S/2021/465

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 17 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr.
Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of
China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam
in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the Middle East
(Yemen)” convened on Wednesday, 12 May 2021. A statement was also delivered by
the representative of Yemen.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-06527 (E) 190521 150621

*2106527*

S/2021/465

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Martin Griffiths
I would like to extend my warmest wishes to the people of Yemen and to
Muslims around the world on the occasion of Eid al-Fitr.
Despite the redoubled efforts in recent months to reach a peaceful resolution
to the conf lict in Yemen, I am unfortunately not here today to report that the parties
are closing in on a deal. Instead, I must report relentless military escalation by
Ansar Allah in Ma’rib; continued restrictions on imports through Al-Hudaydah,
contributing to severe fuel shortages; restrictions on Yemenis’ freedom of
movement across the country, including the continued closure of Sana’a airport;
and the absence of a political process, which deprives Yemenis of hope that an end
to the conf lict is near.
I cannot re-emphasize enough what is at stake in Ma’rib. Ansar Allah’s
offensive, which has been ongoing for more than a year, has caused an astonishing
loss of life, including children who have been thrown mercilessly into the battle.
Internally displaced persons who have sought refuge in Ma’rib continue to live in
fear for their lives. Civilians have been displaced multiple times. The offensive
has been constantly disrupting peace efforts. I once again call on Ansar Allah to
immediately stop its attack on Ma’rib.
The longer the Ma’rib offensive continues, the greater the risks to Yemen’s
broader stability and social cohesion. It may lead to the transfer of conflict to other
areas in Yemen, including those that have remained mercifully far from the main
theatres of conflict.
The continued assault on Ma’rib is unjustifiable. There are options on the
table that would allow for the peaceful and durable resolution of key issues. Those
include lifting the harsh restrictions on the flow of commercial goods, especially fuel,
through Al-Hudaydah port and the reopening of Sana’a airport to commercial traffic.
I fear that the Ma’rib offensive may suggest a belief that the war can be
won outright militarily, but a military conquest will not decisively end the war. It
will only invite further cycles of violence and unrest. Yemen cannot be governed
effectively without inclusive partnerships. As the members of the Security Council
have reiterated time and again, the way to end the conflict is through an inclusive,
negotiated political settlement.
Since March 2020, I have been engaging the parties on the terms of a clear
alternative to the cycles of violence and acute humanitarian suffering. I have
conducted multiple rounds of intensive and complex negotiations with each side.
The terms of the deal have undergone many revisions, but all proposals would have
achieved the following crucial points.
First is a commitment to a nationwide ceasefire, which would provide immense
humanitarian relief. It would allow for the opening of roads in many parts of the
country, including in Taiz, Al-Hudaydah and Ma’rib. It would allow for children to
go to school safely and for civilians to live in relative calm across Yemen for the first
time in many years.
The second issue is reopening Sana’a International Airport to commercial
traffic and ensuring the uninterrupted flow of fuel and other commodities into
Yemen through Al-Hudaydah port. Those measures are imperative. Civilians suffer
the most from the weaponization of the economy. We see that very clearly today in
Ansar Allah-controlled areas, where severe fuel shortages are impacting hospitals,
2/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

essential services, food supply and more. Civilian needs must be prioritized above
all else.
The third point is a commitment to resuming the political process in order to
find a political settlement that ends the conflict.
A deal is still very possible. There is strong international backing and regional
momentum for the United Nations efforts. I want to restate my gratitude to Oman,
Saudi Arabia and the United States of America, among others, for their support.
Moreover, the differences between the parties on the issues under negotiation
are not unbridgeable. A deal can be achieved if the key political leaders heed the calls
of the Yemenis and the international community, including the Security Council,
and make the right decision and if the parties have the political will to make the
compromises necessary to end the fighting.
Taking the decision to end the conflict and open the door to peace is the most
consequential choice that any party can make. The opportunity is still there for the
parties, but time is of the essence. What is currently on the table may not be available
later. Stalling the negotiations serves no one, least of all the Yemeni people.
In the coming weeks, I will work with the parties to conclude negotiations
over a deal that would stop the fighting, address critical humanitarian issues and
resume the political process. I ask the international community to redouble its efforts
to support that endeavour, and I hope that the parties will demonstrate the political
will to move forward. If needed, I will call on them to meet face to face to chart a
path forward.
What I have described is the duty of the mediator, but I cannot force the
parties to negotiate. That is their obligation.

21-065273/30

S/2021/465

Annex II
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
Let me start by wishing everyone an Eid Mubarak.
The humanitarian crisis in Yemen is trapped in a relentless downward spiral.
Famine is still stalking the country, with 5 million people just a step away from
starving. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is still surging, pushing the healthcare system to collapse, and the war continues unabated, making everything else
much worse.
I want to be clear that famine, disease and other miseries are not simply
happening in Yemen; the war is imposing them. As long as the war continues, they
will keep getting worse. That is why it is so important to stop the fighting.
In the meantime, aid agencies will keep trying to mitigate the worst suffering.
To do that, we urgently need action on five points: the protection of civilians,
humanitarian access, funding, the economy and progress towards peace.
The first point is the protection of civilians, which is a requirement under
international humanitarian law. In February, just as the world was renewing
diplomatic efforts to end the war, Ansar Allah launched an offensive in Ma’rib.
The subsequent hostilities, including shelling, air strikes and missiles, have had an
impact on civilians. But the risks ahead are much bigger.
About 25,000 people have fled the fighting so far, many of them for the second
or third time. If the fighting does not stop, aid agencies fear up to 385,000 people
could be displaced in the coming months.
The fighting in Ma’rib has also fuelled escalations elsewhere, including in
Hajjah, Al-Hudaydah and Taiz. They, too, are harming civilians. With millions of
people on the brink of starvation and COVID-19 sweeping the country, more violence
is the last thing that Yemen needs. We need a nationwide ceasefire right now.
My next point is humanitarian access, which is essential for a principled
aid programme. Last month, I expressed concern over new regulations issued by
local authorities on the Red Sea coast (S/2021/372, annex II). Those regulations had
stalled aid delivery for almost half a million people. The regulations have now been
suspended until the end of the year. That is a promising step, and we look forward to
the timely cancellation of the directives altogether.
In the north, we are working with Ansar Allah to sustain the progress that we
have seen over the past year on issues such as biometric registration, assessments
and project approvals. Those were important steps forward. But we also continue
to see challenges from Ansar Allah on other issues, including delays in cargo
movements and attempts to interfere with agencies’ programme management. Those
kinds of actions make it much harder for aid agencies to help people in Ansar Allahcontrolled areas.
We will keep working to address such issues. Providing a needs-based,
principled response across Yemen remains a top priority for agencies and donors alike.
Regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we do not have significant progress
to report. We have heard some positive assurances recently but not yet the official
confirmations that we need to move ahead. That makes planning extremely difficult.
Donor funds for the United Nations assessment project will also soon start to expire.
My third point is funding for the aid operation. Before I go into the funding
rates, I want to emphasize that aid agencies are racing to address the most severe
4/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

needs across the country. We are racing to stop famine. Last month, agencies provided
emergency food assistance to nearly 9 million people. Complementary efforts are
also under way in other sectors.
We are also racing to stop COVID-19. A vaccination drive has started in
Government areas, where health workers have given about 19,000 doses. That is
obviously a small beginning, but rates are expected to accelerate after the Eid al-Fitr
holiday. A lot more vaccine is needed.
And we are racing to help people in Ma’rib and other conflict areas. Weekly
United Nations flights to Ma’rib started on 27 April, and aid agencies are now
expanding programmes there. Thousands of families have already received help.
But we are also racing towards a fiscal cliff. The United Nations response plan
is currently 34 per cent funded. That is up from 22 per cent last month, mostly due to
a surge in short-term contributions that must be spent in the next few months. After
that, the world’s largest aid operation will start to run out of money.
By September, food aid could be cut back for 6 million people. Water and
sanitation are also facing cuts, as are COVID-19 activities, general health programmes
and support for people fleeing conflict.
On 1 June, senior officials from a number of Member States will meet to take
stock of the situation in Yemen, including the humanitarian operating environment
and opportunities to reduce people’s suffering. A major part of the discussion will
focus on ensuring that the aid operation does not run out of money later this year.
Because several key donors have drastically cut their support, underfunding remains
by far the biggest threat. We call on all donors to increase their support back to
where it was in 2019.
The fourth issue is Yemen’s economic collapse, which is accelerating the
risk of famine. There are two immediate steps that can help stem such a collapse
right now.
First, the Yemeni rial must be strengthened. The rial is still trading at near
record lows.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia recently announced that they would provide
oil derivatives worth $422 million to the Government of Yemen over the coming
year. That is a welcome step that should help to relieve pressure on Yemen’s foreign
reserves. The first shipments under that initiative arrived in Aden on Saturday.
The second immediate step to help the economy is to ensure that Yemen has
a stable, adequate flow of commercial imports through all ports. That is also the
Security Council’s long-standing position.
But commercial fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah have plummeted this year.
From January to April, only about 200,000 metric tons of fuel entered Al-Hudaydah,
which is about a third of the normal volumes. Fuel also enters Yemen through other
ports and over land, but getting it to major population centres in the north that way is
more complicated and more expensive. That means fewer people can afford it.
Right now, six vessels, all of which have been cleared by the United Nations
inspection mechanism, are waiting outside Al-Hudaydah for permission from the
Government to dock. They are carrying about 150,000 metric tons of fuel. On
average, they have been waiting more than 100 days. The Government has been
reluctant to allow commercial fuel vessels to enter Al-Hudaydah because of a longrunning dispute with Ansar Allah over import revenue. The parties must find a
solution to the dispute. Until they do, Yemen will continue to see cycles of fuel

21-065275/30

S/2021/465

shortages that push up the prices of food, water and everything else, while cutting
into basic services.
My last point is the need for peace. For months, in fact for years, we have been
calling for a nationwide ceasefire. As I said earlier, it is the war that is ultimately
behind the risk of famine, the spread of disease and economic collapse.
I strongly support everything that Martin Griffiths just said, including his
concern over the lack of concrete political progress despite all the recent engagements
and support from the international community. He is absolutely right that the
measures on the table, including a ceasefire, opening the ports and opening Sana’a
airport, would go a long way towards alleviating people’s suffering. Those measures
could also set Yemen on a path towards a more sustainable peace, and peace is the
only way to resolve this crisis.

6/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese and English]
I would like to start by sending my very best wishes to all Muslim friends —
Eid Mubarak.
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings. There is significant consensus among the members of the Security
Council on the issue of Yemen, which is a political enabler for the resolution of the
matter. The next stage should see us working continuously towards our common goal
of improving the situation on the ground. I wish to make the following observations.
First, we must mobilize every diplomatic effort and work resolutely towards
a ceasefire. The military conflict in Ma’rib has not only led to the displacement
of civilians, with serious humanitarian consequences, but also exacerbated the
confrontation between the parties, undermining the efforts towards a political
settlement. There is no military solution to the conflict.
China reiterates its condemnation of the attacks against civilian infrastructure
in Saudi Arabia. A political solution is in the interests of all parties.
China supports the recent visit by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen to countries of the region and his robust good offices. We welcome the
commitments of the Saudi and Yemeni Governments to a peaceful resolution of
the conf lict. We hope that those efforts will receive a positive response from the
relevant parties.
Secondly, the roles of regional countries must be leveraged and political talks
must be pushed relentlessly. A political solution cannot be achieved without concrete
proposals. The proposals for a nationwide ceasefire, lifting the blockade on Sana’a
airport and Al-Hudaydah port and relaunching political negotiations have been on
the table for months. But the negotiation process has been dogged by repeated delays.
We hope the Special Envoy will stay in close communication and coordination with
regional countries to identify where the crux lies and encourage those countries with
influence on the parties to play a greater role.
His Excellency Mr. Wang Yi, China’s State Councillor and Foreign Minister,
put forward a five-point initiative on peace and stability in the Middle East in
support of regional countries and peoples playing a major role to find political
solutions to the Yemeni and other hotspot issues. We noted that regional countries
have recently expressed their commitments to advancing the peace process in Yemen
and have engaged in friendly interactions among themselves. We hope these positive
signs will translate into tangible actions that can make peace talks happen through
dialogue and consultation.
Thirdly, we must increase humanitarian assistance to address the immediate
needs of the Yemeni people. Today, across the country, the state of the civilian
population is worrisome. The risk of famine is imminent. Controlling the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) is an uphill struggle, and the oil supply is very unstable. China
calls on donor countries to disburse their pledges without delay to keep the United
Nations humanitarian relief programmes going. All parties to the conflict must
ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian access and keep the avenues open for the
import of food, oil and other commodities.
China commends Saudi Arabia’s decision to provide Yemen with $422 million
worth of oil products. We welcome the arrival of the first shipment to the port of
21-065277/30

S/2021/465

Aden, which will bring electricity to the public in different governorates of Yemen.
Over the years, China has provided large amounts of humanitarian assistance to
Yemen through bilateral and multilateral channels. From 2017 through 2020, China
provided more than 11,700 metric tons of food aid to Yemen. Since early last year,
we have provided polymerase chain reaction test kits, medical masks, personal
protection equipment and other anti-COVID-19 supplies to Yemen. China stands
ready to continue playing its part in alleviating the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
Lastly, on the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, China again urges the
Houthis to assist the United Nations technical staff in boarding the ship to conduct
assessment and repairs as soon as possible in order to forestall a potential economic,
humanitarian and marine environmental disaster.

8/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings.
Estonia remains deeply concerned about the continuing military escalation
in Yemen, as it continues to cause immense suffering to the civilian population. It
is especially worrisome in the context of a sharp rise in coronavirus disease cases
and a risk of widespread famine. All parties must immediately put an end to the
hostilities and engage with the efforts to end the war. There is no military solution
to this conflict.
We condemn the Houthis’ continued assault on Ma’rib, as it entails the threat of
further mass displacement and aggravates the humanitarian crisis. It is positive that
the United Nations has been able to deploy humanitarian flights to the Ma’rib region.
However, nearly 20,000 people have already been displaced since the beginning of
February, with dozens injured or killed, and the internally displaced persons camps
are overcrowded. All parties must refrain from attacks to civilian areas and must
ensure respect for international humanitarian law.
Estonia fully supports all diplomatic efforts made in order to end this
conflict, particularly those by Special Envoy Griffiths, the United States and the
Sultanate of Oman. We have also welcomed the announcement by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on ways to end the crisis. We encourage the parties to engage with
these efforts, to show willingness to compromise and to agree to a sustainable and
nationwide ceasefire in order to move forward with an inclusive political process.
It is important to ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in the
peace and political processes.
We urge the parties to take further practical steps to help build trust,
including further agreements for prisoner exchanges. In addition, allowing more
fuel ships to enter the port of Al-Hudaydah would contribute to easing the dire
humanitarian situation.
We also repeat our call upon the Houthi authorities to ensure immediate
and full access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker for the United Nations team without
further delay.
Finally, regarding the developments in the south, we reiterate our call on
the Government and the Southern Transitional Council to implement the Riyadh
agreement, which is an essential step in the path towards reaching a wider peace.

21-065279/30

S/2021/465

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings and for all their efforts. I reiterate our full support to them.
The Houthis continue to prevent peace in Yemen. However, there is an
opportunity to finally bring this conflict to an end. And we welcome the efforts of
the United States and the announcements of Saudi Arabia in that regard.
The Houthis must stop refusing dialogue with the Special Envoy, as was the
case in Muscat, and stop their offensive against Ma’rib, which is home to millions of
civilians, including more than 1 million displaced persons. They must immediately
stop the recruitment and use of children, which we condemn. In that regard, we
renew our call for the implementation of the conclusions of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. And lastly, they must immediately cease their attacks
on Saudi territory, which we condemn in the strongest terms.
They have the opportunity to accept a diplomatic settlement of the conflict
whose parameters are well known: a ceasefire throughout Yemen, without delay
or preconditions; the reopening of the Al-Hudaydah port and Sana’a airport; and
discussions for a comprehensive and inclusive political solution, in which women and
youth must be able to fully participate. It is time for that solution to be implemented
and for the suffering of the Yemeni people to be put to an end.
The international community, and more specifically the Security Council,
must be ready to take action if no progress is made in the coming days. The Houthis
must also immediately and unconditionally allow the United Nations inspection
mission access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Otherwise, they will be responsible for
a major ecological disaster, which will have disastrous environmental, economic and
humanitarian consequences in Yemen and the entire region.
Discussions have been under way for more than two years now to avoid such
a catastrophe. The Houthis’ blocking of any progress on that issue is unacceptable.
We call on the Houthis to act immediately and responsibly for the Yemeni people.
On the humanitarian front, we must redouble efforts to address the risk of
large-scale famine and counter the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
including by accelerating the vaccination campaign. It is essential to ensure full
humanitarian access to all who need it. We call for the immediate removal of
bureaucratic obstacles throughout the country.
Respect for international humanitarian law is an obligation for all. We cannot
repeat it often enough: the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, must remain an absolute imperative.
You can count on France to remain fully mobilized and committed to peace
in Yemen and to reducing tensions in the region. The Security Council is united in
seeking an end to the war in Yemen, and it is time for its demands to be met.

10/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings. I welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen,
Ambassador Abdullah Ali Fadhel Al-Saadi, to this meeting.
At the outset, let me express my heartfelt condolences to the people of Yemen
who have lost oved ones in the recent floods in the country.
I express our support to the Special Envoy for his repeated endeavours to
secure an agreement between the parties for a nationwide ceasefire in Yemen. We
have noted the efforts being made by the United States Special Envoy and the Omani
authorities. The positive statements by Yemen’s neighbours and other countries in
the region have also contributed to the overall diplomatic efforts.
It is unfortunate, though, that no breakthrough has been achieved despite this
diplomatic push. We urge the leaders of warring parties in Yemen to set aside their
differences for the benefit of the Yemeni people, whom they claim to represent. A
spirit of compromise is required to find common ground, avert the risk of famine
and end the suffering of the people. We encourage all parties to show flexibility
and engage with the Special Envoy in good faith. The countries in the region have
a major role to play in influencing Yemeni parties to stop the fighting and pursue
initiatives that are currently being discussed.
In previous meetings, I underlined the importance for greater donor assistance
to address Yemen’s humanitarian situation, the need to remove the impediments by
de facto authorities and the requirement of a smooth supply of humanitarian and
essential commodities to prevent famine in the country. The FSO SAFER oil tanker
still remains an outstanding issue. Today I will focus on two key issues that are
critical for long-term peace and stability in Yemen.
The first is the necessity for an immediate nationwide ceasefire, which should
start with Ma’rib. There can be no peace without the cessation of the offensive in
Ma’rib. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the unabated fighting in front-line
areas of the Ma’rib governorate. The fighting has only prolonged the suffering
of its large population and put more than 1 million internally displaced people at
grave risk.
The current conflict in Ma’rib also jeopardizes its position as a prominent
centre of economic activity in Yemen. The potential economic consequences of a
protracted battle for Ma’rib will further exacerbate the dire economic situation in
the country.
We commend the efforts of the Yemeni Government to fight terrorism despite
the ongoing escalation. It is imperative that Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups be
prevented from exploiting the situation.
From being relatively stable, Ma’rib’s transformation into a hotspot of military
operations, within a span of few months, also underscores the fragility of any
ceasefire that is not backed by a political agreement between the parties.
The second issue is the need for the full implementation of the Riyadh
agreement and the Stockholm Agreement. The formation of the joint Cabinet and its
return to Aden was a major milestone in the implementation of the Riyadh agreement.
However, recent developments in the south are of concern. We hope that the Yemeni
Government and the Southern Transitional Council will be able to work together on
21-0652711/30

S/2021/465

the implementation of the Riyadh agreement. This will also have a direct bearing on
the political negotiations in the next step.
Al-Hudaydah has also been the scene of intense clashes in recent months.
The ongoing fighting in the province between Yemeni army forces and Ansar Allah
risks unravelling the Stockholm Agreement, which will have serious consequences,
both economic and humanitarian. Millions of Yemenis depend on imports from
Yemen’s Red Sea ports. The preservation of this lifeline is even more vital now, as
famine-like conditions have returned to Yemen, in particular against the backdrop
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. I appreciate the efforts of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement to monitor the implementation of the
ceasefire on the ground, despite the restrictions, and urge both parties to fulfil their
commitments under the Stockholm Agreement, including through participation in
the Redeployment Coordination Committee.
The elements of the joint declaration, which were again reiterated in the recent
Saudi initiative, offer a clear road map for a return of peace and stability to Yemen.
They must be pursued without any preconditions.
I conclude by reiterating that all parties in Yemen must put politics aside and
prioritize the well-being and interests of the Yemeni people.

12/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I would like to also join in wishing Eid Mubarak to all celebrating at this
time. A special thanks also to Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for once again a very frank and also informative, if not very
uplifting, briefings.
When we last discussed the situation in Yemen at the Security Council in
April (see S/2021/372), we did so with some sense of hope. This hope at the time
stemmed from the concerted diplomatic efforts of the international community and
regional actors to help end six long years of war, which of course have taken a brutal
toll on the people of Yemen.
Despite those efforts and the resilience and tireless work of Special Envoy
Griffiths and other envoys, it is worrisome, disappointing and dismaying that
progress in bringing an end to this conflict remains so elusive — although I note that
Mr. Griffiths this morning left the door open, telling us that a deal is still possible,
in spite of everything.
I heard Mr. Griffiths also reach for new ways to say the inevitable — that
all parties to this conflict have a responsibility to put the rights and the needs, and
I would add the lives, of the Yemeni people first and to engage seriously with the
diplomatic efforts under way to end the violence, including the efforts within the
United Nations process. I urge them all to do so without further delay.
We all know how critical it is that the Houthis end their offensive on Ma’rib.
Hostilities there continue to inflict death and misery on the civilian population and
are quite simply deplorable. Children have been recruited, homes destroyed and
25,000 Yemenis displaced owing to the violence. The most vulnerable in Ma’rib face
extremely difficult conditions, with mothers, children and pregnant women unable
to safely access emergency paediatric and maternal care. This must stop.
Elsewhere in the country, Yemenis are also continuing to suffer. We know
that coronavirus disease cases are rising across the country. Years of conflict have
shattered the health-care system. There is a really constrained capacity to control
the spread of the virus, care for infected people and, indeed, to sustain basic health
services for the general population.
We know every effort should be made to assist those in need. We are deeply
concerned by reports of bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian assistance,
particularly in the south and west coast. This basic assistance is a vital lifeline for
millions of Yemenis each month, including those facing the horrible threats of hunger
and famine we heard Mark Griffiths outline. We again urge all parties to adhere to
their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and enable
the rapid, safe and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We must also acknowledge the role of the economic crisis and blockages of
vital imports, such as fuel, in driving the humanitarian crisis, and we call on all
parties to work together to urgently reduce humanitarian need.
Furthermore, the FSO SAFER oil tanker, as we know, continues to pose a
significant danger to the people of Yemen and the region, and we urge all parties to
conclude talks to allow United Nations teams to access the vessel and carry out the
necessary repairs.
In line with resolution 2564 (2021), Ireland strongly supports all efforts to
ensure an inclusive, Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political process, under the auspices
21-0652713/30

S/2021/465

of the United Nations, with women at the table. We call again on the parties to the
conflict to ensure women comprise at least 30 per cent of their delegations in all
future talks. Their participation in the room at the talks will be critical, not just to
achieving a political solution, but also to establishing a sustainable peace.
I began by expressing the disappointment we all share at the lack of progress
towards peace. However, I am encouraged that, despite the stubborn and persistent
obstacles, the international community and the Security Council stand fully united
behind efforts to end the conflict.
Violations of international humanitarian and human rights law must end, and
accountability must be prioritized. The work of the Group of Eminent Experts on
Yemen is essential in this regard.
Once again, the world is watching. For the sake of the Yemeni people, it is
incumbent upon all parties on the ground to engage urgently and sincerely, to agree
on an immediate nationwide ceasefire, and to resume long-overdue talks. The people
of Yemen deserve nothing less.

14/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings.
Today, Kenya’s statement will focus on the specific situation in Yemen, as
well as the deteriorating maritime security in the region.
Kenya supports the efforts being spearheaded by the Special Envoy and
regional stakeholders for a political solution to the crisis in Yemen. We urge all
the parties to use this crucial window of opportunity to genuinely commit to the
cessation of any further violence as a foundation for lasting peace.
Kenya condemns the continued use of violence to try to attain political aims,
particularly the use of terrorist attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.
We further condemn the targeting of civilian and commercial infrastructure in
Saudi Arabia.
Kenya remains gravely concerned at the escalated deterioration of security in
Ma’rib. We condemn the acts of violence that are worsening the humanitarian situation.
While we press for a Yemeni-lead peace process, the international community
must do its utmost to identify and hold accountable those continuing to direct
violence at citizens and civilian objects.
The international community should also increase funding for humanitarianresponse operations; they provide the vital assistance families and communities
need, and allow the peace process to progress.
Additionally, national and local actors in Yemen must allow unhindered access
to humanitarian aid, in accordance with international humanitarian law.
We call on the international community to increase its coronavirus disease
response assistance to Yemen. An escalation in infections and the consequent impact
on humanitarian needs could easily worsen the entire situation.
Regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we are disappointed by the additional
preconditions for inspections raised by the Houthis. We continue to urge that timely
access be granted to help prevent potential catastrophic eventualities.
We draw the attention of the Security Council to the deteriorating maritime
security in the region. The recent interception by the navy of the United States of
America of an illicit shipment of weapons from a stateless dhow in the northern
Arabian Sea is only the latest indicator of a worrying trend.
We are concerned that armed groups in multiple countries, including Yemen
and Somalia, are using the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean off the
coast of Somalia to smuggle weapons. The interceptions of such smuggling vessels
imply that even more could be traversing undetected. This undermines existing arms
embargoes and increases the threat to peace and security in the Middle East and the
Horn of Africa.
There have also been incidents of attacks against commercial shipping in this
vital waterway. The overall picture is one of rising insecurity, with consequences for
global trade and the security of neighbouring countries. For this reason, Kenya is
drawing the attention of the Security Council to this regional dynamic, which, if left
unaddressed, may escalate to alarming proportions.
21-0652715/30

S/2021/465

I conclude by reaffirming Kenya’s solidarity with the people of Yemen in their
quest for peace and security. We will continue to support a Yemeni-owned and -led
solution to end this protracted conflict. And, as the holy month of Ramadhan draws
to an end, we wish our brothers and sisters in Yemen and all our Muslim colleagues
Eid Mubarak.

16/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations, Alicia Buenrostro Massieu
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings.
As the Security Council meets today, the offensive against Ma’rib is escalating
in alarming fashion. Missile attacks and other clashes continue in locations both
within and outside Yemen, as the humanitarian situation becomes increasingly
critical. While this situation is worrying enough, the FSO SAFER oil tanker also
continues to pose a latent threat. I believe that we in the Security Council have an
obligation to contribute more effectively to a solution.
We are, of course, deeply concerned about the deteriorating security and
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Beyond the changes in military dominance on the
ground, it is civilians who, as we have heard, pay the greatest cost of the conflict.
It is essential that the Government of Yemen, Ansar Allah and the other armed
groups heed the call of the Secretary-General to observe a global ceasefire. Without
a ceasefire throughout all Yemeni territory, humanitarian operations are almost
impossible. Mexico calls urgently on all parties involved, but particularly to Ansar
Allah, to immediately cease all attacks and provocations.
There is no military solution to the conflict in Yemen. The alternative is for
the parties to participate constructively in dialogue, facilitated by the Special Envoy.
In this regard, we welcome the various efforts led by Mr. Griffiths, together
with the Special Envoy of the United States, to ensure the support of regional partners
for the proposed national ceasefire, and the reopening of ports and airports. We urge
key regional and international actors to use their influence on the parties to ensure
that dialogue is resumed as soon as possible.
Moreover, we believe that the time has come to consider other options to help
address tangible issues in parallel, in support of the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths.
The growing fuel shortage has impacted both the economic and the
humanitarian situations. We note that the Government of Yemen has allowed the
entry of some fuel shipments in recent weeks. However, these are by no means
sufficient to satisfy the basic needs of the country. We urge the Yemeni Government
to lift red tape, avoid unnecessary tariff charges, and facilitate the expedited entry
of fuel shipments. We welcome the assistance offered by Saudi Arabia to make fuel
for electricity production available to the Government, the first shipment of which
arrived in Aden this week.
As we have done previously, we stress, once again, the economic, maritime,
humanitarian and environmental threat posed by the FSO SAFER tanker. We reiterate
the urgent call on Ansar Allah to facilitate, without further conditions, its prompt
inspection by the United Nations teams.
Finally, let me wish all of our Muslim friends peace and prosperity as Ramadan
draws to a close. Eid Mubarak.

21-0652717/30

S/2021/465

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings and
also welcome the participation of the Permanent Representative of Yemen in this
meeting.
The recent all-out diplomatic engagement by regional and international actors
reflects the desire to reach a lasting solution to the conflict in Yemen. It also arises
from the realization that the solution to the crisis will not be a military one but can
be achieved only through frank and direct talks among the Yemenis themselves, with
the support of the international community.
In this regard, my delegation welcomes the steps taken by the United States
Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Lenderking, with regard to the major regional
actors and the Yemeni parties, in support of Mr. Griffiths’ efforts, seeking to build
consensus to relaunch the political process in Yemen. We also call on the Houthis
and their supporters not to waste this opportunity and to respond positively to the
ceasefire offer put forward by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by halting their attacks
against Ma’rib.
The Niger remains convinced that gestures of trust, such as a cessation of
hostilities, the reopening of ports and airports and the release of detainees, could help
generate positive momentum, leading to the return of the parties to the negotiating
table. We therefore call on all actors to work together for the resumption of the
peace talks.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the lifting of the blockades
against Al-Hudaydah port and Sana’a airport remains essential for the delivery of
basic supplies, fuel and the humanitarian assistance on which most of the Yemeni
population depends. Humanitarian assistance must be unimpeded and must not
be subject to politicization by the parties to the conflict at a time when ever more
Yemenis are facing the threat of famine.
It is equally important that humanitarian agencies on the ground be equipped
with adequate resources to continue their work, especially amid the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the onset of the rainy season, which often brings
flooding, leading to immense materials damage in the country.
With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Niger welcomes the delivery to
Yemen of the first batch of vaccines through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
Facility and the launch of the vaccination campaign in the country. The success of
the vaccination campaign could help significantly reduce the difficulties stemming
from restrictions imposed to contain the pandemic and breathe new life into the
Yemeni economy.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my delegation’s strong support and
encouragement to Special Envoy Griffiths in his tireless efforts in seeking a solution
to this crisis, and our hopes of seeing the light at the end of the tunnel of the war
in Yemen.

18/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I want to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
Moreover, I would like to wish Muslims in Yemen and around the world
Eid Mubarak.
Norway welcomes the international community’s increased efforts to achieve
progress in Yemen, and would like to thank Martin Griffiths, as well as United States
Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Lenderking, and Oman and other regional actors,
including Saudi Arabia. We are encouraged by news of recent prisoner exchanges
in Ma’rib, facilitated by local mediators. I believe that such initiatives represent the
capacity of the Yemeni people to find practical solutions and reflect their genuine
will for peace.
However, we deeply regret that a nationwide ceasefire has still not been agreed,
and that the humanitarian crisis and violence continue unabated. We are appalled by
the high level of violence. March saw the highest number of civilian casualties in
six months. At least 90 children have been killed since January. We also know that
children are being recruited and used in armed battle. This is unacceptable.
We are troubled by reports that fighting is affecting internally displaced
person (IDP) sites and civilian areas, mainly in Ma’rib, but also in Hajjah and AlHudaydah. In addition to shelling and attacks by the Houthis, we hear reports that
heavy coalition air strikes have hit IDP camps and civilian houses. Eighty per cent
of IDPs in Yemen are women and children.
Humanitarian access to people in need must be granted immediately. There
is an urgent need to ensure sufficient and predictable supplies of food and fuel. We
call for the lifting of the sea blockade and an immediate reversal of all restrictions
on humanitarian actors. We are deeply concerned by reports that starvation is being
used as a weapon.
We should not forget the dire situation in Taiz. We are shocked by reports that
Houthis have denied people in the city access to water. Furthermore, roads must be
reopened to end the long-term siege.
I would like to highlight the critical role that journalists play in wars. We
are alarmed by the treatment of journalists in Yemen. Norway condemns the death
sentences against four journalists issued by a Houthi court in April last year. Their
cases will come up for review this month, and we call for their immediate release.
The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Yemen is alarming. We
are glad to see that COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility vaccines are being
distributed in Government-controlled areas, but supplies are far from sufficient.
Furthermore, there is an urgent need to distribute vaccines in the north of the
country, in compliance with World Health Organization guidelines.
It is time to act. We urge all actors, especially key actors in the region, to
use their influence and leverage towards the parties. Any sustainable solution to
the conflict in Yemen must be inclusive and address its root causes. In this regard,
we are deeply concerned by the recent large-scale shipment of weapons, which was
apparently on its way to Yemen.
Moreover, I would like to stress that the Riyadh agreement and the
establishment of a unity government are important steps towards peace. Rivalry
and fragmentation, whether in the south or on the west coast, only derail efforts at
securing peace and stability.
21-0652719/30

S/2021/465

Annex XII
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
Again I have to begin my statement with words of regret regarding the virtual
format of this meeting. In the eyes of the global community, our working in front of
our personal computers looks strange given the sustainable positive dynamic in the
epidemiological situation in New York. Nothing bars the members of the Security
Council from resuming the practice of in-person meetings in the Council Chamber,
which meets all the social distancing requirements. We call on our Security Council
colleagues to remember that the Council must set an example and also set the tone of
efforts to maintain international peace and security, rather than hide behind a virtual
format. We strongly request the Chinese presidency to show initiative and take the
Council back to its traditional modus operandi.
We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for the comprehensive reviews they presented of the situation in Yemen.
We are closely following the acute military and political crisis in the Republic
of Yemen, which, regrettably, has now lasted for more than six years. We are
particularly concerned by the situation around Ma’rib. Continuing attacks on civil
facilities — including on the territory of Saudi Arabia — are very worrisome. We
strongly urge all parties to uphold the provisions of international humanitarian
law, put an immediate and complete end to combat activities that ruin non-military
infrastructure and lead to victims among civilians and to seek ways to settle the
conflict by political and diplomatic means.
In this context, we welcomed the recent proposals by the Saudi leadership for
a peaceful settlement of the crisis and called upon the opposing sides to look into
those proposals thoroughly. We stated it previously, and our position remains the
same: the prolonged armed confrontation in the country must end to give way to
sustainable stability and national consensus.
We remain convinced that a comprehensive and lasting settlement in Yemen
is possible once the interests of all leading political forces in the country are
adequately accounted for. The lifting of the sea, air and land blockade of separate
territories would largely contribute to this goal, as well as other urgent steps aimed
at improving the critical socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in Yemen.
We intend to further support the relevant United Nations efforts and the tireless
work of Special Envoy Griffiths. We encourage President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and the leadership of the Ansar Allah movement to act constructively and
be ready to make a compromise when addressing the existing controversies.
Humanitarian assistance to the population of Yemen must be a priority
track of our joint efforts. We are concerned that a lack of financing impedes the
implementation of United Nations programmes for the provision of basic assistance,
including those focusing on food security, access to water and medical services,
which are in high demand amid the pandemic. In this context, we call on donors
to enhance the much-needed financial support for United Nations humanitarian
assistance. We recall that the provision of such aid must not be biased in character.
We are convinced that the problem of the SFO SAFER oil tanker can also be
the subject of a decision that is free of any political motivation. We call on the actors
involved, including the United Nations Office for Project Services, to take onboard
one another’s interests and act in a constructive spirit.
20/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the process of a political settlement in
Yemen directly impacts upon the entire region. For the purposes of de-escalation,
we call on our colleagues to engage in constructive interaction that promotes peace
and stability, including on the basis of the resolution 598 (1987) and the Russian
collective security concept, which envisages an inclusive and collective approach to
problem-solving.

21-0652721/30

S/2021/465

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings and
their continued efforts towards alleviating the impact of the conflict on the people
of Yemen and working towards attaining overall long-term peace. Efforts between
Special Envoy Griffiths and interested parties, including with regional actors,
provide a launching pad for peace in Yemen. We call on all parties to the conflict to
seize this opportunity and show a readiness for compromise before the window for
peace closes.
Continued hostilities prolong suffering, threaten confidence-building and
undermine the peace process. A nationwide ceasefire is needed immediately. It is
time that the parties silence their guns and focus their attention on negotiations and
achieving peace in Yemen. This process must be inclusive, as the marginalization
of any group will be counterproductive to sustainable peace efforts. As stated by
members of the Security Council, the process must be Yemeni-led and Yemeniowned and all groups, including women, youth and minority groups, must be afforded
an equal opportunity to participate. We appeal to members of the international
community to exert their influence on the parties to encourage them to engage
urgently and constructively with the Special Envoys and all stakeholders.
Turning to the dire humanitarian situation, for months it has been compounded
and exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the deteriorating economic
situation, increased hostilities and subsequent displacement, and a palpable gap
in the global aid budget. The recent torrential rains and deadly floods that have
assailed thousands in Yemen are a source of additional concern. While we welcome
the entry of fuel ships at the port of Al-Hudaydah, the circumstances in Yemen
demand greater action.
Over 20 million people in Yemen rely on life-saving humanitarian assistance,
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has reported that almost
half of Yemen’s children under the age of 5 will suffer from malnutrition, including
400,000 who may die without urgent treatment. These innocent children, who play
no part in this unjustifiable, multi-generational conflict, suffer the most. The parties
in Yemen have not only a moral obligation to ensure the delivery of aid, but a legal
obligation to do so. International law requires parties to a conflict to allow and
facilitate the unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid, and furthermore prohibits
the destruction of civilian objects and infrastructure. The statements at the recent
open debate (see S/2021/415) on indispensable civilian objects were evidence of the
international community’s commitment to this fundamental obligation. We must all
condemn any act by parties to the conflict in Yemen that violates international law.
Before concluding, we turn our attention to the ongoing and unresolved issue
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which, much to our displeasure, has now become a
standard part of our interventions. The international community, including States
of the region, and the parties in Yemen are all aware of the grave threat that the
tanker poses to the environment, the economy and the people of Yemen. Promises
can no longer be merely vented but must be translated into concrete action to avert
a catastrophe.

22/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex XIV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, Martin Griffiths, and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock, for their valuable
briefings on developments in Yemen.
My delegation is seriously concerned that the situation in Yemen is growing
ever more complicated and that fighting persists in spite of recently intensified
diplomatic activity, multiple initiatives to establish a ceasefire and resume work
on achieving a political settlement, and the efforts that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General has made to that end with the support of the Security Council.
Tunisia also condemns the continued attacks on Ma’rib. Those attacks are
making the situation worse, frustrating efforts to end the crisis and exacerbating the
population’s suffering and the humanitarian crisis.
My delegation reiterates that the only way to overcome the crisis in Yemen,
restore security and stability in the country and end the Yemeni people’s suffering is
to commit to establishing a ceasefire, resume negotiations and reach a comprehensive
final settlement that will guarantee a better future for the entire Yemeni people, on
the basis of the agreed terms of reference, which are the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its implementation mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive
National Dialogue Conference, and Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). Doing so will preserve the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Yemen.
Tunisia also reiterates its condemnation of repeated attacks on Saudi Arabian
territory and oil and civilian installations. It calls on the Houthis to put an end to
such attacks.
The parties must spare civilians and civilian installations and abide by the
rules of international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In that connection, we urge the parties to the conflict to engage in peace
initiatives, declare a comprehensive ceasefire and commit to a peaceful negotiated
solution that places the interests of the Yemeni people above all other political
considerations. We also commend Martin Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, for his continued efforts to build trust between the opposing
parties and facilitate channels of communication to launch the political process by
involving women in the peace process.
Against the backdrop of an unprecedented humanitarian crisis, Tunisia
expresses its full solidarity with the Yemeni people. In addition to a crippling
economic crisis and the deteriorating health situation caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Yemen is in the grip of a severe humanitarian funding
crisis. Therefore, we call once again for beneficiaries to be given unhindered access
to humanitarian and medical assistance, for port restrictions to be lifted and airports
to be opened, and for appropriate humanitarian funding to be provided, so that the
humanitarian assistance programme can continue and in order to meet the critical
needs of the Yemeni people.
In conclusion, the FSO SAFER oil tanker remains a matter of grave concern
because of the environmental, humanitarian and economic catastrophe it poses in
21-0652723/30

S/2021/465

the Red Sea owing to its decaying hull. We call for the completion and facilitation
of measures to deploy United Nations experts to carry out the necessary technical
inspections and repairs as soon as possible, and for the safety of the rescue team to
be guaranteed.

24/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
Thank you, Martin and Mark, for your unceasing efforts to alleviate the
Yemeni people’s suffering and end this horrific conflict. You have our full support.
Since Saudi Arabia’s statement of support for a nationwide ceasefire, peace
talks and the lifting of restrictions on Yemen’s ports and Sana’a airport, the Houthis’
stated commitment to peace has been put to the test. As things stand, they are failing
this test.
Martin, by refusing to meet you in Muscat or let you travel to Sana’a, the
Houthis have passed up a vital opportunity to show they are ready to work towards
peace. The Houthis say they are putting the humanitarian situation first, but their
actions show they are playing for time to try to take more ground.
If the Houthis were serious about alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni
people, they would cease their offensive on Ma’rib, which threatens to displace up to
1 million vulnerable displaced people, and they would remove their restrictions on
humanitarian access, which are strangling the humanitarian response. If they were
serious about protecting the future generation, they would stop recruiting children
to fight and die on their front lines.
If the Houthis were serious about saving the lives of the most vulnerable, they
would acknowledge the second wave of the coronavirus disease sweeping across
Yemen and accept vaccines from the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility.
If they were serious about the long-term prosperity of the Yemeni people, they
would give the United Nations mission the formal written assurances and permissions
needed to assess and repair the FSO SAFER oil tanker in order to prevent an oil leak
that would devastate Yemen’s fishing and farming.
Regrettably, the Houthis have shown that they are not serious about peace,
or about ending the suffering of the Yemeni people. If this does not change, the
Security Council will need to consider stronger actions to achieve peace in Yemen.
Our interests lie in a strong, prosperous Yemen, free from external interference
and with an inclusive Government. A nationwide ceasefire and Yemeni-Yemeni talks
are the only way to achieve this. Until this is possible, we will continue doing all we
can to prevent a looming famine. We must continue to pressure the Yemeni parties
to ensure the free flow of goods and commodities into and through Yemen, and
ensure a well-funded United Nations humanitarian response. But we know that only
a serious commitment to peace can banish the spectre of famine for good.
I wish all Yemenis a blessed Eid and hope the next year brings them the
security, stability and peace they deserve.

21-0652725/30

S/2021/465

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Let me join others in wishing Eid Mubarak to all of our colleagues and friends
who are coming to the close of Eid. Thank you, as always, to our briefers for their
updates and steadfast efforts.
The United States is unwavering in its commitment to using diplomacy to
end the war in Yemen. United States Special Envoy Timothy Lenderking has been
working tirelessly with Special Envoy Griffiths to bring the parties together to end
the conflict. Both Special Envoys spent last week working with stakeholders in
Muscat and Riyadh, as well as actively engaging with officials from Saudi Arabia
and the Government of Yemen.
As you have heard from Special Envoy Griffiths, he has put a fair deal on
the table. The proposal includes commitments to easing restrictions on the port and
the airport — a key Houthi demand — and to a ceasefire and inclusive political
talks. While urgent action on the port and the airport are needed, only through a
comprehensive ceasefire can we hope to truly bring relief to the Yemeni people.
The Saudis and the Yemeni Government continue to engage constructively,
but the Houthis passed up a major opportunity to make progress on this proposal
by refusing to meet with Special Envoy Griffiths. Instead, the Houthis continue
to prioritize their assault on Ma’rib, exacerbating the humanitarian needs for the 1
million people who have been forced to flee their homes and have found refuge in the
city. This violence from the Houthis, especially against internally displaced person
sites on the outskirts of Ma’rib, is unacceptable. And it must stop immediately.
This offensive risks overwhelming an already strained humanitarian response and
triggering a dangerous wave of escalation across the entire country. There is no
greater threat to peace in Yemen.
We understand that there is no simple solution to the conflict in Yemen. But a
resolution becomes exponentially harder when one side of the conflict is committed
to pursuing a military solution and rejects diplomatic negotiations. Right now, the
Houthis seem to have no interest in peace. In a similar vein, the Houthis continue to
delay the United Nations assessment and initial repair of the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
It has been almost two years. We call on the Houthis to allow the assessment to
proceed as soon as possible, and we urge other nations to press the Houthis to allow
the assessment to move forward immediately.
But despite this continued, cruel and callous obstinance from the Houthis,
there is hope for Yemen yet. Here is the good news: we have stronger international
and regional consensus on ending this war than ever before. The Saudi and Yemeni
Governments are prepared to bring this war to an end. They have publicly announced
their commitment to reach an end to the conflict in line with Special Envoy Griffiths’
proposal. The Government of Oman is also playing an important role in facilitating
efforts between the key stakeholders.
So we urge the Houthis to stop standing in the way of peace and commit to
a comprehensive ceasefire. Each day the Houthis continue with their offensive in
Ma’rib is in direct defiance of the Council and an attack on its own people. And each
day the humanitarian disaster in Yemen gets darker, crueller and bleaker. Over 16
million Yemenis — more than 54 per cent of the country’s population — are in acute
need of food assistance. The war is starving the country.
There is only one way to permanently address the humanitarian crisis in
Yemen, that is, a lasting ceasefire and an inclusive political solution. But until
26/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

that happens, the international community must step up to fund the humanitarian
response without delay. And all parties must permit the free flow of both commercial
and humanitarian commodities such as fuel, food and medical supplies. Otherwise,
it is hard to imagine how much worse it will get for the Yemenis. The people of
Yemen need our help. They need peace. And until then, they need all the resources
that they can get.

21-0652727/30

S/2021/465

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their comprehensive briefings. I welcome the
Permanent Representative of Yemen to our meeting today.
Recent months have witnessed increased casualties due to intense fighting
in many places in Yemen, especially in Ma’rib. We are gravely concerned about the
military escalation and cross-border fighting.
In that context, we welcome the continued efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths
and his team in conducting a series of shuttle diplomacy activities to engage the
parties concerned in the United Nations-led peace proposal for Yemen. It is
encouraging to learn about positive responses to, and cooperation with, the Special
Envoy from parties, regional partners and the international community. However,
more response and closer cooperation are required in this regard.
Therefore, we call for further cooperation with the Special Envoy in pursuing
peace and stability for Yemen. We stress the urgency of all parties ceasing military
hostilities, accepting the above-mentioned proposal, especially on a nationwide
ceasefire, and figuring out a way to reach a sustainable settlement to end the conflict
in Yemen. We reiterate the importance of regional and international contributions
and support to facilitate the peace process. The inclusion of women in the political
process in Yemen should also be ensured and promoted.
On humanitarian issue, we remain concerned by the continued dire situation
in Yemen. The recent flash flood in south-west Yemen and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic have exacerbated the country’s humanitarian situation with
ongoing conflict, economic crisis, fuel shortages, food insecurity and a risk of largescale famine. The COVID-19 pandemic in Yemen has caused a high death rate despite
the fact that various vaccination, prevention and protection efforts have been made.
Moreover, 80 per cent of Yemen’s population needs protection, nutrition,
shelter and medical support. More than 16 million people are facing food insecurity.
Four million Yemenis, 73 per cent of whom are women and children, have been made
homeless. According to a United Nations Population Fund report, about 5 million
women and girls of childbearing age and 1.7 million pregnant and breastfeeding
women have limited or no access to reproductive health services. It is also distressful
to learn that one Yemeni woman dies every two hours during childbirth from causes
that could be prevented.
Against this backdrop, it is imperative to provide a safe and smooth passageway
for humanitarian aid in Yemen and ensure access to basic services for those in need.
It is also urgent to improve the funding shortfall so that the challenges mentioned
earlier can be addressed. The Yemeni people cannot wait. They are in urgent need of
assistance to survive the worst humanitarian crisis since the conflict broke out more
than six years ago in Yemen. We need to act fast.
On the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we reiterate our concern over the environmental
risks posed to Yemen and the region. We urge Ansar Allah to honour their
commitments on this matter. More than ever, the United Nations technical team
should be granted immediate access to carry out its tasks and the necessary repairs
on the tanker.
Last but not least, we stress the need for the full implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement.
28/30

21-06527

S/2021/465

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Ali Fadhel Al Saadi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month, and to wish you every success in the fulfilment
of your mandate, and to thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam, for his successful presidency of the Council last month.
Mahatma Gandhi said: “There is no way to peace; peace is the way”. The
Yemeni Government has supported and will continue to support a comprehensive,
just and sustainable peace, with a view to resolving the Yemeni crisis on the basis of
the agreed national, regional and international terms of reference, which are the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation mechanism, the outcomes of
the All-Inclusive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, notably resolution 2216 (2015). Since wars begin in the minds of men, it
is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed.
However, our problem today is that war and violence remain entrenched in
the minds of Houthi militia members. That is why all the efforts of the Yemeni
Government led by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the United States
of America for Yemen, and the recent initiative of Saudi Arabia to stop the bloodshed
and establish peace in Yemen have been rebuffed and met with intransigence and a
brutal offensive against Ma’rib, home to more than two million people, that started
in February and continues unabated. Ballistic missiles, drones and heavy weapons
are being used against civilians and displaced persons, and civilian objects in Saudi
Arabia have also been targeted.
Those terrorist militias will not choose peace as long as they continue
to receive military, logistical and media support from the rogue Iranian regime.
The militias will not curtail their diabolical schemes and ambitions as long as that
regime continues to sponsor and back them and smuggle weapons to them. Indeed,
just a few days ago, the United States Navy Fifth Fleet seized a large shipment
of smuggled arms in the Arabian Sea. That shipment, which was headed to the
Houthis from Iran, constituted yet another flagrant violation by that country of all
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2015). The militias mean
to prolong the war and undermine regional security and stability. It is no longer
enough to make statements, issue condemnations and take nebulous positions in
response to all these attacks, the escalation and the repudiation of all sincere efforts
to establish peace. What is more, such actions send a negative message, as we have
seen from the manner in which the Houthi militias have responded to all such calls.
The Security Council must assume its responsibility and take decisive measures
to halt the attack on Ma’rib, because that attack imperils the peace process and
exacerbates the humanitarian crisis. Moreover, the Council must compel the militias
to cease military operations and accept proposals and initiatives aimed at ending
the conflict and the Yemeni people’s suffering by implementing the comprehensive
ceasefire and accepting the peaceful solution agreed upon by Yemenis and the
regional and international community. The Government of Yemen, aware of its
responsibility to the Yemeni people, will continue to extend its hand in peace and
support all international efforts in a constructive manner, particularly the efforts
of Martin Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and United States
Special Envoy Linderking, in addition to the efforts of all friendly actors to achieve a
comprehensive and sustainable peace in Yemen in accordance with the agreed terms
of reference for a political solution.
21-0652729/30

S/2021/465

Despite the efforts of the United Nations and humanitarian and relief
organizations, human suffering continues to grow in many parts of Yemen because
the Houthi militias are looting humanitarian aid and depriving rightful beneficiaries
of that aid. In addition, those militias have seized the salaries of public sector
employees and imposed hefty taxes, in particular during the holy month of Ramadan,
on the private sector in areas that they control in order to finance their war effort,
prolong their senseless war and exacerbate the human suffering they capitalize on
to strongarm the international community and achieve political gains. The Houthi
militias’ attack on Ma’rib is compounding human suffering exponentially with each
passing day. More than 3,030 families have been forced once again to flee their
camps, as Houthi shelling has laid waste to wells and water tanks, burned tents
and houses, and killed civilians, mostly women and children, in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law, human rights law and all international laws and
norms.
The Yemeni Government therefore calls on this august body to pressure the
Houthi militias to halt their acts of aggression. We once again call on development
partners and friendly countries to increase funding for the humanitarian response
plan in Yemen, support the Yemeni economy by depositing and transferring donor
contributions through the Central Bank of Yemen, and back the effort of the
technocratic Government to carry out its programme and achieve stability, bring
about economic recovery, stimulate development and provide services to all citizens.
The Yemeni Government is still waiting on the Security Council to reveal the
results of the investigation by the Panel of Experts into the heinous and criminal
terrorist bombing of Aden International Airport that took place just as members of
the Government were arriving there. Once again, we ask the Council, out of respect
for the victims and for international humanitarian law, to ensure that the perpetrators
of the attack on Aden International Airport are held accountable. We once again call
on the Panel of Experts to conduct a transparent and independent investigation to
uncover the details of the heinous crime, perpetrated by Houthi militias, of setting
African migrants on fire in Sana’a, and bring those involved to justice.
We repeat once again our warning that an oil spill from or an explosion
aboard the FSO SAFER oil tanker will result in an environmental, economic and
humanitarian catastrophe. We call on the Security Council to bring the utmost
pressure to bear on the Houthi militias, in order to stop them from using the tanker
as a tool for political coercion. In addition, the Council must compel them to give
the United Nations team immediate and unconditional access to the tanker in order
to carry out the necessary inspections and repairs, and thereby save Yemen and the
other countries bordering the Red Sea, as well as international shipping lanes, from
a disaster the likes of which the region and the world has never seen.

30/30

21-06527
