UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-~EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 16 APRIL 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ I 707) . . , , . . . . . , , . , , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . c 0
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913) . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . * * . . I.. .I.. . . . . . . . . .

1

s/w. 1707
-~--

NOTE
Les totes des documents de l’organisation des Nations Unies se composent de lettres
majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d’une tote dans un texte signifie qu’il s’agit
d’un document de I’Organisation.
Les documents du Conseil de securitd (totes S/. . .) sont, en regle generale, publids
dans des Suppliments trimestriels aux Documents officiels du Conseil de stcuritd. La date
d’un tel document indique le supplement dans lequel on trouvera soit le texte en question, soit des indications le concernant.
Les resolutions du Conseil de securite, numerotees selon un systeme adopt6 en 1964,
sont publides, pour chaque an&e, dam un recueil de R&solutions et dkisions du Conseil
de sCcuritt5 Ce nouveau systeme, applique retroactivement aux resolutions antkrieures au
ler janvier 1965, est entrC pleinement en vigueur a cette date.

SEVENTEENHIJNDREDANDSEVENTHMEETING
Held in New York
President: Mr. Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR

on Monday,
(Peru).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia,

16 April

1973, at 11 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
first name on the list of speakers is the Minister for Foreign
Affaires of Egypt, Mr. Mohamed Hassan El-Zayyat.
4. Mr. ELZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President, it is indeed an
honour and pleasure to be back in the Council, participating in these proceedings under your presidency. I thank
you very much for allowing me to participate.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 707)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1091 3)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with a previous decision of the Council [I 705th
meeting], and with its consent, I shall invite the representatives of Lebanon, Israel and Egypt to take places at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
{Lebanon), Mr. I! Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. M. El-Zayyat
(Egypt) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Again
in accordance with previous decisions of the Council
/I 705th and 1706th meetings], I invite the representatives
of Saudi Arabia, Algeria and the Syrian Arab Republic to
take the places reserved for them in the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wish to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria) and Mr0 H Kelani (Syrian
Arab Republic) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

5. As the Council has heard from the representative of
Lebanon (1705th meeting], my friend and colleague
Mr. Edouard Ghorra, the night of 10 April 1973 witnessed
an unprecedented aggression on his country-premeditated,
prepared, carried out and arrogantly admitted to by the
Government of Israel. Some 50 men and women were
murdered in cold blood in their beds, in their homes, in
their miserable camps or in the peaceful cities of Lebanon,
6. The assassins were not common criminals. They were
Israeli soldiers trained and ordered by their Government to
commit these common-law crimes. The defence correspondent of The Times of London, Mr. Stanhope, reported in
The Times of 12 April that those crimes were executed by a
secret Israeli department set up last year. That department,
the correspondent says, goes under the code name of
“Mivtzah Elohim”, or “God’s Wrath”. Its chief is MajorGeneral Aharon Y&v, a former head of “Aman”, the
military intelligence section. He was appointed by
Mr. Moshe Dayan, the Defence Minister, but is responsible
to Mrs. Meir, the Prime Minister, and comes under the daily
supervision of Mr. Yigal Allon, the Deputy Prime Minister.
Those are the persons who gave directives, who gave the
orders to commit the common-law crimes of 10 April.
7. It is obvious that the acts of murder and assassination of
the Palestinian leaders and refugees and of the Lebanese
citizens in Beirut were planned by the highest authorities of
the Israeli Government and executed by their official
agents.
8. The reaction of Israeli authorities to those assassinations was simply shocking. The Prime Minister of Israel
thought those assassinations were “marvellous”.
The
Foreign Minister of Israel, on 11 April, claimed in the
tiesset that the first echoes reaching his ministry reflected
“great admiration” abroad for those horrid murders.
9
9. More, the Israeli authorities have served notice that
such barbaric crimes will be repeated in Lebanon, in the
Arab countries or anywhere else, whenever the men and
women in authority in Tel Aviv SO decide, undeterred by
international ethics, assured against international action or
sanction.

10. These murders suggest that Israel has now assigned to
itself an imperial role in our region. Its leaders would decide
the persons to be eliminated an4 the civilian planes to be
shot down. This goes parallel to decisions on which
territory is to be cleaned up of its Palestinian inhabitants,
or Egyptian inhabitants, or Syrian inhabitants and annexed,
which villages and towns are to be demolished, and which
Israeli colonies are to be built on the ruins. Human beings
are objects and international boundaries are fictitious marks
on old-fashioned maps, The Zionist leaders decide the shape
of the Middle East, and the Israeli armed forces and agents
carry out the decisions.

sider taking adequate and effective steps or measures in
accordance with the relevant Articles of the Charter to
implement its resolutions”.
16. Fourthly, on 26 June 1972, this Council expressed its
grave Concern at Israel’s failure to comply with the previous
resolutions of the Security Council “calling on Israel to
desist forthwith from any violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon” [resolution 316 (I%?)/.
17. All these condemnations and warnings had no effect
on the authorities in Tel Aviv. Indeed, in its last assault,
Israel escalated its aggression. It has become more violent
and less inhibited. Today the authorities in Tel Aviv have
espoused murder and assassinatibn as a formal State policy
and practice.

11. Press reports coming from Israel today indicate that
the Israeli Government is satisfied that the deliberations in
this series of meetings of the Security Council will only
follow the same routine as in previous debates and end as
previous debates have ended. This comment means that
your expected resolution will carry in Israel the same
weight as your previous ones and will have the same
effect-or
lack of it-on the aggressive policy of the
authorities in Tel Aviv.

18. What do the people in our area expect from the
Council today? What do the people in Lebanon expect?
What do the people in Egypt expect? What do Lhey want
to hear? What are they waiting to hear?
19. Surely the Council has now taken account of’ the
failure of the Government of Israel to comply with its
repeated resolutions-I
am using the language of the
Chartew. It is therefore the Council’s inescapable duty to
determine what measures it should now take in the
discharge of its responsibilities.

12. In the past, this Council reglztted, deplored, and
condemned various acts of aggression committed by Israel.
The Council, as you are well aware, has, in the last four
years, passed the following. resolutions, after discussing
Israeli aggression in the Lebanese,sector alone. I Ieave out
now other aggressions, other resolutions and other condemnations.

20. The measures envisaged by the Charter include many
things. We are conscious that some of them cannot be
applied now. The United Nations has not yet formed its
coercive forces. But there are measures envisaged by the
Charter which include complete or partial interruptiorl of
economic relations, communications and severance of
diplomatic relations. It is unbelievable that Israel continues
to receive ever-increasing massive military and economic
assistance from a Member State, even after it has read and is
aware of all the previous resolutions by the Council on
Lebanon alone. It is inconceivable that such massive aid
should be provided to Israel while it occupies the territories
of three States Members of the United Nations, while it
continues to colonize the occupied territories, while it has
made a mockery of the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, while it has boycotted
the peace mission of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, while it has acted contrary to all deci.
sions of the Security Council and the General Assembly on
the Middle East.

13. First, on 31 December 1968, the Council condemned
Israel “for its premeditated military action in violation of
its obligations under the Charter” /resolution 262 (1968//
against the civil International Airport of Beirut. On that
occasion, the Council issued
“a solemn warning to Israel that if such acts were to be
repeated, the Council would have to consider further
steps to give’effect to its decisions”.
14. Secondly, on 26 August 1969, the Council condemned
“the premeditated air attack by Israel on villages in
southern Lebanon in violation of its obligations under the
Charter and Security Council resolutions” /resolution 270
(1969)]. The Council again declared that
actions of military reprisal and other grave violations of the cease-fire cannot be tolerated ant &at the
Security Council would have to consider further and
more effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against repetition of such acts”.
“such

21. Yesterday, Sunday, 15 April, the Chairman of the
United States Senate’s Foreign Relations Committee,
Senator Fulbright, summed up the net effect of American
military and economic assistance to Israel. On the television
programme “Face the Nation” he stated the following:

15. Thirdly, on 19 May 1970, the Council considered
another large-scale Israeli attack against Lebanon’ and again
condemned “Israel for its premeditated military action in
violation of its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations” (resolutiorz 280 (1970)/ and declared that “such
armed attacks can no longer be tolerated” and repeated

“It is quite obvious [that] without the all-out support
by the United States in money and weapons, the Israelis
would not do what they have been doing. We“-that
is,
the United States-” bear a very great share of the
responsibility for the continuation of this state of
warfare”.

“its solemn warning to Israel that if they were to be
repeated the Security Council would, in accordance with
resolution 262 (1968) and the present resolution, con2

AI1 the weapons which have been provided to Israel during
the past years have surely only made Israel more and more
contemptuous of the decisions of the Council and of the
General Assembly. A ban on military supplies and financial
aid to Israel is today essential for the attainment of peace in
the Middle East.
22. The least that the Security Council can do now is to
call upon all Member States including and indeed especially
the permanent members of the Council-and in this case the
United States-to interrupt their economic assistance and
their military supplies to Israel, which have facilitated
aggression in the past and would facilitate the committing
of further aggressions. Certainly the peoples of the world
should come to know to what extent an international legal
order based on the Charter of the United Nations iscapable
of protecting them. The people in our area have the right to
know whether decisions of the Council do indeed haveany
practical value.
23. We are fully aware that Israel is bent on proving that
the Charter is a mere fallacy; we are fully aware that Israel
is bent on proving that the authority of the Security
Council is a fiction. We are certainly aware that Israel, like
dl militaristic States, is bent on proving that what counts is
sheer power and sheer terror. We refuse to accept this
militaristic thesis. We want and need a world protected by
law, protected by the United Nations Charter. That is why
we will listen to the deliberations most attentively and wait
for a meaningful and effective resolution.
24. It is also the intention of the Government of Egypt to
ask later in this Council at this meeting, for a full review of
the entire Middle East situation by the Security Council.
Egypt will later ask for specific steps to be taken to bring
about a full examination of United Nations efforts for the
implementation of all its resolutions, and for applying the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations in the
region. These would of course include the request for the
submission of a full report by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, M;. Gunnar Jarring, and his mission.

Story of the Irgulz, published by Schuman, New York,
1951. On pages 163 to 165 Mr. Begin tells us the story of
how, in his words, the atrocities of the Irgun spread like
wildfire after the massacre of Dir Yassin and caused the
exodus of some 635,000 Arabs who ran away shouting in
panic, “Dir Yassin, Dir Yassin.” Twenty-five years later to
the day the peaceful city of Beirut saw another series of
murders. What is different now is this. What was then
attributed to irresponsible persons is now arrogantly
claimed as a policy of the State of Israel, Twenty-five years
have passed. There must be some youth in Israel today who
is 25 years old, and he should try to follow the bloody trail
from Dir Yassin to Beirut.
27. Mr. HUANG Mua (China) (tmnslation from Chinese):
In the small hours of 10 April 1973, the Israeli Zionists
flagrantly despatched armed bandits to invade Beirut, the
capital of Lebanon, and carried out premeditated raids and
slaughters at the headquarters of the Palestinian guerrilla
organizations and refugee camps. Palestinian guerrilla
leaders Mohamed Youssef, El-Najjar, Kamal Adwan and
Kamal Nasser, as well as a number of other Palestinian
revolutionaries, were killed, and heavy causuatties were
inflicted on the Lebanese people. These fresh crimes
committed by the Israeli Zionists have evoked the indignation of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples as well as the
peoples of the whole world. On behalf of the Chinese
Government and people, the Chinese delegation expresses
profound sympathy and consolation to the PaIestinian and
Lebanese peoples. We express the utmost indignation at and
strongly condemn the aggression and brutal crimes committed by the Israeli Zionists.
28. The horrible atrocity of 10 April is by no means an
isolated incident, but the continuation of a series of
atrocities committed by the Israeli Zionists over a long
period. This incident only serves as yet another proof that
the Israeli Zionists resort to aggression as their State policy
and have carried out their policy of aggression by most
brutal means. After the atrocity of 10 April, the lsraeli
Premier openly and brazenly extolled it as being “very
marvellous”. The Chief of Staff of the Israeli Armed Forces
arrogantly declared that “there is nq possibility” for Israel
to “honour the sovereignty of Lebanon” as long as there
arc Palestinian guerrilla activities on Lebanese territory and
that Israel “intends to continue” such operations. At the
Security Councl meetings here, the Israeli representative
also openly declared that where there wLrz Palestinian
patriots Israel would have the right to attack. All this is
undisguised gangster’s logic. As everyone knows, the Palestinian people have been driven out of their homeland by
the Zionists and, destitute and homeless, are leading a
miserable life, In these circumstances it is perfectly just for
the Palestinian people to fight on the territories of other
Arab countries for the restoration of their rights to national
existence with the support of the fraternal Arab people. If
the Israeli aggressors were allowed to act so recklessly,
invading one Arab country today and another tomorrow,
what would be left of the international code of conduct?
All peace-loving and justice-upholding people of the world
categorically reject the gangster’s logic of the Israeli
aggressors and absolutely cannot tolerate their aggressive
atrocities.

25. The Council and the world it represents certainly have
the right and the duty to know whether peace efforts in the
Middle East have indeed reached a dead end. After almost
six years of Israeli occupation, arrogance and efforts at
humtliation, our people and indeed all the peoples of the
civilized world have the right to know whether the United
Nations has succeeded or failed in its duty to-and I am
using the words of the Charter-establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising from
international law could be maintained. Certainly we have
the right to know where the responsibility for the present
situation lies.
26. On 9 April 1948 the peaceful village of Dir Yassin in
Palestine saw the most horrible of massacres-the murder of
its children by the Irgun Zwei L,eumi of the Zionist
movement. For those who have forgotten about that, I
reluctantly recommend a book by Mr. Menachem Begin,a
member of the Israeli cabinet until very recently and
member of the Knesset. The book is called The Revolt:
3

29. The Israeli aggressors think that by means of bloody
massacre they can intimidate the Palestinian, Lebanese and
other Arab peoples and stamp out the raging flames of the
just struggle against Israeli aggression. This is a sheer fond
dream. The fiercer the oppression, the stronger the resistance. By their perverse acts, the Israeli aggressors are
lifting a rock only to drop it on their own feet. The people
fighting for freedom and liberation cannot be exterminated.
With one man falling, millions will rise and march forward
along the path crimson with his blood. The awakened
Palestinian and other Arab peoples will further see through
the ferocious features of the Israeli aggressors, enhance
their fighting will, unite closely and advance wave upon
wave, to carry on the struggle against the aggressors through
to the end.

34. Finally, I have to point out that, in his statementof
13 April (1706th meeting/, the Soviet representative
deviated far from the subject under discussionin the
Security Council to harp unabashedlyon the hackneyed
tune of the “non-useof force in international relations”. HC
also made innuendos, attacks and threats against the
Chinesedelegationand all other delegationswhich oppose
or do not support the Soviet proposal. By so doing, the
Soviet representativetried to provoke a controversy and
divert the attention of the meeting. We expressregret at
this.

3.5 At the twenty-seventh sessionof the GeneralAssembly, the Chinese delegation made a full anaIysis and
refutation of the Soviet delegation’sreactionary argument
which distorted the spirit of the Charter and aimed at
30. It is necessaryto point out here that the connivance seekingfame by deceivingthe public. It is clear to all that,
and enouragcmentby the two super-Powersare the basic in playing up once again the reactionary theory of the
reaon why the Israeli Zionists have not only long occupied absolute “non-use of force in international relations”,
and refused to withdraw from large tracts of Arab which makes no distinction between aggressionand the
territories but alsodaredto perpetrate soblatantly repeated victim of aggression,
betweenjustice and injustice, at a time
armed invasions and murderous actrocities againstneigh- when the Israeli Zionists havejust committed the crimes of
bouring Arab countries. Contending for their spheresof
armedaggression
and brutal massacre
againstthe Palestinian
influence, the two super-Powersare deliberately main- and Lebanesepeoples,the Soviet representativeis, in fact,
taining a situation of “no war, no peace” in the Middle East whitewashingthe aggressors’crime while asking the vicand are intentionally taking advantage of the temporary timized Palestinianand other Arab peoplesto give up their
difficulties of the Palestinianand other Arab peoplesto
struggle against aggressionand wait for death with tied
make political dealsat the expenseof the latter’s national hands.
rights, territory and sovereignty, so as to facilitate their
contention for important strategic points and oil resources
36. He even went so far asto accuseall thosewho disagree
in the Midr’le East.
with his reactionary theory of encouragingaggressionand
supporting Israel, trying thereby to exert pressureon them.
31. One super-Power has been supporting the Israeli This has revealedall the more clearly the high-handedness
aggressorswith arms and economic aid, and the other is and ulterior motive of the Soviet representative.Judging his
pouring a steadyflow of manpowerinto Israel to supplythe
wordsby his own deeds,one will seethat the proposal for
Israeli aggressorswith sources for troop recruitment and
the so-callednon-useof force in international relatiom and
even technical specialists. Previous speakers here have the permanentprohibition of the useof nuclear weaponsas
rightly said that the Palestinianand other Arab peoplesare propagated by the Soviet representativeis nothing but a
the victims of supper-Powerpolicies. However, the superdownright fraud. Its purposeis none other than to cover up
Powers’acts of seekinggains at the expenseof othersare their frantic armsexpansionand war preparation and their
being seenthrough ever moreclearly by the Arab peopleand attempt to consolidatetheir position of nuclear monopoly
will eventually end in ignominiousfailure.
and nuclear blackmail and to lull the vigilance of the
world’s people so asto expedite their unbridled expansion
32. On this occasionthe Chinesedelegationreaffirms: The and aggression
in pursuit of their big-Powerhegemony. The
Chinese Government and people will, as always, firmly
Chinesedelegation declares that it firmly opposes
that
support the Palestinian,Lebaneseand other Arab peoplesin
reactionary theory and infamous design of the Soviet
their just struggleagainstthe Israeli aggressors.
The Security representative.
Council mustadopt aresoIution sternly to condemnandstop
the aggressionand atrocities of the Israeli aggressors.
The
heroic Palestinianand other Arab peoplesare by no means 37. Mr. Malik also said that the so-called“new rule of
aloneIn their just struggles:the world situation isfavourable international law” about the so-called“non-use of force in
to the struggleagainsthegemonismand power politics. The international relations” must be “expressly stated” in
Palestinianand other Arab peoplesare becomingevermore whatever resolution the Security Council now adopts 011
the question under consideration.By insistingon thrusting
staunchthrough temperingin their arduousstruggles.
such an issueinto the resolution of the Security Council, he
33. We are deeply convinced that, no matter what further revealshis strenuousattempt to place obstaclesin
difficulties and twists and turns they may encounter and the way of adoption by the Security Council of a resohltiun
in support of the Palestinianand other Arab peoplesand in
what sacrificesthey will have to make on their road of
advance,with the energeticsupport of the justice-upholding opposition to Israeli aggression.The Chinese delegation
firmly opposessucha schemeof the Soviet representative.
countries and people all over the world, they will certainly
defeat the Israeli aggressors,recover their national rights
and lost territories and win final victory, so long asthey
38. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): ?hc
rely on and mobilize the broad masses,persist in unity
representativeof Israel is the next speaker011 the list and 1
againstimperialismand perseverein protracted struggle.
call on him.
4

39. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I remember hearing as a child
the Chinese story of the blind man and laughter. Apparently a blind man was standing near a crowd of people
who were in a jocular mood; and suddenly he heard them
burst into laughter; he joGed them and laughed as well.
Asked one of the men in the crowd: “Why do you laugh,
blind man, not knowing what it is all about? ” And the
blind man replied: “AS you are all laughing, there must be
something worth laughing about, and therefore I laugh
too.” What the blind man did not know was that the crowd
was laughing at him.

43. At our previous meetings I analysed the origins of
Arab terrorism, which reach back 50 years and have their
roots in the Nazi ideology of the infamous Haj Amin
el-Husseini, Hitler’s collaborator in the annihilation of
6 million Jews.After Israel’sattainment of independencein
1948 and the defeat of the invading Egyptian and other
Arab armies, the first murder squadsto be sent against
defenceless
Israeli men,women andchildren were organized
by the Egyptian Government in Gazaand Sinai. They were
named fedayeen and their banner, appropriately enough,
was the old Nazi SSemblem,the skull andcrossboneson a
black background.

40. To the representative of the People’s Republic of
China, who is relatively new in this Organization, I would
say: Make no haste in joining the chorus of those who
attack Israel by distorting basic international concepts, and
by falsifying fundamental principles regarding peace and
war and aggression, and the right of Israel, a victim of 25
years of Arab aggression, to defend itself against terrorism.
One day these same distortions of values and precepts
might be turned by their proponents against you.

44. In the early 195Os, they launched a campaignof
incursions into Israel, blowing up houseswith their inhabitants asleep,throwing grenadesinto classrooms,ambushing civilian buseson highways. The Canadian Lieutenant-General Bums, then head of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), wrote of those
attacks in his book, Between AmD arzd Israeli.
“I felt that what Egyptians weredoing in sendingthese
men, whom they dignified with the nameoffedayeen, or
commandos,into another country wit.11the missionto
attack men, women, and children indiscriminately wasa
war crime. It wasessentiallyof the samecharacter . . . as
the offences for which the Nazi leadershad beentried in
Ntimberg, to cite the mostrecent example.“*

41. But I would leave it to the founder of the Chinese
Republic, Sun Yat-sen, to reply to the substance of the
Chinese representative’s statement. On 24 April 1920, Sun
Yat-sen wrote a letter to a Zionist leader in Shanghai, Mr.
N. E. 3. Ezra, in which he said:
“I have read your letter -and the copy of Israel’s
Messenger with much interest and wish to assureyou of

45. It wasonly the Sinai campaignof 1956, in which the
terrorist basesin Gaza and Sinai were destroyed, that put
an end to the sanguinaryattacks from Egyptian-controlled
territory. Egypt continued, however, to encourage and
assistin the pursuanceof terror operationsfrom other Arab
Ptates. In recent years, Beirut has become the principal
operational headquartersof Arab international terrorism
while Cairo is undoubtedly its political capital. This was
expressedas follows in a statement by President Sadaton
6 April 1972 at a conference in Cairo of all the terrorist
groups:

my sympathy for this movement, which is one of the
greatest movements of the present time. All lovers of
democracycannot help but support whole-heartedlyand
welcome with enthusiasmthe movement to restoreyour
wonderful and historic nation, which hascontributed so
much to the civilization of the world and which rightfully
deserves
an honourableplacein the family of nations.”
It is time for the Government of the People’sRepublicof
Chinato ponder thosewords.
42. It is clear that it is not a message
of peacethat Egypt’s
Foreign Minister hasbrought to the United Nations.There
was not a glimmerof light, of understanding,of peacein his
words today. He flew acrossoceansand continentsto tell
the world that Egypt supportsinternational terrorism,that
Egypt backs the savageoutrages of Arab murder gangs.
Dishearteningas this attitude is, it is not new. It is an
established
and well-knownfact that Egypt indentifiesitself
with the campaignof atrocities carried on by Arab terror
organizations against innocent civilians. The Egyptian
Government has never concealedits full support for these
crimes.Its Prime Minister, at the time of the Lod airport
massacre,publicly praised that barbaric crime. Egypt
rejected a request by the Federal Republic of Germanyto
assistin a last-minute effort to prevent the murder of the
Israeliathletes at the Munich Olympic Games.It remained
silent when Governmentsthroughout the world raisedtheir
voicesagainstthe ghastly assassination
by Arab terroristsof
American and Belgiandiplomatsin Khartoum. Indeed,it is
evident to all that Arab terrorist organizationswould have
beenunable to pursue their operationsand to perpetrate
such acts without the backing of the Egyptian and other
Arab Governments.
5

“We have come together once again at one of your
assemblies,which you generally hold in Cairo, your
meeting-placeand your home. I do not believethat this is
a matter of chance.No, I do not seeit even asa deliberate
choice, but as somethingnatural, a matter of course.For
you and for us, there is nothing before us but to fight.”
46. Egypt’s role as protector of Arab terrorism and its
machinery is especially evident in the growth of murder
operations in and from Lebanon. It wasEgypt that forced
upon the LebaneseGovernment the 3 November 1969
agreementwith the terrorist organizations, granting those
organizations freedom of operation in Lebanon. That pact,
known as the Cairo Agreement, was signed in Egypt’s
capital by the notorious Yassir Arafat on behalf of terror
groups and by Lebanotl’s Chief of Staff, Emil Bustani,
while representativesof the Egyptian Government,including
the Director-Generalof its Foreign Ministry, participated in
the talks.

1 Toronto,Clarke, Irwin and Company, Ltd., 1962, p. 88.

September. The report indicated that more details were
available than could be published. It is obvious that that
which was known to a journalist of AI Gumhuriyyla must
also have been known to the Egyptian authorities.

47. The supplementary agreements between Lebanon and
the terrorist organizations were also negotiated and concluded in Cairo. Time and again the Government of Egypt
exerted pressure on Lebanon to conform to these agreements and to give a free hand to the terrorist groups.
Whenever it seemed that the Lebanese Government was
unhappy with this situation, whenever it appeared that
Lebanon might try to do something about having become
the base for the export of bestial bloodshed. Cairo was up
in arms, intervening and forestalling it. President Sadat’s
emissaries were always on the go to.ensure the maintenance
of the terrorist establishment in Lebanon. One of these
emissaries who intervened several times in 1972 was
Mr. El-Zayyat’s predecessor as Foreign Minister, the present
Secretary-General of the Arab League, M&mud Riad.
Another one, Hassan Sebri el-Khouli, holds the office of
President Sadat’s personal representative.

53. Cairo has become the safe haven for terrorists after the
completion of their operations. These include members of
the Popular Front who, in July 1968, conducted, from
their office in Cairo, the negotiations concerning an El Al
aircraft hijacked to Algiers; the popular Front pirates
responsible in September 1970 for hijacking a Pan
American Boeing 747 to Cairo and bIowing it up upon its
arrival there. The Egyptian Government made no attempt
whatever to prevent the destruction of the aircraft and the
terrorists were all set free. The murderers of Jordan’s Prime
Minister Wasfi Ta1 in Cairo were set free by the Egyptian
authorities. The hijackers of the Sabena aircraft, which
landed in Lod in May 1972, demanded that the aircraft be
flown to Cairo with Arab terrorists to be released from
Israeli prisons. A similar demand to be flown to Cairo was
made by the gang which murdered the Israeli athletes in
Munich.

48. Today, Egypt is apparently concerned once more
about the future of the terrorist operations from Lebanon.
Israel’s action on 10 April was a serious blow to the murder
groups and their supporters. Egypt is again fearful that this
might weaken the barbaric campaign of atrocities. Egypt
knows, of course, that public opinion in the enlightened
world is aroused against this scourge, Views Israel’s action
against the terrorist centres in the Beirut area as timely and
justified and expects Lebanon to eliminate them.

54. Cairo is also a centre of terrorist propaganda. A special
radio station has been placed at the disposal of the murder
organizations by the Egyptian Gove’rnment. The assistance
given to the terrorist groups was summed up by President
Sadat of Egypt in an interview published in a Lebanese
newspaper Al Bayrak on 8 January 1973. To the question,
“TO what extent do you assist the fedayeen? “, Egypt’s
President replied, “Our assistance is unlimited”. Surely it is
obvious to all that this attitude of the Egyptian Govemment constitutes a serious obstacle to peace. The avowed
official objective of the terrorist groups and of their
umbrella organization, the so-called Palestine Liberation
Organization, is to destroy Israel and to eliminate it as a
sovereign State. Egypt’s support for and identification
with these organizations and their activities cast a dark
shadow over Egypt’s ultimate goals in the Middle East situation. Egyptian leaders, however, have gone beyond that.
Gamal Abdel Nasser’s promise to strike a death blow at
Israel’s independence and existence is a matter of record.
Egypt’s objectives today have been openly formulated in
the notorious “theory of two stages”, which was defined as
follows by President Sadat’s confidant, Mohamed Hassanein
Heikal, in an article in AZ Ahram:

49. Just as Mr. Riad or Mr. el-Khouli used to intervene on
behalf of the terrorists with the Lebanese Government,
Mr. El-Zayyat has joined our debate to see to it that no
harm comes to these murderers. To satisfy his demands is
to satisfy the assassins at Lod, the murderers at Munich and
the bloodthirsty butchers at Khartoum. To vindicate the
position expounded by theEgyptian Foreign Minister is to
vindicate the outrages committed by the Arab terrorists.
Egypt is interested that the terrorist activities should
continue and expand and not only in Lebanon. El
Fatah-Black September personnel undergo training with the
Egyptian army in a special camp. Special courses given in
Egypt to members of terrorist organizations have included
intelligence, frogmen, commandos, special weapons such as
rockets and recoilless guns.
50. The Egyptian Government has at times been directly
involved in actual operations by the terror groups. Thus,
the military attache at the Egyptian Embassy in the United
Kingdom was the organizer of a plot to blow up an El Al
plane at London airport. This was established in the Oxford
trial of one Trevor Williams, who was involved in the plot
and was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment in March 1970
for his part in it.

“There are only two specific Arab goals at present:
first, elimination of the consequences of the 1967
aggression through Israel’s withdrawal from all the lands
it occupied that year and secondly, elimination of the
consequences of the 1948 aggression through the eradication of Israel.”

51. Late in 1968, an American volunteer of Lebanese
origin joined El Fatah-Black September. NC was trained in
Baalbek, Lebanon, to carry out terrorist activities in Israel.
Two Egyptian intelligence officers attached to the Egyptian
Embassy in Amman were his instructors. They also supplied
him with detonators hidden in toothpaste tubes and bars of
soap.

55. Exactly a year ago, in a speech on the birthday of the
Prophet Mohammed, President Sadat said of the people of
Israel:

52. On 21 September 1972, the semi-official Egyptian
daily Al Gumhu~“ya published information of a new
terrorist operation planned to be carried out by Black

“It was written of them that they shall be demeaned
and made wretched. . . . The matter is no longer one Of
only freeing our country. . . . We shall send them back to
their former condition.”
6

56. These being the aims of the Egyptian Government, it
is abundantly clear that the terror organizations are not at
all a people’s movement, but merely the artificial product
of the policy of the Egyptian and certain other Arab
Governments. These terror organizations were established
and built tip to serve the destructive objectives and designs
of those Arab Governments on Israel’s sovereignty, and are
not supported by the vast majority of Palestinians. Should
the Egyptian Government so desire, the terror organizations
would cease to exist tomorrow.
57. However, in view of Egypt’s attitude and of the
objectives common to the terrorist organizations and the
Cairo Government, what is all this talk by the Egyptian
Foreign Minister that the United Nations has not done
enough, that the Security Council should act against Israel?
Is it a United Nations responsibility to assist Egypt and the
Arab terrorist organizations to pursue their aim of depriving
the people of Israel of the right to life? If action is to be
taken, it is against international terrorism and States which
harbour and assist it, not against Governments which take
protective measures against these bloody outrages.

62. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): The
next speakeron my list is the representativeof Lebanon,on
whom I now call.
63. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): It is obviousthat the latest
criminal assaultby Israelon Lebanon hasearned for Israel
world-wide indignation and condemnation. It has evoked
deep concern in the area and is having wide repercussions.
It is this deep concern about developmentsin the Middle
East and about the prospects of peace there which has
brought the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Mr. ElZayyat-whom 1 esteemand whose friendship I cherishfrom Cairo, acrossthe ocean,in order to warn the Security
Council and the world about these repercussionsand the
deep concern shared by all Governments. We, in our
delegation, appreciate the fact that Mr. El-Zayyat hasseen
fit to come here in order to be with us when we are
discussing the complaint of Lebanon about the Israeli
aggression.
64. My delegationwishesto state that it is grateful for the
statements already madein the Council by the representatives of the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, the Sudan andthe
People’s Republic of China, in which they have defended
our causeand castigatedthe aggression
by Israel.

58. The world and Israel are weary of listening to Egypt
and other Arab States invoking one-sided resolutions which
brush aside the merits of the issues and Israel’s legitimate
rights and interests; resolutions forced through the United
Nations organs by virtue of the purely mechanical numerical weight of Arab delegations in our Organization;
while, at the same time, Egypt and other Arab States
trample under foot the entire Charter of the United
Nations, all its principles ancl all its obligations in relation
to Israel.

65. During the last four years Lebanonhasbeensubjected
to severalheavy and massiveattacks by Israeli air and land
forces. Many ofour townsand villagesin southern Lebanon
were destroyed. Hundredsof our civilian people, including
women and children, were killed or injured. The Security
Council has met to dealwith theselsraeliacts of aggression
and adopted several resolutions condemning them, condemning Israel, and warning it againsttheir repetition. The
Foreign Minister of Egypt hasrecalled thesefacts in detail.

59. What is this talk of coercing Israel to give up its
legitimate rights to self-defence and to live in security? Has
not Egypt learned the lesson, after 25 years, that the use of
force and coercion cannot be effective against Israel, not
after what its people has had to go through to regain and to
defend its independence? Does not Egypt realize that the
only way to resolve the Middle East question is by
abandoning its present policy and embarking on the course
of dialogue, understanding and agreement with Israel?

66. But theseresolutionsdid not deter Israel. The inaction
of the Security Council in September 1972, becauseof a
veto cast by a permanent member of the Council, has
emboldened Israel. It has undertaken several large-scale
operations resulting in more death, suffering and destruction, the last of which is the gangster-likeoperation which
hasbrought us before the Council.
67. Every time we speak of Israeli aggressionagainst
Lebanon, we seethe Israeli representativesbring out of the
hat their old worn-out tricks, mixing every aspect of the
situation with what they call “acts of terrorism”. We have
just this moment heard Mr. Tekoah. He has to go back as
far as Haj Amin el-IHusseinito find a linkage between the
plight of 6 million Jews in Europe-that holocaust which
was condemnedby all the peoplesof the world and which
we still condemn now-and the Arabs, and to portray the
Arabs to the world askillers, asmurderers,asterrorists.

GO. Egypt’s Foreign Minister did not bring us a message of
hope. Let him however carry back a message to his
Governmknt and to his people, a message that there is hope,
real hope, for peace, if Egypt ceases to support the
nefarious aims and activities of the terrorist organizations
and enters into a free meaningful dialogue with Israel. This
evening, the Jewish people all over the world will be
celebrating Passover, its festival of freedom. It commemorates the struggle of the people of Israel, more than
20 centuries ago, to live in freedom and in independence,
and ancient Egypt’s attempt to deny them this right.

68. Well, Hitler’s Nazis also killed 18 million Soviet
citizens; they killed hundreds of thousands of French,
British, Austrian, Yugoslav, Australian, New Zealand and
Indian people. Why do the representativesof thosecountries not come and tell us that becauseof a certain
association between Naj Amin el-Husseiniand Hitler the
Arabs are the murderersand are responsiblefor the evils of
the Second World War and all the sufferingsto which their
people were subjected?

61. Egypt’s present Arab rulers are not of the same people
as those of the Egypt of the Pharoahs. Yet, they too have
hardened their hearts; they too are trying to prevent Israel
from living like other natioas. It is to’be hoped that, for the
good of the Egyptian people and of all the peoples of the
Middle East, they will be wiser and less obdurate than the
Pharaohs.
7

4

have always been helpful in every way to the promotion of
conditions of peace and security in Lebanon. But the press
and the Israelis do not refer to the dozen other Lebanese
innocents who were killed, to the 50 other people who
were murdered in the refugee camps, or to the 30 other
Lebanese who were injured. They do not refer to this
repetitious aggression against the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon.

69. This sing-song of the Israelis, aimed at exploiting the
massacres of 6 million Jews, must be put to an end in the
Council. There is always the attempt to widen the debate,
to picture the Arabs as terrorists, to speak about terrorists
as “Arab terrorists”. It is a fact that Palestinian individuals
are undertaking some acts. They are engaged in a struggle,
in resistance against Israel. Why do all Arab people have to
be responsible for every act committed by any individual
Palestinian anywhere in the world, and why should
Lebanon always be held responsible for those acts and
suffer the murderous assaults against it by Israel?

75. During the last several months Israel has followed a
ruthless and murderous policy by hitting at Palestinian
camps in both Syria and Lebanon, even if those camps are
located far from Israel. It has done so without provocation
or warning. It does not justify its aggressions except by the
fallacious pretext that it is hitting Palestinian terrorists to
prevent possible future murders. But the kind of terrorists
who were killed in the bloodthirsty Israeli raid in Lebanon
were none other thant 17 innocent civilians in the homes
and streets of Hasbayya and about the same in Dayr aI
Achayer. Twelve civilians were killed, 34 wounded and two
are still missing in the attack on Rabid, where a woman and
her six children were killed. In the refugee camps of Nahr
El-Bared, Badawi and Beirut scores were murdered. A blind
policy of reprisal that, in the words of The New Yorkhi,
far from honouring a cause, merely disgraces it.

70. The Israeli attempt to picture Beirut as the capital of
international terrorism and Lebanon as the least civilized
country in the world cannot but meet with our indignation,
our strong indignation. Our people and our Government are
indignant concerning those charges. A peaceful country
such as Lebanon, a country that has, throughout history,
maintained open friendly relations with ali the countries of
the world, which bases its policies and its way of life on
freedom and on friendship with peoples-that is the
country lsrael is trying to picture to the world as a country
of terrorism.
71. But Israel cannot deceive international opinion,
because international opinion knows very well the history
of Lebanon and the values we uphold there. They know
what kind of a society we are building in Lebanon, where
groups of various races and religions are building a modern
society in harmony. I have heard many times that the
Lebanese experiment is a wonderful one that should be
copied by others.

76. The Israelis forget their barbarous attacks against
schools and factories in Egypt at Abou-Zabel and BahrelBakar, where scores of peaceful wcrkers and young children
were butchered. To no avail arc the attempts of Israel to
deceive public opinion about the circumstances in which a
Libyan civilian airliner was shot down, under orders, by
Israeli pilots on 21 February 1973, and 110 innocent
civilian passengers met their deaths. This barbaric act, the
first of its kind in the annals of civil aviation, aroused the
indignation and the condemnation of world public opinion,
the International Civil Aviation Organization, the Commission on Human Rights and other bodies.

72. Naturally, Israel does not want that experiment to
succeed, because it is a challenge to the mode of government
and way of life it is erecting in Israel. The attack on Beirut
was political assassination conceived and executed by the
responsible Government of Israel, a Member of the United
Nations, against another Member of the United Nations.

77. And Mr. Tekoah comes here today and speaks to us
about Arab war crimes while his country is the only State
Member of the United Nations which stands condemned by
the Commission cm Human Rights of this Organization for
its war crimes against the civilian people in the West Bank,
in Gaza, in the Golan Heights and in Sinai.

73. l have just received a dispatch from Beirut telling me
that the British and Belgian Governments have assured the
Lebanese Government that the passports that were in the
hands of two alleged British and two alleged Belgian
subjects were false ones. The agents of Israel resorted to the
[mud of falsifying passports in order to have people
infiltrite Lebanon. Those so-called tourist gentlemen who
like swimming and fishing at night were sent by the agents
of Israel to prepare for their vile, base attack upon Beirut,
And the Israeli Government sets itself up at once as
accuser, judge and executioner. Mr. Tekoah came here the
other day to proclaim, in Emile Zola’s style, “I come to
accuse Lebanon”--as though that would impress the Council and the world. IIere we have the advocate of the
perpetrators of one of the most abominable of crimes
accusing Lebanon, the victim.

78. 1 should like to ask who started the campaign Of letter
bombs-even though an Israeli diplomat was killed in the
process-a campaign to coincide with the discussion of
terrorism at the United Nations last September‘! nre
Surzday Times of London stated at that time that:
“it was out of character for the Black September not to
have claimed credit for those incidents as they had done
instantaneously at the time of Munich and on other
occasions.”
Why is it that most of the letters were immediately
intercepted and many of them proved to be duds? Who
started and waged the method of sending letter bombs to
German scientists working in Egypt? Certainly the Israeli
representative knows the role played by a fbrmer Israeli
security chief, Isar Halprin. He surely recalls the I..avon
affair and the attempts which Israeli agents made to plant

74. We notice that the press and the Israelis have
emphasizcd that what happened in Beirut was the killing of
three Palestinian leaders, three Palestinian terrorists. Well,
naturally they try to gloss over this matter by emphasizing
terrorism. But these were people living in civilian apartments with theif families. They have, as Mr. Tekoah has
claimed, had contacts with the Lebanese Government. They
8

Palestinians are settled in a large number of
countries, Arab and non-Arab. If Israelwere to follow aI1
their movements, suspectand implicate all the countries
where they resideor through which they may have gone
in transit, then it would benot only towards Lebanonbut
towards most of the countriesof the world that it should
launch its bombersquads.
I‘

book-bombs in the United States Information Libraries in
Alexandria and Cairo to wreck the then improved relations
between Egypt and the United States?

.

79. The latest Israeli operation proved that it was possible
for Israeli agents to penetrate into Lebanon, in the guise of
tourist gentlemen who loved swimming and fishing. Therefore, who loaded our mail boxes with letter bombs a few
months ago, some of which exploded against victims?
Perhaps the successor of Mr. Isar Halprin could tell US?

.

.

“How can one allow Israel to attack Lebanon, and
Lebanon alone, persistently, whenever any action is
undertaken againstits interest or nationalsin any part of
the world? ”

80. There is always an attempt to confuse the acts of
individuals and the acts of Governments. I should like here
to cite what the Christian Science Monitor said in its
editorial of 11 April 1973: “Meeting terrorism with
counter-terrorism
and invading a sovereign, independent
country in the process, is no way to solve the problem-the
problem of the Palestinian refugees. The paper drew the
conclusion that: “The net result of the Israeli operation can
only be to exacerbate tensions.” And I think that we have
already proved the results of that operation.

8.5. The dilemmaof the Palestinianproblem hasbeenwith
us for 25 years, as we were reminded by Mr. El-Zayyat
today. What have we done about it? Are we going to let
these peoplelive in misery for ever? Theseare peoplewho
were born in the campsin misery, someof them educated
in the schoolsand training centresof the United Nations.
They have become cognizant of their existence, of their
rights, of the great injustice done to them. What are we
going to do? Throw them into the desert or into the sea?
What is Lebanon askedto do? I have heard and even read
from some elements among the Palestiniansand their
friends the following:

81. The Israeli representative recalls to our memory the
Munich incident. Concerning that incident, it has already
been established that the Arab commandoshad not
intended to kill. They were forced to react violently when
the accord with the Germanpolice wasbroken becauseof
the intransigenceandlack of humanconcern for the fate of
the Israelisshown by membersof the Israeli Government.
82. In the face of the terror campaignconductedby Israel
against the Palestinian people, scoresof United Nations
resolutionsremind it and the world of their existence.And
there must be a discrepancyhere betweenMrs. Meir and her
representatives.On the one hand Mrs, Meir declares:Who
are the Palestinians? Who are they? Where are they?
Whereas, Mr. Tekoah and other Israeli representatives,
everytime we meet here, tell us that they are in Beirut, they
are in Lebanon, the next day they are in Damascus,
then
they are in Cairo, they are in Algeria, they areeverywhere.
Therefore, these Palestinianpeople exist. They havelegitimate rights and thoselegitimate rights have beenupheldby
the United Nations. Their right to exerciseequalrights and
self-determination has been upheld in many resolutionsof
this Organization.
83. The path that Israel is following, the path of the
annihilation and extermination of the Palestinianpeopleis
fraught with grave danger. Perhapsit is useful to remind
Mr. Tekoah of the warningthat Lord Samuel,who himself
was a Jew and a former High Commissionerof Palestine,
once gave to the Israelisin the wake of terrorist acts they
had perpetrated in Palestine.He told them to bewareof
treading again the course followed by the Zealotsduring
the time of the Roman Empire. Such outrages,he said,
would lead to the destructionof the

“Well, we are despairingof all the efforts of the United
Nations to achieve a solution to our problem. Our only
solution is to march, all of us at one time, from all over
the Arab countries on the Israeli borderswithout arms,
with white handkerchiefs in order to reintegrate our
ancestralhomes.”
If they did, would Israelshoot them down asterrorists?
86. J mentioned that these peoplehave taken cognizance
of their existence and their rights. Allow me only to cite
from a book entitled The Disinhetited: Journal of a
Palestinianexile, by Mr. FawazTurki. Mr. Turki said:
“Mine is an existential problem having to do with the
yearning for my homeland, with being part of a culture,
with winuing the battle to remainmyself, asa Palestinian
belonging to a people with a distinctly Palestinian
consciousness.
“If I was not a Palestinianwhen I left Haifa asa child, I
am one now.“a
Ttrey do exist, those Palestinians,and they have a problem.
87. I should like to recallhere somevery apt words stated
by Mr. William Rogers, Secretary of State of the United
States, in an addressmade on 9 December1969 before the
1969 Galaxy Conferenceon Adult Education in Washington. Mr. Rogerssaid:

“

“There can be no lasting peace without a just settlement of the problem of those Palestinianswhom the wars
of 1948 and 1967 have madehomeless.”

national homeitself, becauseits moral and spiritual
foundations will be blown to pieces,and without themit
cannot stand.”
84. The Foreign Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Kalyl Abouhamad stated in the General Assemblyon 26 September

2 official
Records
of
Session, plenary Meetings,

the General
Assenlbly,Twenty-seventk
204 1stmeeting,
paras. 50 and 51.

3 NewYork, Monthly ReviewPress,
1972,p. 8.

1972:

9

He also said:

91. What have been the results of Israel’s excessive and
ever-mounting claims and intransigence? The mission of
Mr. Jarring to implement resolution 242 (1967) is paralysed. The United States initiative, called the Rogers Plan,
has been shelved. The mission undertaken in 1971 by 10
heads of State representing the Organization of African
Unity to help promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict
on the basis of resolution 242 (1967) yielded no positive
results. An alternative United States plan to bring about an
interim agreement between Egypt and Israel to reopen the
Suez Canal is under heavy doubts. The General AssembIy
adopted many resolutions, among them resolutions 2799
(XXVI) and 2949 (XXVII) which. specifically urge Israel to
respond favourably to the United Nations initiatives undertaken to implement Security Council resolution 242
(1967).

“The problems posed by the refugees will become
increasingly serious if their future is not resolved. There is
a new consciousness among the young Palestinians who
have grown up since 1948 which needs to be channeled
away from bitterness and frustration toward hope and
justice.”
88. What have we done to meet that challenge in order to
channel the hopes, the energies and the minds of the
Palestinian people towards a constructive life? You speak
about terrorism. This is a qukstion, as a matter of fact,
which is not before the Council. The Council is seized with
a complaint by Lebanon against an act of aggression
committed by Israel, against a Member State called Iebanon. That is the complaint on the agenda. We are r,ot
discussing here the problem of terrorism in its entirety. This
matter has been discussed in the General Assembly during
its twenty-seventh session. It adopted a resolution on this
matter [resolution 3034 (XXVI..~/ and decided to establish
an Ad Hoc Committee, and the Committee is being formed
in order to deal with it. But as I reminded the Council the
other day, [1705th meeting], and as our Secretary-General
reminded the world Iast September,” you cannot discuss
terrorism without discussing its underlying causes. May I
quote in this connexion what a gr&t statesman, President
Pompidou of France, said in a press conference on 21
September 1972, following the Munich events:

92. But all these efforts and resolutions have broken down
because of Israeli intransigence and obduracy. Many an
Arab Government has signified its willingness to find a just
and durable solution within the framework of the Security
Council resolution. They have proved on many occasions
their willingness to co-operate with the United Nations and
with the Member States to make an earnest effort to
achieve peace.
93. While Israel proclaims its lip service to peace, it
systematically scuttles every ‘effort to make progress
towards it. It pretends it wants it, but this is a political trick
and a subterfuge. Peace is a categorical imperative. Declarations of intent and desire are not sufficient while tile
suffering and anxieties of peoples mount and the problem is
being deliberately complicated, its solution delayed and
acts of aggression pursued. Faith in peace must be matched
by deeds, by the application of all resources to attain ii.
Reliance on power and military arrogance is destructive not
only to the cause of peace but to the people resorting to it
and to the fundamental and spiritual values they profess
they are attached to. Has not God told the Israelis in the
Book of Deuteronomy: “Take heed lest you forget the
Lord your God. . . . Beware lest you say in your heart, ‘My
power and the might of my hand have gotten me this
wealth’ “?

“France has taken a position, and I myself, in the most
clear-cut manner, against the Munich affair. But one
cannot eliminate an event unless the causes are eliminated, We can condemn, take precautions, but we shall
not eliminate terrorism and we will not have resolved a
problem which in itself is profoundly human and beyond
politics and that is the Palestinian problem.“5
89. While we are on the subject of terrorism I should like
to quote from an article by Mr. Kapeliouk which appeared
in Le Morzde on 11 April. He said:
“Terrorism in the State is more reprehensible if it is a
matter of irregular groups. Acts like the one perpetrated
in Khartoum or Cyprus are only the symptoms of an
essential injustice which it is in our power to remedy,
Those who are sacrificed sometimes revive and demand a
settlement of accounts.“5

94. By the might of the sword the Israelis have carved a
State for themselves in Palestine, expelled from it tile
Palestinian people and visited upon them untold suffering
for a quarter of a century; following the war of 1967, they
occupied large areas of the territories of Egypt, Jordan and
Syria, declared the annexation of the Holy City of
Jerusalem and violated the human rights of the peoples in
the occupied territories. Thus the Israelis are bIinded by
their newly-found military power and, in their haste to use
it, they fail to see the intolerable harm they are inflicting
on the Palestinians and other Arab peoples and the
unacceptable damage they are causing to the principles and
purposes of the Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the cause of peace. This is a grim and grave
reality tiith which the Middle East and the international
community have been faced for a long time and whkh
has
led to endless turmoil, bloodshed and suffering. Israel bears
the prime responsibility for this unhappy enduring situation
and the United Nations shares in the responsibility
for
allowing it to last and further degenerate. Such a situation

90. There is one way to end all of this. We can go on for
hours exchanging accusations. The way is peace, a peace for
which all the Arab peoples yearn. They want it very badly
in order to build up their economic, social and cultural
conditions and better the conditions of their people, The
Israeli Government attempts in vain to deceive the worId by
proclaiming its desire for peace. InternationaI public
opinion already knows better. It knows that Israel sets up
one barrier after another on the road to peace.
4 See Official Records of’ the General Assembly,
Twenty-seventh
Session, General Committee,
199th meeting,para. 97.

5 Quotedin I:renchby the speaker.
10

Goebbels and Dulles. Suffice it to mention those four
names. But they have all passed into oblivion, whereas we,
the first Soviet socialist Power in the world, live and
flourish and follow the path of Lenin, the path of peace,
friendship, mutual understanding among all peoples and
unremitting struggle against aggression in all its forms and
manifestations.

cannot but prolong the sufferings of the people that are
victims of the Israeli aggression and intransigence and
endanger international peace and security.
95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish):
There are three more speakers on my list. I must point out
that any speakers in addition to them will be heard at our
next meeting.

101. That is the situation with regard to anti-Sovietism
and slander.

96. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, if there is to be
an afternoon meeting, then perhaps I can be the first
speaker of that meeting in order not to delay our
distinguished colleagues, of whom there arc many here.
That is an indication of the attention attached by all
representatives to the United Nations to the discussion of
the latest act of aggression by Israel against Lebanon.
Perhaps it might be advisable to meet at 3.30 p.m. and
continue our work then. I shall not try the patience of our
colleagues. It seems that the members of the Security
Council have grown accustomed to meeting at inconvenient
times. But we have many guests. Perhaps we may have a
break until 3.30 p.m. and continue our work at a second
meeting.

102. My reply on Friday would have been shorter. But
today it will be a little longer because to the Israeli
slanderers and exponents of anti-Sovietism has been added
yet another-the Chinese slanderer and exponent of antiSovietism. So we have here a a duet, a chorus. Israel and
China have joined together in a common duet against the
Soviet Union. And what have they found? Neither one nor
the other has been able to refute a single one of the
arguments in the statement of the ‘Soviet delegation, for
they are cast-iron arguments, it is impossible to refute
them, they have been confirmed by all who have spoken
here. I am deeply convinced that, in the condemnation of
Israel, these arguments will be upheld by all members of the
Security Council with, perhaps, a rare exception. Thus,
anyone who takes up a position of anti-Sovietism and
slander against the Soviet Union in an attempt to distort
the just, firm, decisive consistent policy of the USSR with
regard to the Middle East question, is opposing the
overwhelming majority of the members of the Council and
their positions, as well as the overwhelming majority of
States Members of the United Nations, which have repeatedly condemned Israel in General Assembly resolutions.

97. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On
the basis of consultations an agreement exists that a
meeting of the Security Council be held tomorrow at IO.45
a-m, if the speakers now on my list would be prepared to
speak at the meeting tomorrow morning, I should have no
objection. Furthermore, this afternoon there is a meeting of
the Committee concerning sanctions against Rhodesia, which
has a deadline that is very close. Therefore I should prefer
that we not have a meeting of the Security Council this
afternoon,
98. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
[translation fkom Russian): Then I shall speak now. I very
much regret that the situation is such that I have to speak
at what may be termed an untimely hour, that is,
lunch-time. I spared the Council and those who were
present at its Friday meeting [I 706th meeting] and
decided not to speak in reply to the routine slanderous
tirade in the statement of the Israeli representative. Not one
single fact--and all the facts and arguments in the statement
of tameSoviet delegation were based on documents, on facts
and on decisions of the Security Council strongly condemning Israel for its repeated aggression against Lebanonwas refuted by the Israeli representative. He confined
himself to the slanderous fabrications which are typical of
his style and behaviour in the Council, in an attempt to
distort the position and policy of the Soviet Union.

103. That is the true state of affairs. Both the preceding
speakers, the speaker from Israel and the speaker from
China, attacked me for referring to the General Assembiy
resolution adopted at the twenty-seventh
session concerning the non-use of force in international relations and
permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. That
is very significant. Furthermore, I must say that, in my
statement, I did not mention China even once. Check the
records. For this reason, the slanderous attack by the
Chinese representative against the statement of the Soviet
delegation reminds me of a Russian anecdote. In one village
there had not been a robbery for many generations. The
people lived honestly, they worked hard, they respected
one another and nobody stole anything from anyone else.
One day a theft occurred. The elder, the heed man or
mayor, of the village called an urgent meeting of its
citizens, of all the inhabitants of the village. He told them
of the extraordinary event, There had been a theft in the
village and the thief must be found and punished. He
appealed to them: “Respected fellow citizenss, I know you
are all honest people. We have never had a robbery here. A
thief has committed a crime and he must confess before all
the honest people here.” But the thief remained silent.
Then the elder said: “Look, the thief’s hat is burning.” The
thief snatched at his hat and thus revealed himself. You will
understand why I mention this story; it is because I have hit
the nail on the head.

99. We have grown accustomed to this. For the Israeli
representative, anti-Sovietism and slander against the Soviet
Union have become a kind of chronic illness. The sooner he
recovers from it, the better for him and for his country.
100. Many more powerful statesmen have slandered the
Soviet Union, after the October Revolution, after the First
World War, in the period between the wars and after the
Second World War. The murky constellation of slanderers
and exponents of anti-Sovietism included Churchill, Hitler,
11

104. Let us return to the argument of the Israeli representative. What did I say? 1 said that it was quite obvious
that anyone opposed to the adoption of a resolution on the
non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, anyone
who voted against that resolution or abstained during the
vote had, in essence, adopted a course of encouraging Israel
and other aggressors to continue their policy of aggression
and to continue to use force in international relations. I
also emphasized that the adoption of this resolution by the
General Assembly represented the establishment of a new
rule of international law concerning the non-use of force
between States. Members of the United Nations must take
note of the General Assembly’s decisions.
10s. Furthermore, I proposed that it should be pointed
out in any draft resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council that Israel, as the aggressor, was violating not only
the Charter of the United Nations but also that resolution.
That did not please the Israeli representative. That is quite
natural. As I stressed, a General Assembly resolution of that
kind is not to the liking, not to the taste of an aggressor.
However, at today’s meeting it turned out that it was not to
the taste of China either. What conclusion can one draw
from this? Judge for yourselves, gentlemen. What did the
representative of Israel refer to? He stated that 46 States
had abstained. But how many voted in favour,
Mr. Tekoah? Seventy-five. This is not your first day in the
United Nations. This is not the first time you have
participated in the work of a session of the General
Assembly and you know that, if a resolution of the General
Assembly is adopted by a majority, it becomes a resolution
of the United Nations and not of Israel, not of the Soviet
Union, not of China, not of the 46 who abstained and not
of those who voted against it. It is a United Nations
document, an official decision of the United Nations
Organization. Rease bear that in mind, Mr. Aggressor, and
do not disregard that resolution. You assert that it is a
“Soviet resolution”. That is not true. The idea was a Soviet
one, an idea corresponding to the world-wide desire to
strengthen the peace and security of peoples, to wage a
selfless struggle against aggressors and aggression in any
form, in any manifestation. And, of course, such a
resolution does not please the aggressor.
106. You took part in the work of the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. The Chinese representative took part aIso. You both know perfectly well that the
draft resolution did not come from the Soviet delegation.
The idea came from the Soviet delegation, the original
outline of the draft. But then a contact group-from what
group of States? From the third world-supplemented
and
reworded that draft, IIIled it out and did so very well. It
thus became an expression of the will, of the desire, of the
wish of the third world to put an end to the use of force in
international relations and to put an end to the threat
hanging over mankind: that of the use of nuclear weapons.
As a result, the statements by the Israeli and by the Chinese
merely confirm that the Soviet Union was right, that it has
its finger firmly on the pulse of international life and takes
note of the general desires and sentiments. We are proud
that our idea was supported by 75 States, despite the
abstention of those who abstained and despite the vote of

those who voted against the resolution. IncidentalIy, the
representative of Israel, in his customary manner, distorted
the number of those who voted against the resolution.
There were only four negative votes, but you mentioned
six, Mr. Tekoah. That is a distortion. That is an untruth. 1
shall remember all my life who voted against that resw
lution: China, South Africa, Portugal and Albania, A
magnificent quartet. So there were not six, but four, Check
that. Do you agree? Fine.
107. And both these statements-that by the Israeli and
that by the Chinese-confirmed that I was completely right;
they confirmed the position of the Soviet delegation that
anyone who did not support that resolution, anyone who
voted against it, or abstained, had in fact added grist to the
mill of the aggressor, and particularly Israel, because, after
the elimination of the hotbed of war in Viet-Nam, Israeli
aggression is now the major threat to international peace
and security; and it is on this question that all attention
should be focused.
108. In this connexion, I venture to quote from the report
by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev on the fiftieth anniversary of
the founding of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. He
said:
“The international situation has now become such that aI1
who desire a genuine strengthening of universal peace
must intensify their efforts to eliminate the hotbeds of
war in the Middle East and remove the consequences of
Israeli aggression against the Arab States. Many States
have spoken out in favour of solving the Middle East
problem on the basis of well-known resolutions of the
United Nations Security Council. But, unfortunately,
such statements are not enough. Had they been supported
by concrete political acts, Israel would have been forced
to accept a peaceful settlement, to recognize the lawful
rights of the Arab peoples. So far as the Soviet Union is
concerned, its readiness to make its contribution to that
cause is well known.”
109. I should like to emphasize yet again the touching
coincidencebetweenthe statementsof the representativeof
Israeland the representativeof Chinain connexion with tIrs
statementby the Soviet delegationconcerningthe General
Assembly resolution to which I referred. What unites
them? First, anti-Sovietism;secondly, slander againstthe
Soviet Union and an attempt to distort the position of the
Soviet Union in generaland on this questionin particuIar;
thirdly, the sameposition of opposition to the GeneraI
Assembly resolution on the non-useof force and tile
permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. I
stressonce againin this connexion, gentlemen,that this is
not a USSR resolution, it is a resolution by 75 States
Membersof the United Nations; I alsostressagain ht.
once it was adopted by a majority it becamea United
Nationsresolution and eachself-respectingMember of tile
United Nations must take it into account and not attribute
this resolution to the Soviet Union. We are, of course,
proud that it is attributed to us, but it is not ours; it is a
resolutionof the United Nations.
110. This is the platform on which Israel and China have
united againstthe Soviet Union.

12

Ill. What did the Chinese representative say? I have
already pointed out that he said that-although I did not
mention China-that this resolution, as he put it, ties the
hands of the Palestinians and of all fighters for the freedom
of their countries, fighters for national liberation. That is a
monstrous distortion of the resolution. I ‘have the impresrion that the Chinese representative is not familiar with
this resolution; apparently he has not read it. I shall read it
for his information and, at the same time, to refresh the
memory of other representatives. The resolution states:

113. Such are the facts and no anti-Sovietism, no slanderous fabrications against the Soviet Union by the
representative of Israel or the representative of China can
divert us from the facts or cover them up. All representatives sitting here at the Council table and in the
Council chamber understand that perfectly well.
114. The whole world knows that Israel is a friend, an
ally, and a comrade-in-arms of South Africa. I quote from
the press:

‘Mindful of the principle of the inadmissibility of
acquisition of territory by force and the inherent right of
States to recover such territories by all the means at their
disposal”. (resolution 2936 (XXVII)]

“Strong bonds link Israel and the Republic of South
Africa. What are the reasons for such close contacts, what
aspirations unite these two States? The whole policy of
the Republic of South Africa is based on racial segregation and the cruel suppression of the African population. Apartheid is one of the most shameful phenomena
of our age. Racism is Israel has also been raised to the
status of an official policy”.

Where is there anything about tying people’s hands? On
the contrary-and
the Chinese representative must know
this, he has no right not to know it-this resolution unties
the hands of the victims of aggression in the struggle against
the aggressor. The victim of aggression is a State which is
subjected to aggression and it has the right to use all the
possibilities open to it and to take advantage of the help of
its friends to cleanse its territory of the occupiers, to free
its land. Now, this is a new rule of international law,
supported by the majority of members of the United
Nations; it is now a United Nations document and,
consequently, a rule of international law.

Everyone knows this too, I recall that at some stage
Mr. Tekoah drew ow attention to the reason why the
Israelis put forward the theory that they are the “chosen
people of God” and that they are nearer than any other
people to God. I am an atheist. Rut I do not believe that
God could be so partial. God must be objective, just.
Consequently, what is it that unites Israel and South
Africa? Racism.

112. There is a second point. The Chinese representative,
in his blind slander against the Soviet Union, in his
malicious anti-Sovietism, asserted that this resolution-and 1
emphasize yet again that it is not a Soviet, but a United
Nations resolution, a resolution of the General Assembly, a
resolution of 7.5 States-ties the hands of the fighters in the
national liberation struggle. Nothing of the sort. The
resolution states:

115. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
call on the representative of Israel, on a point of order.
116. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I do not believe that the
Security Council should be a forum for the kind of slanders
and abuses of any people’s religious faith we heard just now
from Mr. Malik. If he is sufficiently ignorant of the Jewish
people’s faith-of Judaism-let him not speak here about it
at all. But I do not think we are here to listen to the kind of
vicious attacks that he has expressed just now, and I would
respectfully request you, Mr. President, to draw his attention to this fact and to call him to order.

“Reaffirming its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of colonial peoples for their freedom by all
appropriate means at their disposal”.
Where is there anything about tying people’s hands? Does
the resolution really tie people’s hands? On the contrary, it
unties their hands, it helps them. In this resolution, the
voice of the United Nations is raised in support of those
fighting for national liberation, Whom, indeed, did this
resolution displease? It displeased those who suppress the
freedom of the African people-the South African racists
and Portuguese colonialists. They voted against it. And we
find China in that company. This is a historical fact, and it
will go down in history as one of the most shameful pages
on the position of China in the United Nations, a day when
China, by its malicious anti-Soviet slander and policy,
turned up in the camp of the enemies of freedom and
national liberation, together with the South African racists
and the Portuguese colonialists. As the saying has it, YOU
can’t go any further than that. Today’s statement by China
has confirmed that it is with the Israeli aggressors, because
together with them, word for word, and in the same
direction, it is waging a struggle against the General
Assembly resolution on the non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use
of nuclear weapons.

117. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I have great respect for the
Jewish people. In our country there are about 3 million
Jews. In my student days, Jews were my best friends. But
those were genuine Jews, not Zionists who propagated
racism and entertained hatred against all other peoples,
including the Arab people. It is against that that we protest.
With all due respect to the Jewish people, we arc resolutely
struggling against the Zionists, who consider other peoples
to be semi-human, as did Hitler. We are struggling against
racism and the racist philosophy of Zionism and that is
what I am talking about now. 1 am drawing a parallel
between the racists of South Africa and the racists of Tel
Aviv, who are supported by international Zionism. And
however much you bang your pipe on the table,
[Mr. Tekoah] you will never be able to suppress this or to
efface it.
118. And now a few words about the hackneyed, so-called
formula, with which we are all bored, the formula which
every Chinese representative repeats day after day at
13

meetings of United Nations organs ahout “two super 123. Apparently China is displeasedat the friendshipof
Powers” or “one or two super-Powers”.What can one s!y
the Soviet Union with the Arab countriesand is attempting
about this? Instead of discussingIsrael’saggression
against to slanderthat friendship.
Lebanon in a concrete manner and introducing concrete
proposals,the Chineserepresentativeis trying to divert the
124. In the communique concerning the visit oI
attention of the Security Council to anti-Sovietismand Mr. SaddamHusseinto the Soviet Union, it is emphasi&?.d
slanderagainstthe Soviet Union.
that:
“The Soviet Union and the Republic of Iraq haveonce
119. The demagogicnature of such a statementis quite
againconfirmed that the friendship of the Soviet Union
obviousand doesnot require any comment. The peoplesof
with Iraq and other progressive Arab States is ia
the world and the Arab peoples are well aware of the
accordancewith the fundamental national interestsof
consistentand firm policy of the USSR in favour of the
completeelimination of the consequences
of Israel’saggres- their peoplesandis an important factor in the strengthen.
ing of the national independence-andsocial progressof
sionagainstthe Arab States,the withdrawal of Israeliforces
the Arab peoples”.
from all the occupied Arab territories, a peacefulpolitical
settlementin the Middle East in accordancewith Security
12.5. Theseare but a few of the official documentswhich
Council resolution 242 (1967) and the safeguardingof the
decisively refute the anti-Sovietismand slander of the
lawful rights of the Arab peopleof Palestine.Therefore,no
one will ever succeed by means of slander and hostile Chineserepresentative.
calumniesin distorting this fundamental position of the
Soviet Union, which is to give support and help to the Arab
126. What does the Chineserepresentativepropose? We
peoples,the victims of Israeli aggression.
are proposing: first, sanctions against Israel. Does the
Chineserepresentativesupport this or not? He hasbeen
120. Israel slandersus becausewe help the Arabs and silent on this point. We are proposing the expulsion of
Chinaslandersus for its own reasons,but they areboth in
Israel from the United Nations. Doesthe Chineserepre.
the sameboat. It is appropriate at this point to introduce sentative support this or not? We are proposing the
somedocumentary evidence from statementsby leadersof
resumption of consultations amongthe permanent mem.
Arab Stateson this matter. In the communiqueconcerning bers of the Security Council on the Middle East question.
the visit to the USSR of the adviserto the Presidentot the
Doesthe Chineserepresentativesupport this or not? 1 am
Arab Republic of Egypt on national security matters, putting these questionssquarely to the representativeof
Mr. MuhammedHafez Ismail, in February of this year, it
Chinaand I insist on a direct answer,without any coverof
wasstressed
in writing that:
anti-Sovietismor slander.Stepsmustbe taken. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt,
“The parties pointed out that friendship and compre- Mr. El-Zayyat, our old friend and colleaguewith whomwe
hensiveco-operationbetweenthe Soviet Union andEgypt have worked here in the United Nations,hastoday placeda
is the most important factor in the struggle against question squarely before the Security Council: Doesthe
imperialistaggression
in the Middle Eastfor the peaceand Security Council exist within the United Nations as an
security of the .peoples of the region. They confirmed organ for the maintenance of international peace and
their unwaveringdesire to develop andstrengthenSoviet- security or not, or is it only a figment of someom’s
Egyptian relations, in strict compliancewith the provi- imagination? Is the Council capableof taking specificsteps
sionsof the Soviet-Egyptian Treaty on Friendshipand against the aggressorfor such monstrous crimes by the
Co-operation”.
Israeliextremists,or not?
121. In the communique on the visit to the USSRof the
Minister of Defence of Egypt, Mr. Ahmed Ismail Ali, in
Marchof this year, it wasstated that:
“The Egyptian representative expressedhis deepgratitude to the Soviet Union for its consistent aid and
support to Egypt in its just struggle against Israel’s
imperialistaggression”.

127. The representative of China did not comment on
Mr. El-Zayyat’s question. But, apart from that, it would
have been possibleto achieve something useful through
joint efforts by the permanent membersof the Security
Council in various directions, including joint consultations
amongthem, againstthe resumptionof which the United
Statesand Chinaare objectingand protesting.

128. Very well, Mr. Chinese representative, you are
blaming “two super-Powers”for the Middle East. This is
122. A high opinion of the Soviet Union’ssupport andaid how you proposeto help the Councilwith your new ideas.
to the Arab countries was expressedby the Vice-Chairman There is a Russianproverb: “A new broom sweepsclean”.
of the Revolutionary Command Council of Iraq,
So let us undertake some joint action, let us heed
Mr. SaddamHussein,in his speech on 22 March of this Mr. El-Zayyat’s appeal.Let us adopt a strong resolution and
year. He emphasizedthat the problem of the Palestinian impose sanctions on Israel for its uninterrupted and
people and of the Zionist imperialist occupation of their
continuing aggression,for its monstrouscrimes againstthe
homelandand of other Arab lands must be settled on the
Arab peoples.Let us makejoint efforts and not just talk.
basisof a close union and solidarity between the Arab
All we hear in the statementsby the Chineseis anti-Soviet
peoplesand the friendly Soviet Union and the forces of
gossipand slander,but nothing of substance.That is the
socialism.
real state of affairs.
14

129. We should not let our attention be diverted to the
bilateral relations between the Soviet Union and China.
They are in a regrettable state, but we are optimists and
believe that they will some day improve. For our part, we
are working and shall continue to work to improve relations
with China. We rebut and shall continue to rebut decisively
and firmly China’s anti-Soviet calumny and slander.
130. As to the interests of other peoples-in this case, the
Arab, Palestinian and Lebanese peoples and the Arab
States-which
have fallen on evil times and have become
victims of aggression as a result of the latest monstrous
crimes of the aggressor, let us forget our bilateral disputes
and concentrate on finding ways to curb the aggressor. That
is our main task in the Security Council, and the Soviet
delegation summons to this task all the representatives
seated at this table, above all, the Chinese delegation.
131. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): ‘I%e
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Egypt, on whom I now call.
132. Mr. ELZAWAT
(Egypt): Mr. President, I am very
sorry if I have to ask for your indulgence and the
indulgence of the members of the Council for two minutes.
I do not propose to be led into the maze into which the
representative of Israel wants to take me, away from the
subject before the Council, which is, as Mr. Ghorra just
said, the complaint of Lebanon against the aggression on it
by Israel. But I really wonder why the representatives of
Israel bother to speak at all in the Council. If the Council is
going to adopt resolutions such as it adopted in the past,
then the representatives of Israel have a ready reply to this.
133. From my memory and without looking into papers, I
think the Council, after adopting such a resolution, was
called by one Israeli representative, “a kangaroocourt”;
another said that it was “morally, legally and politically
bankrupt”; and a third expressedthe belief that all its
resolutionswere “doomed to the morgueof history”. I am
surethere must besomeother expressions;I do not belittle
the capacity of the representativeof Israel to coin some
newphrases.So this is quite all right for them.
134. Now if they are afraid of coercive measures
by the
I am surethey know very well that, whilethey are
beingguaranteed againstany physical dislodgingfrom their
colonies and occupied territories by the American Phantoms, they are equally guaranteedagainstany sanctionsby
the American veto. They should not worry. There will be
no coercive measuresfrom this Council in so far asthere is
a veto and the veto islent to the Governmentof Israel.
COUhCd,

in Cairo and, should I come here in the future. this tape
would be at your disposal,Mr. President-the Prime Minister of Egypt asked:YVhere are the security measuresthat
Israel is so proud to announce that it has taken and
perfected? ” He was not speakingon or about, or for or
against, Lod. He wasspeakingabout the security of Israel.
Indeed, this is a very important point. Israelthinks that by
occupation, annexationsand terror it hasgainedsecurity. If
it has, then how did this happenin Lad? How is it that the
Isaelisare so afraid and are invoking “God’s wrath”? How
is it that they are still askingfor and getting more Phantom
planes? Is it that their security is only illusory and that
force and coercion, occupation and terror, will never get
Israel the security it needs?
136. Israel will only get that security if, during this night
of Passover,it will really heed God’swrath and will fear and
understandthat really what is virtuous and what is goingto
stay and be lasting is the rights of men, the rights of
nations. It is this which you are goingto defend and which
I am askingyou to defend,Mr. President.
137. The PRESIDENT (intetpretution from Spanish): I
call on the representativeof Israel.
138. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I am sure that I am reflecting
the feeling of many around this table, and many more
others that must have been following today’s meeting, if I
expressshock, protest and disgust,at the manner in which
the representativeof the Soviet Union turned this debate
into a political agitators’meetingin Moscow. Now I do not
know what people who listen to such absurditiesas those
voiced by him here say or how they react in his land, but I
think I am certain that such nonsense,such slandersand
such abusecannot impressanyoneat the United Nations.
139. The representativeof the USSR issensitiveabout my
criticism, about the criticism of many others, of his
Governments’spolicy. And he is right to be sensitive.There
is much to be sensitiveabout. He should be. His Government should be sensitive about the oppressionof Soviet
Jewry. His Government should be sensitive about the
continued support it has given to Arab aggressionin the
Middle East, Arab aggressionwhose avowed aim is to
destroy a sovereignState Member of the United Nations
and annihilate its people,He andhis Government shouldbe
sensitiveabout the fact that the murder of Israeli athletesat
Munich and the massacreof innocent passengers
at Lod
airport were carried out with Soviet Kalashnikov rifles.
140. Apparently the Soviet representative,when speaking
here, believesthat the memory of his listenersis asShOTt as
his own. No, Mr, Malik, nobody has forgotten that the
Soviet ‘Government, not the Jewish people, made the
Molotov-Ribbentrop pact with Hitler’s Nazi Germany. NO
one has forgotten that the State which takes up SOmuch of
the Security Council’s time by the kind of absurdities
regardinginternational behaviour, that we were forced to
listen to today, is the only one-

13.5. I have taken the floor not to speakabout this, but
only on one singlepoint. Among the distortionsthereis not
only the distortion whereby four are made six-this
distorting must be a habit-but also the distortion of the
alleged declarations of the ex-Prime Minister of Egypt. I
cannot let this passbecauseI wasa colleaguein his Cabinet
and I know what happened. In a speechon television,
which was recorded-the tape was heard by all the
diplomatic representativesand representativesof the press

141. The PRESIDENT (im‘erpretation from Spanish): 1
call on the representativeof the Soviet Union on a point of
order.
15

142. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics):
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, 1 would draw the
attention of the representative of Israel to the fact that we
are considering Israel’s aggression and the monstrous attack
on the capital of the sovereign State of Lebanon, and not
the policy of the Soviet Union.

148. That is the policy that Egypt asks the Council 10
approve. Without the slightest hesitation, the ‘Governmnenr
of Egypt has sent its Minister for Foreign Affairs to the
Security Council to ask for a mandate to continue
international terrorism, the very scourge the intemationnal
community is SO desperately trying to combat. It is not
sufficient that these are the policies being propounded to US
by the Foreign Minister of a State Member of the United
Nations; he sees no reason why he should not himself ~CSOI~
to pure distortion and falsification of his own Frilrae
Minister’s statements. I shall quote the precise and fulI text
of the statement of Prime Minister Sidky on Egyptian
television on 1 June 1972, following the Lad airport
massacre. The Prime Minister of Egypt said:

143. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Israel may now continue.
144. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I was saying that no one has
forgotten that the only Member State around this table
which has ever been expelled from an international organization, from the international community, is the Soviet
Union-expelled in 1939 by the Council of the League of
Nations. This is the Government whose representative
comes to sermonize to us about aggression. And the Soviet
representative has found it necessary, as at the previous
meeting, to build almost his entire argumentation on some
resolution which all of us, even those that supported it,
know to be the annual Soviet propaganda exercise. He did
not mention, however, resolution 2625 (XXV) adopted
unanimously by the General Assembly, the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, which states:

“The fact that three men with three machine-guns
succeeded in carrying out the events that happened in
J-od Airport discloses the truth about Israel. Where is the
talent and the genius for organization without parallel in
the whole world and the tremendous abilities that the
imperialists kept on talking about after the June war,
when they said it was impossible to fight against Israel
because she possesses irresistible power? What happened
at Lad proved that we can achieve victory in our fight
with Israel.”

“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing,
instigating, assisting or participating in acts of civil strife
or terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in
organized activities within its territory directed towards
the commission of such acts, when the acts referred to in
the pressent paragraph involve a threat or use of force.”

If there was anywhere at any time praise for the Lad
massacre, it is in those words prononced by the Prime
Minister of Egypt.
149. The representative of Lebanon referred ta international opinion, to the reaction of the enlightened warId
to Israel’s action against terrorist bases on 10 April. I shall
quote a brief comment from the Cyprus Mail, which cannot
be suspectedof being biasedin favour of Israel. Yesterday.
15 April, the newspaperwrote:

145. The Soviet Union not only supported that Declaration but was one of its initiators. However, memory
seems to be short when it comes to attacking Israel for
demanding that one of its neighbour States abide by those
provisions.

“In frenetic exchangesof chargealtd counter-charge.of
slander and reply in the Security Council which in die
past few days have passedfor debate on the latest
incidents in the Middle East, the one clear fact that has
emergedso far is that none of the Arab countries, nor
their patron and protector the Soviet Union, is prepared
to denounce, much less take any action to curb,
international terrorismexcept in sofar asit is perpetrated
by Israelis.And becauseof the spectacularcharacter of
the latest Israeliincursion againsttargetsin Lebanon tile
Arab Jutrage in Nicosia only a day before has become
obscured in a fog of political hatred and prejudice in
which the Council meeting has become engulfed. ‘I&e
Lebanesewere mistaken in resorting to argument about
infringement of their sovereignty asone of the mnin Parts
of their complaintsagainstIsrael, for nobody has been
more guilty in this regardthan the Arab bandswhich are
honoured with the description of commandos-or aPP]F
the bland appellation ‘terrorists’, asYOU will. The ~~~~~~~
assaultOJI Beirut and Sidon wasno more blatant a breach
of sovereignty than were attacks on the residenceof
AmbassadorRahaminTimor and that at the internationai
airport in Nicosia. The one, however, was a rank failure
and the other a dramatic success.That is one of the root
causesfor the almostpathologicalreaction from the Arab
capitalsand evenfrom Moscowitself.”

146 As I said earlier, the world is weary of listening to the
catalogues of United Nations resolutions when the problem
confronting us is the fact that Arab States have torn to
pieces the entire Charter of the United Nations in their
relations with Israel.
147. The Foreign Minister of Egypt has found it necessary
to respond to my statement. I shall respond by quoting to
him from an article written by President Sadat’s closest
collaborator, Ehsan Abd El-Qudusus, which appeared in
Akhbar El- Yom the day before yesterday, Saturday, 14 April
1973:
“The operations carried out by members of the
organizations constitute the continuation of the state of
war. The Arab States that are backing and financing these
operations and which open their gates to help them are
States which ,will be in a state of war until the over-all
battle begins.”
Now, that is the official reaction; that is the official
explanation of why the Egyptian Government has been
supporting and intends to continue to support the kind of
terrorist atrocities that are being carried out from the
territory of Lebanon.
16

supported that proposal out of peaceful intentions whether
they can accept Mr. Malik as their spokesman? Can they
agree to the explanation made by Mr. Malik on that
resolution? [General Assembly resok tion 2936 (XXVII)] 1
do not believe that Mr. Malik is the only speaker qualified
to explain that resolution.

1.50. The base, malicious and vicious character of the
falsehoods with which the Lebanese representative bombards this Council meeting after meeting is demonstrated
by the allegation we all heard today that Israel is the one
that sent letter-bombs to Israeli citizens in order to kill
them. In the thousand-year old history of blood libels
against the Jewish people, that is undoubtedly one of the
most atrocious. And that in itself is sufficient to illustrate
the worth of the Lebanese representative’s arguments,
claims and allegations.

158. Secondly, in his last statement, Mr. Malik cited the
preambular paragraphs of that resolution, but he deliberately avoided any mention of its operative part. It is
precisely the operative part of the resolution that reveals
the ulterior motives harboured by the Soviet delegation
when it initiated the proposal. The first paragraph of the
resolution states that the General Assembly:

151. He has, however, not confined himself to that
horrendous libel. He went further. At this Security Council
table, the representative of Lebanon spoke out-and we
shall all no doubt read it in the record unless it is
changed-to explain to the world that the Munich murderers had no alternative but to kill the Israeli athletes.
That of course brings to mind a recent statement made by
the Prime Minister of Lebanon, immediately after the
assassination of the diplomats at Khartoum. The Prime
Minister of Lebanon called the result a commendable one.
Now, that is peaceful Lebanon. That is the Lebanon its
representatives here try to claim is innocent.

“Solemn1y declares, on behalf of the States Members of
the Organization, their renunciation of the use or threat
of force in all its forms and manifestations in international relations, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and the permanent prohibition of the use
of nuclear weapons;“.
159. Why should Mr. Malik read out only the preambdar
paragraphs, and not the operative paragraphs of that
resolution? Mr. Malik asserts that the spirit of the Charter
is precisely the non-use of force. This is a total and
out-and-out distortion of the Charter. The Charter has
explicitly provided that all countries subjected to aggression
have the right to self-defence and to oppose aggression.
Why did the Soviet representative at the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, when this resolution came
up for discussion, refuse all along to include this provision
of the Charter in the resolution? Why did he, after long
discussions, mention this only in the preambular part and
refuse to make any change in the operative part of the
resolution? Could it have been a mere oversight at the
time? If it indeed was an oversight at the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, why did you again
deliberately avoid mentioning this point today in your
statement?

152. I shall end by answering the Lebanese representative’s question as to what his Government should do
concerning the presence of the terrorist organizations,
terrorists bases, centres, headquarters and hide-outs, in
Beirut and other parts of Lebanese territory. I shall answer
him with a Lebanese proverb, which says: “Seek good for
your neighbour, and you shall find it at home.” The
Government of Lebanon should try to apply that good
counsel in its policies and actions and eliminate the centres
of terrorist
atrocities and terrorist operations on its
territory.
153. The PKESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
had announced earlier that all speakers in addition to the
three inscribed on the list would be heard tomorrow
morning. However, one of them has asked to be allowed to
exercise his right of reply, and I shall call on him on the
understanding, first, that he will be brief and, secondly,
that this will be the end of the consideration in this debate
of matters that are not strictly within the scope of
document S/Agenda/l707.

160. Mr. Malik, you accused the Chinese delegation of
so-called anti-Sovietism. Since you have betrayed the
principles of Lenin, since you have betrayed the interests of
all the people who have been subjected to aggression, then
the Chinese delegation, as a matter of course, will have to
expose you.

154. I give the floor to the representative of China, Who
wishes to speak in ex:rcise of his right of reply.

161. In my statement today I have already mentioned that
we should listen to his words and judge him by his deeds.
Then, by doing this, it should not be difficult to see through
the Soviet representative and to see that his proposal of the
so-called non-use of force is purely hypocritical and
reactionary.

155. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (trandation from Chinese):
I thank you, Mr. President, and also the members of the
Council, for giving me the time to make a reply to the
statement made by Mr, Malik.
156. Mr. Malik has assigned himself the self-appointed role
of the spokesman for the proposal on the so-called non-use
of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons.

162. I need not go too far. In August 1968, hundreds of
thousands of troops and thousands of tanks and planes
were sent to invade the capital of one of your allies. Would
this be called a non-use of force? Is this in accordance with
your proposal for the non-use of force in international
relations? At the end of 1971 you supported, by force, the
dismemberment of a State Member of the United Nations.
You obstructed at that time the adoption by the Security
Council of a resolution for an immediate cease-fire and the

157. At the meeting on 13 April [1706th meeting] and at
today’s meeting he has repeatedly stated clearly that those
who opposed or abstained on that proposal are supporters
of the Israeli and other aggressors to continue their policy
of aggression. I cannot but ask those representatives who
17

withdrawal of troops by the parties PO the conflict to their
respective territories. Would that also be in conformity with
the principle of the non-use of force iri international
relations mentioned by YOU just now?

may defend himself and has the right to do so, with all
means at his disposal. We have been interpreting the Charter
in this way for 27 years. And we welcome the fact that
China, too, shares this view. The essence of our policy is to
help the victim of aggression by all available means and to
recognize the right of the victim of aggression to defend us
honour, freedom, independence and territorial integrity.
Thus the Soviet Union and its heroic armed forces defended
all these things during the Great Patriotic War. We
successfully defended our honour, freedom and independence and saved the world from the Fascist plague; we also
saved Jews throughout the world and helped China to rid
itself of Japanese aggression. I would advise the representatives of Israel and China, as I once before advised the
representative of Israel, that, instead of slandering the Soviet
Won, they should recommend that their Goveriunents
erect monuments in the capitals of their States, Tel Aviv
and Peking, in gratitude to the Soviet soldier, who saved the
Jews from annihilation by the Hitlerites and China from
annihilation by Japanese imperialism and militarism.

163. Today beyond its borders the Soviet Union maintains
a large number of troops and a large number of military
jases and is carrying out threats everywhere. Along the
northern frontiers of China it has stationed a million troops
to threaten China. Could this also be called the non-use of
force or threat of force in international relations? If one
adheres to a very simple principle-that is, that one should
not only listen to someone’s words but also look at his
deeds-it will not be difficult to see through his true
features.
164. The Soviet representative attempts to apply the
reactionary theory of the so-called non-use of force in
international relations to the situation in the Middle East.
He attempts to include such a principle in the resolution
which mighl be adopted by the Security Council on the
aggression committed by Israel against Lebanon. The very
reactionary nature of his argument is his non-distinction
between aggression and the victim of aggression and
between justice and injustice. In advocating the non-use of
force in international relations in an absolute way without
regard to conditions, he is in fact asking the Palestinians
and other Arab peoples that are the victims of aggression,
whose land has been occupied and who have been driven
out of their homeland, to wait for death with tied hands.

167. These are facts of history. And no anti-Soviet slander
will efface or eclipse them. Both speakers make up for their
lack of arguments with malicious anti-Sovietism and slander
against the Soviet Union. But it is all trivial and unconvincing. No one will succeed in turning back the clock and
discrediting the peace-loving policy which the Soviet Union
has pursued since the time of Lenin.
168. It is not we, but you Chinese gentlemen, who have
deviated from the Leninist norms. But I do not consider
this chamber a forum for ideological debate. If th=
representative of China is see&g to impose an ideological
debate on us here, that is his affair; it is an indication of
weakness, not of strength. He referred to the events ~h.idl
took place when the Soviet Union came to the aid of a
socialist State to save a socialist structure threatened by the
forces of reaction and imperialism. China would like to SAC
that socialist country in Eastern Europe end up in the
hands of imperialism and reaction. That, essentially, is
China’s policy and what China wants. Neither the imperialists, nor the reactionaries, nor the Maoists got what they
wanted. We acted correctly; we helped our brothers in a
socialist country, and they are grateful to us. The whole
socialist world is grateful. And the revisionists and betrayers
of the principles of Leninism all slander us. Such are the
facts.

165. Every time the Chinese representative makes mention
of super-Powers, Mr. Malik becomes very sensitive. China
did not invent the term L‘super-Powers”. China is only using a
term which has been generally accepted by the world at
large. I remember that at the Security Council meetings in
Panama City, when I made mention of the super-Powers,
Mr. Malik did his’utmost to argue that there was only one
super-Power-not
one or two-but
in the course of my
statement, when I refuted Mr. Malik’s argument, all of a
sudden Mr. Malik showed three fingers to everyone around
the table. He not only admitted that there were indeed
super-Powers; he not only admitted that there were two; he
also tried to include China among the super-Powers. I
should like to ask Mr. Malik these questions. Does China
station a single soldier on foreign soil? Does China have a
single military base on foreign soil? Does China have its
own fleet to invade the territorial seas of other countries?
Does China have its own military aircraft to intrude into
the air space of other countries? He attempts to create
confusion in order to slander China as also one of the
super-Powers, but he will never succeed. As for the
l’epresentative of Israel, he, like Mr. Malik, is 31~0 trying to
create confusion in order to cover up his own aggressive
nature.

169. The second is that of Bangladesh. Bangladesh is
now recognized by the whole world; this confirms the
correctness of the position of the Soviet Union, a position
which it adopted the moment this problem arose, because it
was a matter of the struggle for national independence of
the people of Bangladesh. In the United Nations we helped
them in that struggle. But you joined with the former
military junta of reactionaries and militarists. That is cluirc
natural, since it is your present policy. YOU are opposed to
the national liberation struggle.

166. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
{translation from Russian): I had not intended to speak and
prolong the meeting, but the representative of China has
again made so many slanderous remarks against the Soviet
Union that 1 must reply. First of all, I should like to express
my satisfaction that the position of China and the position
of the Soviet Union coincide in the interpretation of the
Charter of the United Nations-that the victim of aggression

170. Both of you, gentlemen, the representatives of
China and Israel,-and as it happens you are sitting next to
each other-are again slandering us in connexion with the
resolution on the non-use of force. But you must be aware
8

putting the imperialistPowersand the Soviet Union in the
same boat he is sheltering imperialism, not to mention
aggressionand reaction. This is alsoin keepingwith China’s
policy and goals.If we are to taik about who has deviated
from Leninism,then, I think, no commentis needed-China
hasdeviated,

ihat this is not our resolution, but a United Nations
resolution adopted by 75 States. I consider that paragraph 1 is good and that paragraph 2 is not bad. The
representative of China read out paragraph 1. Paragraph l-on non-use of force in international relations-is
excellent, as is the recognition of the right of the victim of
aggression to use any means to defettd his rights. Equally
excellent is the paragraph which contains a reference to the
fact that those who are fighting for the national liberation
of their peoples should use all the means at their disposal
and that they should receive assistance in their struggle.
What is bad in this? This is our position, We are proud of
it. But you are slandering us. The overwhelming majority of
all the Arab States voted in favour of the resolution; only
two
abstained. In slandering us you are, consequently,
slandering them too. What-are they worse judges than you,
Mr. Huang Hua? Their culture is just as ancient as yours.
But they have more political experience in the United
Nations than you have. And they realized that this
resolution was to their advantage and not to Israel’s*

173. You grumble and complain becauseI speak about
this resolution at almost every meeting. Yes, and I will
continue to do so. Wheneveraggression
is under discussion
and whenever the need arisesto defend the victims of
aggression,I shall alwaysspeakabout this resolution asan
expressionof the desirenot only of the Soviet Union but of
a majority, a significant majority, of Membersof the United
Nations not to use force in international relations and to
renouncepermanently the useof nucIearweapons.
174. The representativeof Chinaspoke about armaments
and military bases.Is there now an opportunity to test our
sincerity and yours? There is a General Assembly resolution [2930 (XXV..)] which set up a Special Committee
to preparefor a world disarmamentconference,but you are
impeding the work of that Committee. Let us convenethe
Committee. Incidentally, the Secretary-General is convening a meeting of the Committee on 26 April. Cometo
the meeting and let us discuss,among other things, the
elimination of military baseson foreign territory. DO not
take the credit for this proposal;asearly as 1946 we first
proposedin the United Nationsthe elimination of baseson
foreign territory and we are ready to eliminate all of them
today. You refer to the fact that we have an air force and a
navy. But we have them for defence at a time when the
whole imperialistworld hasarmeditself againstus-and YOU
are well aware of this; you are helping those who establish
military blocs againstus; we are obliged to have a good
navy, a good air force and a magnificent army, but not for
the annexation of foreign territory or for aggression;
we do
not intend to attack China or anyone else.We do not need
to. What reason have we? This is something you have
dreamed up with your fantasy about a threat from the
north; you are usingthis fantasy mainly to achieveinternal
and other goals.

171. The countries of the third world-the countries of
Asia and Africa-realized that that resolution was to their
advantage and not to the advantage of South Africa and
Portugal. And so we voted with them in favour of the
resolution. But you took no part in that, although you
grandiloquently declare: “China is a defender of the third
world, China is a component part of the third world”. That
is where your friends are-in South Africa and Portugal.
Our friends are here-all Africans and Asians; we voted with
them because we understand that this resolution was
opposed to imperialism, aggression, reaction and racism.
You were talking nonsense here when you alleged that it
ties the hands of the freedom fighters, On the contrary, it
helps them and it would help them if you supported it. Let
IIS convene the Security Council, let us consider and adopt
a Security Council resolution supporting this General
Assembly resolution, let us give it added strength as a rule
of international law on the non-use of force in international
relations; the peoples of the world will be grateful to us. Do
not distort the essence of the matter; understand that you
have taken the wrong course, and that we are trying to set
you right.
172. You say that I am the spokesman
for the resolution.
No, my understandingof the resolution, the inner feeling,
in my mind and in my heart, is that it is advantageous
to
the victims of aggressionand disadvantageousto the
aggressor.Look at the list of delegationswhich voted in
favour of the resolution.It is disadvantageous
to thosewho
are seekingto becomesuper-super-Powers
and to control
the whole world; but that is the idea which the Chinese
leadersare nurturing-to use the third world asa meansof
becominga “super-super-Power”.That is why in PanamaI
showedthe representativeof China three fingers, as he
mentioned.I wastalking about three major Powers,but he
wastalking about two. I did not invent the term “superPowers”.And if Mr. Baroody is here,he will rememberthe
argumentwe had with him in the First Committeebefore
China was admitted to the United Nations. I objected
vigorously to the term “super-Powers”.The Soviet Union
doesnot claim to be a “super-Power”. This label hasbeen
hung around our neck, And the representativeof China
repeatsit. Well, let him repeat it if he likes it. But by
19

175. In this connexion, I shouldlike to quote to members
of the Security Council the words of Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the CommunistParty of the Soviet Union, from his report
to which I have alreadyreferred:
“The Chineseleadersstate that they are apprehensive
about some kind of threat from the USSR. If these
statementsare sincere,it is impossibleto understandwhy
in that case China has left unansweredthe proposals,
which we have made repeatedly since 1969, that we
should enter into a clear, firm and lasting obligation
which would exclude the invasion of one party by the
other. If Pekingis really anxious about China’ssecurity,
why have the leadersof the People’sRepublic of China
not agreed to conclude a special treaty on non-useof
force, the draft of which washanded to the Chineseon
15 January 1971? This draft treaty statesquite clearly
that the parties-I quote-‘will not useagainsteachother
armedforce includini any types of weapons,including(u)
conventional weapons, (bj missiles, and (c) nuclear

181. So, to sum up. Yes, the representativeof Israelhas
already referred to the Kalashnikov rifle. This is a good
weapon,which wasinvented in 1947, after the war, A few
days ago I read in The New York Times that we,
apparently, have invented a better weapon. Well, sowhat,
that is your affair. If Mr. Tekoah takes it upon himselfto
investigatethe history and distribution of the Kalashnikov
rifle, he will seethat it can be found in any corner of the
globe, and we are glad and proud if the Kalashnikovrifle is
in the handsof those who arefighting for the freedomand
independenceof the peoplesof Africa-in southernAfrica,
in Guinea (Bissau)and in other oppressedand colonial
Territories: it meansthat we are really helping the freedom
fighters both in word and in deed.

weapons’. No, the actions of the Chinese leaders are
clearly not consistent with their complaints of a mythical
‘Soviet threat’.”
176. This is the actual state of affairs, and no calumnies,
no malicious slander,.no anti-Sovietism on the part of the
Chinese can either erase or conceal these facts. The Soviet
Union does not intend to attack China and is not preparing
to do so. China has created a phantom for itself and is
shouting about it to the whole world. Evidently, it suits
China to do so. Well, if you like, shout about it just as you
You find it useful and
shout about “super-Powers”.
advantageous, so carry on, if it pleases you.
177. As to the strengthening of the northern frontier with
the USSR: while China and the Soviet Union enjoyed
relations of peace, friendship, mutual respect and fraternal
co-operation, there was no threat for the USSR. But China
has violated the friendly fraternal relations and the peaceful
situation at the frontier. We were compelled to concern
ourselves about defence. Thus all China’s fantasies about
“the threat from the north” are far-fetched, and, as
comrade Brezhnez stated, China’s actions are inconsistent
with its words.

182. Incidentally, the representative of China spoke of
“words and deeds”, But he did not answermy questions:
what will we achievein the Security Council by discussing
the question of Israel’s aggressionagainst Lebanon? I
repeat these questionsonceagainand addressmyselfto Ihe
representative of China: is he for or against sanctions
againstIsrael? Is he for or againstthe useof force by Israel
againstthe Arabs? And when I proposethat weincludein
the resolution a reference to the General Assemblyresolution on the non-use of force, my intention was to
condemnIsrael for using force againstthe Arabs. Are you,
the representativeof China, againstthis? If so,say so,and
the Arabs will know that you support the useof force by
Israel against the Arabs. Are you in favour of the
resumptionof consultationson the Middle Eastamongthe
permanentmembersof the Security Council, or not? Are
you in favour of the expulsion of Israel from the United
Nations or not? You have not answeredthesequestions;
you have tried with a murky wave of anti-Sovietismto
concealyour position on thesequestions.

178. The representative of Israel accuses the Soviet Union
of introducing proposals for propaganda purposes at every
session of the General Assembly. We are proud of this. I
would be ready to pray to Allah and to your God,
Mr, Tekoah, if at every session of the General Assembly
Israel would introduce proposals on the strengthening of
peace and international security and on non-aggression by
Israel against the Arab countries. That would be magnificent propaganda. Try it! Yes, at every session of the
General Assembly we introduce proposals on the strengthening of peace and international’ security, on disarmament
and on the convening of a disarmament conference. At its
twenty-seventh
session, the General Assembly considered
more than 15 items introduced at various times on the
initiative of the Soviet Union with the aim of strengthening
peace and international security, advancing the struggle
against colonialism, supporting the national liberation
movements, and so on. We are proud of this-this is what
the United Nations is Ibr, this is why it was established, and
God grant that the Americans and British and everyone
sitting at this table, including Israel, might also introduce
good proposals on how to strengthen peace.

183. No, we insist that here in the Security Council we
shoulddiscusstogether with you what action we are to take
on the question under consideration.Or do you wishto get
by with anti-Sovietism and slander against the Soviet
Union? It will not work: the peoplesof the world await
effective action by the Security Council. You declarethat
you are in favour of effective action, of deedsnot words.
Then let us take effective joint action, and answer the
questionsI have put. That will be the best answerto the
latest monstrouscrimescommitted againsta sovereignArab
State by the Israeliaggressors,
who declarethat they do not
recognizethe sovereigntyof States.
184. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanisfr): I
call on the representativeof Lebanon in exerciseof the
right of reply.

179. Today our distinguished friend Mr. El-Zayyat came
here for this purpose. He placed a task before the Security
Council: members of the Security Council, he said, take
measures, strengthen peace and security in the Middle East,
protect the victims of Israeli aggression, punish. the
aggressor. This is natural; it is what the United Nations was
established for, and it is written in its Charter.

185. Mr. GI-IORRA (Lebanon) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, by your Ieave and that of the
Council, I shouldlike to refer to somepoints raisedby the
representativeof Israel. The Ambassadorof Israelquoted
from a newspaperpublishedin Cyprus. I, of course,would
not wish to commenton what that newspapersaid.Perhaps
for that newspaperArab blood is not of the samevalue as
Israeli blood. At any rate, I would, on the other hand, wi$h
to quote what was said quite recently by an Israeli
professor. ProfessorAvishai Margalit of the University of
Jerusalemlately drew attention to “the increasinglywide-

180. When therefore, the representative of Israel tries to
accuse us of introducing proposals on peace, security and
disarmament at sessions of the General Assembly, allegedly
for propaganda purposes, we are proud-this
is praise,
although expressed in the form of slander and an attempt
to distort the position of the Soviet Union,
20

spread conviction of Israeli youth that the classical Zionist
solution is unfair because it is based on inequity toward the
Palestinian people”.
186. Mr. Dov Bar Nir, one of the leaders of the Mapam,
said: “I would never have consented to the abolition of the
unhappiness of my exile by creating new unhappiness-the
dispossession
of the rightsof another people.”
[The speakercontinued in English]
187, I think we all recall here the con&&ion, and the
value of that contribution, of a former colleague, the
former representative of the United States, Mr. Charles
Yost. I should like to recall what he wrote in the Qwistian
Sciettce
Monitor on 4 September 1972, following another
Israeliaggression
againstLebanon:
“Understandable as they may be, can we justifiably
exclude from the definition of terrorism the Israeli
retaliatory raidsagainstPalestiniancampsin Lebanonand
Syria last week, which surely killed many wholly innocent people and which probably helpedcreatea newcrop
of terrorists among their relatives and friends. Wasthat
either humaneor w+,e?”

accustomed to hearing from the representative of Israel.
Mr. Tekoah claimed that the Prime Minister of Lebanon
said that the Khartoum incident was a “commendable
result”. Those are the correct words, but they were taken
out of context.
191. First, Mr, Salamand I, in the Commissionon Human
Rights, expressed our sorrow about what happened in
Khartoum. Weexpressedour sympathy to the delegationof
the United States, to the Governmentof the United States,
to the Government of Belgium and to the families of the
victims. What Mr. Salam was referring to was the second
phaseof the Khartoum incident, namely, when the commandoswere prevailed upon by the SudaneseGovernment
to surrender without harming the other hostages.Did
Mr. Tekoah want the Saudi Arabian Ambassador, the
Jordanian Ambassadorand the wife of the Saudi Arabian
Ambassadorto be killed also? That wasthe result that was
commendableto the PrimeMinister of Lebanon. It wasthat
there was a happy outcome to the secondphase of that
outrage, that the Prime Minister of Lebanon consideredto
be commendable, and the fact that the commandos
surrenderedto the authorities of the Sudan.
192. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
call on the representativeof Israel.

He went on to say:
“Until we can agreethat methodsof warfare or police
action which inevitably, whatever the extent, kill large
numbersof civilians are terror and are unacceptablejust
as much as the slaughterby political organizationsand
individuals,we shallnot have cleanhands. . .“.

193. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I apologize,but I shall be very
brief indeed, First of all, the following comment wasmade
by The Times of London on 5 March 1973 regardingthe
statement by the LebanesePrime Minister which lye
representative at the Council table has tried to explan
away:

I@. I should like also to quote Mr. William Raspberry,
who wrote in the WashingtonPosf on 16 September1972
asfollows:

“With the bodiesof the three diplomatslying murdered
in the Embassy’scellar, it is an extraordinary statement.
It doesnot augur well for the reactions to the outrage
which can be expected from other Arab capitals.”

“AS outrageousas the Olympic assaultwas,it wasthe
act of outlaws. And if it was the act of outlawswhose
Governmentsharedtheir senseof injusticeat the handsof
Israel, that does not make it an act of Government.
Israel’s reprisals on the other hand, were clearly an
official undertaking. It takessomefairly tortured reasoningto equatethe two.”

194. Secondly, I shouldlike to take exception to one term
that has been used here both by the representative of
Lebanon and by others. They consistently refe,r to the
murderers, such as those who committed the slaughterof
Israeli athletes in Munich and the massacreat Lod airport,
as individuals. It is true, they sometimes add some
derogatory term, like “outlaws”. Now who are these
‘Loutlaws”? The murdersin Munich were committed, aswe
all know, by Black September.Black Septemberis a branch
of El Fatah. El Fatah is headedby a gentlemanby the name
of Yassir Arafat. This gentlemanalsohappensto be headof
the umbrella organization known as the Palestine Liberation Organization. Members of the United Nations frequently come across this name in United Nations documents submitted and signed by Arab delegations.
Mr. Arafat, his organization, together with El Fatah and
other terrorist groupswhich are membersof it, are welcome
guestsin Cairo, and participate in all political and military
conferencesorganizedby the Arab Governments.

189. Finally, the representative of Israel raised some
doubtsabout what I saidregardingthe Munich outrage.My
Governmentand I herein the Council expressedour sorrow
about what happenedin Munich. I wasnot here to justify
what happenedin Munich. But I called attention to the fact
that the Commandoshad reachedagreementto fly off to
Tunisia with the Israeli athletes at that time. I want to
make that clear in the record, so Mr. Tekoah can understand it. The commandosand the Israeli athleteswould
have beenalive today if someonehad not started shooting
at the Munich airport becauseof the intransigenceof the
IsraeliGovernment,

195. Now let us, therefore, know exactly what we are
dealing with. For instance,immediately after the Munich
killings, these individuals received a reward of $5 million
from the ruler of Libya, who is known to be subsidizingthe
Black Septemberwith $30 million annually, not to speakof

190. Another point I should like to make concernsa
statement allegedly made by the Prime Minister of
Lebanon, Mr. Saeb Salam, following the Khartoum incident. This is another distortion of the kind we are
21

items with regard to which members have spoken brilliantly. I regret that I must say, however, that 1 do not
think they have made, a very great contribution to the
order and clarity of our debate. I therefore hope that, at
the meeting tomorrow, the speakers will limit themsehes to
the item on the agenda, namely: The situation in the
Middle East: letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

the subsidies which these groups of murderers receive from
other Arab Governments.
196. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
have no .more speaker% on my list, but before adjourning
the meeting, I should like to inform the Council that, after
consultations with members, it has been agreed that the
next meeting be held tomorrow at 10:45 a.m.
197. I should like to add that I have noted that representatives have probably enriched their knowledge on many

i74emeeting rose at 3.10 p. m.

22
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82001-June

1978-2,200
