A/61/PV.105

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

105th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 24 July 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/61/709/Add.9)
The President: Before turning to the items on
our agenda, I would like to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/61/709/Add.9, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communications contained in document A/61/709 and
Addenda 1 to 8, Georgia has made the payment
necessary to reduce its arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Announcement regarding the results of the election
of the Chairpersons of the Main Committees
The President: I should also like to recall for
members that on 24 May 2007 the following
representatives were elected Chairpersons of the six
Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session and are accordingly members of the
General Committee for that session: First Committee,
Mr. Paul Badji of Senegal; Special Political and
Decolonization Committee, or Fourth Committee,
Mr. Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem Mohamad of the

Sudan; Second Committee, Ms. Kirsti Lintonen of
Finland; Third Committee, Mr. Raymond Wolfe of
Jamaica; Fifth Committee, Mr. Hamidon Ali of
Malaysia; and Sixth Committee, Mr. Alexei Tulbure of
Moldova.
I congratulate the Chairpersons of the six Main
Committees of the General Assembly for its sixtysecond session on their election.
Agenda item 6
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly
The President: Since the President of the
General Assembly and the Chairpersons of the six
Main Committees for the sixty-second session were
elected on 24 May 2007, the election of the VicePresidents of the General Assembly remained to take
place at a later date.
In accordance with rule 30 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, we shall now
proceed to the election of the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly for its sixty-second session.
All members of the General Assembly are
eligible in this election except those already
represented in the General Committee, namely, those
countries whose representatives have been elected to
the presidency of the General Assembly or to the
chairmanships of the Main Committees for the sixtysecond session.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-43643 (E)

*0743643*

A/61/PV.105

In accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
annex to resolution 33/138, of 19 December 1978, the
21 Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for the
sixty-second session shall be elected according to the
following pattern: six representatives from African
States, five representatives from Asian States, no
representative from Eastern European States, three
representatives from Latin American and Caribbean
States, two representatives from Western European and
other States and representatives of the five permanent
members of the Security Council.
In accordance with paragraph 16 of annex V to
the rules of procedure, the election of the VicePresidents of the Assembly by secret ballot will be
dispensed with when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled.
We shall proceed accordingly.
I shall now read out the names of the endorsed
candidates.
African States: Benin, Botswana, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Egypt, the Gambia and
Mauritius.
Asian States: Cyprus, Iraq, Palau, Sri Lanka and
Turkmenistan.
Latin American and Caribbean States: Bahamas,
Honduras and Uruguay.
Western European and other States: Iceland and
Turkey.
Since the number of candidates corresponds to
the number of seats to be filled in each region, I
declare those candidates elected, in addition to the
representatives of the five permanent members of the
Security Council.
The following States have therefore been elected
to vice-presidencies of the General Assembly for its
sixty-second session: Bahamas, Benin, Botswana,
China, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, France, the Gambia, Honduras, Iceland, Iraq,
Mauritius, Palau, the Russian Federation, Sri Lanka,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Uruguay.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the
States that have been elected to vice-presidencies of
the General Assembly for its sixty-second session.

2

Having elected the 21 Vice-Presidents and the
Chairpersons of the Six Main Committees of the
General Assembly, the General Committee of the
General Assembly at its sixty-second session has thus
been fully constituted in accordance with rule 38 of the
rules of procedure.
Agenda item 106 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/61/962)
The President: As indicated in document
A/61/962, in accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, having consulted Member States and
having drawn up a list of countries from among the
regional groups concerned, I requested the delegations
of China, Cuba, Egypt, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America to propose candidates to
serve for a period of five years beginning on 1 January
2008.
As also indicated in document A/61/962,
candidates, in accordance with paragraph 7 of
resolution 59/267, of 23 December 2004, should have
experience in at least one of the following fields:
oversight, audit, inspection, investigation, evaluation,
finance, project evaluation, programme evaluation,
human resources management, management, public
administration,
monitoring
and/or
programme
performance, in addition to knowledge of the United
Nations system and its role in international relations.
As also indicated in document A/61/962, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I submit to the Assembly the
candidatures of Mr. Nikolay V. Chulkov of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Even Francisco Fontaine Ortiz of
Cuba, Mr. Mohamed Mounir Zahran of Egypt,
Ms. Deborah Wynes of the United States of America
and Mr. Zhang Yishan of China for appointment as

07-43643

A/61/PV.105

members of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2008 and
expiring on 31 December 2012.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint those candidates?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda
item 106.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/61/409/Add.2)
The President: I request Ms. Rana Salayeva of
Azerbaijan, Rapporteur of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), to
introduce the report of the Committee.
Ms. Salayeva (Azerbaijan), Rapporteur of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee): I have the great pleasure of
introducing to the General Assembly the report of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) that has been submitted under
agenda item 33, entitled “Comprehensive review of the
whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects”. The report is contained in document
A/61/409/Add.2. The document includes the texts of
draft resolutions I and II, recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption.
By adopting draft resolution I, entitled
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”, the
General Assembly would endorse the proposals and
recommendations contained in paragraphs 15 to 232 of
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, contained in document A/61/19 (Part II).
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
held its substantive session between 28 February and
16 March, as well as on 23 May, when it reviewed its
work and considered new proposals.
Among all the recommendations contained in the
report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations to be endorsed by draft resolution I, I wish
to draw the attention of Member States to paragraph 71

07-43643

of that report, which invites the President of the
General Assembly to convene an ad hoc open-ended
working group on assistance and support to victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as to consider
the draft United Nations policy statement and draft
United Nations comprehensive strategy with a view to
reporting to the Assembly the results of the working
group before the end of the sixty-first session.
By its resolution 61/267 of 16 May 2007, the
Assembly authorized the open-ended Ad Hoc Working
Group of Experts of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations to continue consideration of
the revised draft model memorandum of understanding.
The open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts
met from 29 May to 1 June, as well as on 11 June
2007, and as a result it finalized the revised draft
model memorandum of understanding in the form of
amendments to the memorandum that is contained in
chapter 9 of the Manual on Policies and Procedures
Concerning the Reimbursement and Control of
Contingent-Owned
Equipment
of
Troop/Police
Contributors Participating in Peacekeeping Missions.
By adopting draft resolution II, entitled
“Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate
future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, the General Assembly
would endorse the recommendation of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations contained in
document A/61/19 (Part III) requesting the SecretaryGeneral to incorporate into the model memorandum of
understanding the amendments contained in the revised
draft model memorandum of understanding annexed to
the report.
Both draft resolutions I and II were adopted by
the Fourth Committee without a vote. The draft
resolutions would not give rise to financial
implications. Oral statements to that effect by the
Secretary-General can be obtained from the secretariat
of the Fourth Committee.
Before concluding, allow me to pay tribute to all
delegations for their active participation in the work of
the Committee. I should also like to express special
gratitude to the Chairman of the Fourth Committee,
Ambassador Madhu Raman Acharya of Nepal, and the
other members of the Bureau — Ms. Monica BolanosPerez of Guatemala, Mr. Mahieddine Djeffal of Algeria
and Mr. Urban Andersson of Sweden — for their
contribution to the work of the Committee. I should

3

A/61/PV.105

also like to thank the secretariat of the Fourth
Committee for its valuable assistance.

Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 13 of its report.

With these brief remarks, I now have the honour
of submitting to the General Assembly for
consideration and adoption the recommendations of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee), which appear in the report
published under the symbol A/61/409/Add.2.

We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
and II.

The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) which is before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it two draft
resolutions recommended by the Special Political and

4

Draft resolution I is entitled “Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects”. The Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/291).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate
future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations”. The Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/267 B).
The President: Before proceeding further, I
should like to draw the attention of Members to
paragraph 71 of the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping contained in document A/61/19 (Part II).
In accordance with resolution 61/291 that was
just adopted by the General Assembly, endorsing
paragraphs 15 to 232 of the report, I have been invited
to
“to convene, at the earliest possible date during
the sixty-first session of the General Assembly
and with the participation of all Member States,
an ad hoc open-ended working group on
assistance and support to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse, to consider the draft
United Nations policy statement and draft United
Nations comprehensive strategy with a view to
reporting, before the end of the sixty-first session,
to the Assembly the results of the working group”
(A/61/19 (Part II), para. 71).
In that connection, I should like to inform
members that details on the chairmanship and
programme of work of the ad hoc Open-Ended
Working Group will be communicated to them shortly.

07-43643

A/61/PV.105

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 33.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: reports of the General Committee
Fifth report of the General Committee
(A/61/250/Add.4)
The President: I call on the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had already made clear
before the General Committee on 20 July the
background of its request for the inclusion on the
agenda of the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session of an additional item entitled “Contemporary
forms of xenophobia” to be discussed in the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Nevertheless, as this issue has been brought to the
attention of the General Assembly, my delegation
would like to reiterate the background for the better
understanding of other delegations present here.
It is because the Japanese suppression of Koreans
and their organization has become ever more
intolerable and reckless that we could not but request
the inclusion of an additional item at this late stage of
the sixty-first session of the General Assembly.
Today in Japan, evil-minded calls and e-mails
have been directed one after another to Korean
families, schools and their organization — the General
Association
of
Korean
Residents
in
Japan
(Chongryon) — threatening that “we will strike you
with Molotov cocktails and kill you all. Go back to
Korea!” Korean students and vulnerable girls in
national dress are constantly exposed to indiscriminate
and harsh words, violence and terror on their way to
and from school. Forced searches, intimidation,
explosions, the use of terror, arrests and detentions of
Koreans, their families and the Korean organization are
daily occurrences.
The inhuman acts of the Japanese authorities
against Koreans and the Chongryon have become ever
more intolerable and insidious this year. From the
outset of this year, the Japanese authorities set their
media in motion to float various kinds of false reports
aimed at tarnishing the image of the Chongryon in a

07-43643

bid to frantically inspire bitterness towards the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Chongryon in its society.
At the same time, the director of the Japanese
national police agency sent its police officers into a
wholesale repressive campaign, persecuting and
arresting officials of the Chongryon and Koreans in
Japan and undertaking other actions. Although those
officers are under the obligation to protect the Koreans’
rights and activities, the police have been tasked with
implementing stepped-up pressure on North Korea. It
is the job of the national police agency of Japan to
force North Korea to come out in favour of
negotiations with Japan.
The Japanese police authorities have conducted
forced searches of numerous Chongryon-related
facilities, including the headquarters of Chongryon and
Korean schools, blindly assaulting and arresting
Koreans with the support of heavily-armed police units
and armed vehicles. They undertook four hours of
forcible search of small office rooms of about
10 square metres in a Korean printing house, deploying
a large force of more than 300 armed police officers,
15 large armoured buses and 42 patrol cars. Even more
intolerable is that they arrested a businessman in
hospital, who developed a cerebral infarction during
the search before being carried there. The police
officers took hold of Koreans protesting the forced
search and threw them into the street like parcels. They
rushed into ladies’ dressing rooms and confiscated all
documents, including personal diaries.
The Japanese authorities went even further,
forcing Chongryon to sell the land and the building
housing its headquarters in an evil-minded attempt to
exterminate Chongryon at any cost. That represents
nothing but wanton infringement upon the sovereignty
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
no prior regime of Japan had ever dared to do. It is a
move to physically annihilate the centre of activities of
Korean residents in Japan and the General Association
of Korean Residents in Japan, which defends the
democratic national rights of Koreans in Japan, and to
stamp out the activities of the General Association and
Koreans in Japan.
The Chongryon is a legitimate overseas
compatriots’ organization of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea whose mission is to protect the
democratic national rights of the direct victims of the

5

A/61/PV.105

criminal drafting of Koreans by Japan in the past and
of Koreans in Japan today, their descendants. The
Japanese authorities paint the criminal action taken
against Chongryon as an execution of law and a mere
business issue related to the collection of bonds, but
this is a political plot and criminal move to deprive
Chongryon of the centre of its activities and to destroy
it at any cost.
But nothing they do can negate these hard facts.
Such repression of Korans by Japanese authorities is a
flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and all
major international human rights instruments,
including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which stipulates universal respect for the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of all, without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion.
Despite all those facts, Japan has attempted in
every way to block the inclusion of the suggested
additional item out of fear of having its crimes
revealed before the international community. We will
continue at the United Nations and all other
international forums to call on and question Japan for
its politically motivated suppression of Chongryon and
Koreans in Japan, unless Japan puts an end to it.
The President: I call on the representative of
Japan.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): Japan supports the outcome
of the General Committee’s decision on 20 July not to
include an item entitled “Contemporary forms of
xenophobia” in the new agenda of the General
Assembly. That decision was unanimous.
I would like to state the following in reply to
what was referred to by the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in order to
make our stance and position clear. All the allegations
made by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
distort the facts of events. The issues raised are by no
means instances of xenophobia, as claimed by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but are the
internal judicial, economic and other affairs of Japan
and do not in any way constitute a basis for
deliberation in the General Assembly.
With regard to the allegations made by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea concerning the
measures taken by the Japanese side, I would like to
state the following.

6

On 25 April 2007, Japanese police conducted a
search of a subsidiary organization of the General
Association of Korean Residents in Japan, located in
the Korean press hall, in order to collect evidence
related to the suspected abduction case. Before the
search was conducted, Japanese police obtained a
search warrant from the appropriate court. Japanese
police searched the building legally and properly. They
took no illegal action of any kind and engaged in no
violence or threats. Based on past experiences, riot
police units, buses and patrol cars were deployed as
necessary protection, since illegal physical obstructions
that make appropriate searches impossible are
sometimes encountered.
The credit unions in Japan affiliated with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are domestic
financial institutions established under Japanese law
for the purpose of providing banking services to
Korean residents in Japan. Between 1997 and 2001, 16
of those credit unions declared bankruptcy due to a
large number of non-performing loans that were made,
inter alia, to the General Association of Korean
Residents in Japan. In order to protect the bona fide
depositories of those credit unions facing bankruptcy,
the Japanese authorities spent more than 1.3 trillion
yen — that is, approximately $11 billion — in
Government funds on a non-discriminatory basis.
As part of recovery measures, the Resolution and
Collection Corporation (RCC), a corporation
established by a public organization to collect nonperforming loans of bankrupt financial institutions in
Japan, purchased the non-performing assets of the
bankrupt credit unions affiliated with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, using public funds. While
other efforts were made to recover the enormous
amount of Government funds that were injected into
the credit unions affiliated with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, this was carried out in
exactly the same manner as for any other bankrupt
domestic financial institution. Among the nonperforming assets of the bankrupt credit unions
affiliated with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, there were loans to the General Association,
which the General Association formally acknowledged
as debt incurred by loan contracts in an amount
totalling approximately 63 billion yen — that is,
approximately $530 million. In November 2005, the
RCC initiated a lawsuit against the General Association
of Korean Residents in Japan, seeking repayment of

07-43643

A/61/PV.105

loans in Tokyo district court in the context of its debtrecovery measures. In June 2007, the court handed
down a judgement calling for the repayment of the
approximately 63 billion yen in loans. The General
Association did not appeal that judgement to a higher
court. Up to the time that the judgement was delivered,
the RCC continued consultations with the General
Association regarding payment of the debts, but the
General Association indicated its intention to pay only
a very small part of the total.
In the circumstances, the RCC had no choice but
to file a petition to auction off the building and land
belonging to the General Association, in accordance
with the normal required legal procedures, on 25 June
2007. It is the regular practice of the RCC to file a
petition to auction off real estate as a means of
collecting non-performing loans that it has purchased
from other bankrupt financial institutions in Japan. The
petition to auction the building and land owned by the
General Association was for the purpose of collecting
debt and not for any political or diplomatic purpose.
With regard to the other allegations made by the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, I would like to state the following.
The Government of Japan has taken measures to
ensure that Korean residents in Japan lead normal
lives, including by granting them the appropriate legal
status for remaining in Japan and improving conditions
that affect their lives. The constitution of Japan
guarantees equality before the law without
discrimination of any kind. Based on that principle,
Japan has striven to realize a society free from all
forms of discrimination, including racial and ethnic
discrimination, in the 60 years since the end of the
Second World War. The Government of Japan has
acceded to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
other major international human rights instruments and
covenants and has been making sincere efforts for their
implementation. The Government of Japan is
proactively engaged in the activities of a variety of
United Nations forums aimed at the elimination of
racial discrimination.
As mentioned previously, the statement made by
the representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is entirely groundless, and we cannot accept
it.

07-43643

On the other hand, however, the head of the
delegation to the Six-Party Talks held in Beijing from
18 to 20 July 2007 recognized the importance of
achieving progress in all areas, and it was therefore
decided that all five working groups, including one on
the normalization of relations between Japan and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, should be
convened before the end of August. During the meeting
of the heads of the delegations of Japan and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, at the time of
the Six-Party Talks, views were exchanged on the
Talks and the relationship between Japan and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. While the two
sides recognized that challenges remained in both
areas, they agreed that further cooperative efforts
should be made to overcome them.
On the basis of that understanding, the
Government of Japan would like to make sincere
efforts to exchange views with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in the second meeting of the
working group on the normalization of relations
between Japan and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, to be convened before the end of August.
Also, we strongly hope that relations between Japan
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
move forward, and we believe this is possible if there
is a sincere response from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to the questions that separate Japan
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at
present, including the matter of the abductions.
The President: With respect to paragraph 1 of
the report of the General Committee contained in
document A/61/250/Add.4, the General Committee
decided to recommend that an additional item entitled
“Contemporary forms of xenophobia” not be included
in the agenda of the sixty-first session.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves
that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: Two representatives have
requested to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
May I remind members that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

7

A/61/PV.105

Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): My delegation closely followed
the statement made by the representative of Japan. He
mentioned non-discrimination in dealing with forcing
the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan
to sell its building and land. I would simply like to cite
one example of how there is discrimination against
other nationals, in particular Koreans, in Japan. The
Resolution and Collection Corporation bought bad
bonds to the tune of 4,004.1 billion yen by spending
353.3 billion yen from 1999 to 2005. That means that
Japanese businesses and enterprises redeemed those
bonds at a rate as low as 8.8 per cent. The Corporation,
however,
pressured
the
Korean
organization
Chongryon to redeem 100 per cent of the debt of the
hall of the headquarters of Chongryon to it — and to
add annual interest of 5 per cent to the payments.
No matter how nicely the Japanese representative
tried to portray the criminal action of suppressing
Koreans in Japan and their organization, and of
usurping Chongryon’s headquarters building as
carrying out the law or as a mere business matter
related to the collection of bonds, Japan cannot deny
the fact that the terrorism campaign sweeping Japan is
the product of a premeditated plot and its direct
instructions to realize its political ambitions.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I must take the floor once
again because of the groundless allegations that have
been made by the representative of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
As I already stated in my intervention, this is a
business issue. The bankruptcy of the Korean credit
union affiliated with the General Association of Korean
Residents in Japan did not involve discriminatory or
different treatment or segregation, because the
Japanese bank that went bankrupt during the same

8

period had to pay back on the same conditions. That is
exactly the economic basis upon which we are working
in Japan and possibly elsewhere in the world.
Moreover, we have asked the Japanese district court to
rule on this issue, and we have received approval from
the court. Therefore, economic activities in Japan have
a non-discriminatory nature. If a bank, credit union,
association or organization has a debt, it must be paid
back. That was not the case, so legal measures were
taken. That is a very simple fact.
In addition, we cannot accept the words used by
the representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea characterizing this kind of action as terrorism.
That cannot be tolerated. Such things should not be
used in general remarks in the General Assembly
without there being any grounds. I would like to draw
attention to the fact that it is inappropriate for such a
statement to be made repeatedly by the representative
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including in the General Committee. We cannot
tolerate it.
The fact is that the measures taken by the
Japanese side to search the General Association for
further evidence related to the abduction of Japanese
citizens by persons affiliated with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea were necessary in order to
save the lives of Japanese nationals. That is, of course,
a country’s right and obligation.
The second case is, as I stated, a matter of purely
economic activities. I do not have to repeat that once
again. It should be understood in that way and not
interpreted in a distorted manner.
I shall stop here. I hope that I have made myself,
and the position of Japan, clear to all members.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

07-43643
