UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2175

th

NEW

CO.UNCILf.

MEETING:

1 DECEMBER

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2175)
... ........ ......... ....... ........ .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...................
titter dated 25 November 1979 from the Secretary&General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13646) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2175

1
1
1
1

‘.

.,

.

.
.

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined ’ ’
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations,‘, ,,
document.
( ; T..
.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quar-: ; :
terly SupPrements of the Oficial Recod of the Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given. : :
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Semidry CourrciL The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions .’ .”
#,.adopted before l.January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
..t

.

.2175tb MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 1 December 1979, at 9.00 p.m.
president:

Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

cussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule-37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following,, States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaida, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the &tation

for them’at the side of the Council chamber.
4.’ The PRESIDENT (inierpretation from Chinese): I wish
to inform the Council that the Charge d’affaires of the
Permanent Mission of Iran to the United Nations, Mr. Jamal
Shemirani, ofE$ally informed the outgoing President of the
Council yesterday that, on the instructions of his Govemment, Iran does not intend to be present at this evening’s
meeting.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2175)
1. Adoption of the agenda
.2. Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13646)

5. I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents which are before
them: document S/13648, a letter dated 26 November from
the Permanent Representative of Pakistan addressed to the
Secretary-General; document S/13659, a telegram &ted
27 November from the Chairman of the Permanent Council
of the Organisation of American States addressed to the
President of the Security Council; document S/13667, letter
dated 30 November from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea addressed to the Secretary-General; and document
S/13668, a letter dated 30 November from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland addressed to the SecretaryGeneral;

The meeting was calIed to order at 9.25 p.m.
Expression of tbanks to tbe retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Chinese): Allow
me, on behalf of the members of the Council, to express to
Ambassador Palacios de Vizzio, Permanent Representative
of Bolivia, our deep appreciation for the successful and
outstanding way in which, as President for the month of
November, he presided over the Council’s extremely diflicult work last month.
Adoption of the agenda

oi#the President. Mr. Abde! Meguid

(Egypt) and Mr. Tubman (Liberia) took the places reserved

..

6. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): Twentyseven days ago, 63 Americans, as well as personnel of other
nationalities, were seized when an armed, disciplined group
of demonstmtors invaded the United States Embassy at
Teheran. Eighteen of those captured have been released. At
least 50 Americans remain captive.

i%e agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
coundi (S/13646)
2. The PRESIDENT
(inte~retation from Chinese): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2172nd meeting, I
invite the representative of Sri Lanka to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

7. As with diplomats everywhere, the individuals Who
were taken hostage are entitled to the protection of the
Government of Iran by the most solemn commitment
nations can give-the sovereign pledge of Governments by
treaty and international obligation.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fernando (SriLunka)
took the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council
chamber.

8. Governments of course retain the right to require that
foreign diplomatic personnel leave their soil. But every
standard of international behaviour, whether established by
practice, by ethics, by treaty or by common humanity,
supports the principle that the personnel of a diplomatic
mission and diplomatic property are inviolate. Even in the
darkest moments of relationships between countries, the
security and well-being of diplomatic personnel have been
respected.

3. The ,PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
should also like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Egypt and
Liberia, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the dis1

9. Iran asks that its grievances be heard and acted upon.
Yet Iran and the authorities who speak for it are violating
the most basic obligation of nations. They hold hostage the
very people whose job it is to facilitate communications and
resolve differences, thus producing understanding and
agreement among nations.

for understanding. There is not a single grievance in this
situation, alleged or spoken, that could not be heard in an
appropriate forum. In addition, as we have said from the
beginning, the United States remains ready, upon the
release of the hostages, to discuss with the Itinian authorities the differences which exist between us and to seek their
resolution.

lo. None of us, whatever .our differences on other issues,
can ignore the implications for all of us of this event.

18. But no country can call for justice while at the same
time denying it to the defenceless. No country can breach
the most fundamental rules of the community of nations
and at the same time expect that community to be helpful
in the problems which it perceives for itself. In the simplest
terms, no country can break and ignore the law while
seeking its benefits.

11. Nor can the world ignore that these diplomatic representatives are being held under degrading conditions. They
are threatened, kept bound, isolated, not allowed to speak,
denied mail. Even their whereabouts are uncertain. All of us
at this table are also diplomatic representatives of our countries, charged with the same duties and protected by the
same laws and rules of conduct as those now held captive at
Teheran. It is for all of us to speak up to demand their
release, and to insist upon basic conditions of humanity for
their care pending their release, including daily visits by
impartial observers.

19. What is it that the world can agree upon if not the
protection of and respect for those whom we appoint to
represent our sovereignty and resolve our differences?
20. How tragic for Iran, how tragic for the-world, that the
threats to peace are being driven to a new crescendo. The
most powerful voices in Iran have encouraged violence in
neighbouring countries and condoned bloodshed rather
than condemning it. In addition, totally unfounded charges
which can only inflame the situation have been made
against the United States with respect to the current crisis.

12. Many Members of the United Nations, including
some members of the Council, have had ambassadors murdered, diplomatic personnel injured, embassy facilities destroyed. On each occasion the delicate framework of the
international community was harmed, but efforts were
made to heal the wounds. The situation at Teheran has a
feature unlike other assaults on the diplomatic ties that bind
our world. In Iran, the Government itself defends the violence which holds diplomats hostage. Such a situation is
intolerable.

21. The United States in all the years of its history has had
as a fundamental principle the freedom’ of all people to
worship as they choose. Out of this history and long association we honour and respect the leaders and the nations of
Islam.

13. The United States insists that its diplomatic personnel
be released and that its diplomatic premises be restored.
These are not negotiable matters. The United States will
hold the authorities in Iran fully responsible for the safety of
the Americans now held captive.
14. I speak today for hostages who are endangered by the
frenzy and uncertainty of events, by the inhumane conditions under which they are held, and by the threat of the
authorities in Iran to compound unjust acts through trials.

22. The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of other nations is a tenet of both the United Nations and
the foreign policy of the United States and that includes, of
course, respect for the territorial integrity, political,independence and sovereignty of Iran. We respect the right of
the people of Iran to determine their own future through
institutions of their own choosing and all of us must accept
their decisions.

15. Around the world, nations of East and West, North
and South, in individual and collective statements have
expressed their opposition to this violation of international
law and called for the immediate release of the hostages. We
express our appreciation for this overwhelming expression
of international concern and support in behalf of the principles that lie at the heart of civilizcd international behaviour.

23. The President of the United States, speaking for a
unified and determined nation, has made it clear that we are
seeking a peaceful resolution in this conflict and so, in this
spirit and in an effort to heal the wounds of the past, the
United States has turned to the Security Council and the
Secretary-General. In the same spirit, the United States has
begun proceedings in the International Court of Justice.

16. In this spirit, the United States appreciates the fact
that the President of the Security Council, speaking on
behalf of the members of this body, has twice urgently
appealed for the release of the hostages. The President of the
General Asembly has twice spoken eloquently in support of
that plea. The Secretary-General has worked unceasingly to
resolve this crisis. There has not been a satisfactory response
to date and the hostages are still not free. We gather here to
determine what more can be done.

24. There is in the United States a unity of purpose, a
disciplined sensitivity to the needs of peace, a determination
to search out peaceful means to bring this dispute to a just
conclusion and also a determination to do what must be
done to protect our fellow citizens and the rule of law. That
unity of purpose is shared by all Americans. But make no
mistake. Beneath that discipline is a seething anger which
Americans properly feel,as they witness daily on television
new threats’and outrages against our fellow citizens.

17. None of us is deaf to the passionate voices that speak
of injustice, that cry out against past wrongs and that ask

25. The hostages must be freed.
2

’

26. Mr. b;LGARD (Norway): The Norwegian Govemment welcomes and fully supports the Secretary-General’s
request for this urgent meeting of the Security Council. We
share his concern over this grave situation. We want to pay
a tribute to the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts to
secure the release of the hostages and to defuse the crisis.

which we have gathered here to examine and which ,haS
prompted him to ask for the convening of this meeting.
33. The assault on the United States Embassy at Teheran,
the taking as hostages of the American diplomatic personnel and, above all, the approval of those acts by the
Iranian leaders constitute, in the view of the Portuguese
Government, a violation not only of the most elementary
human rights, but also of the basic principles of interruttional law, which are vital for organizations like the United
Nations.

27. It is the firm view of the Norwegian Government that
the hostages in Iran must be released without delay. The
taking of hostages for whatever purpose, is totally unaccep
table and must be rejected. The seizure of the American
Embassy at Teheran and the holding of its personnel as
hostages amount to flagrant violations of some of the basic
rules of international law enshrined in the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations’ of 1961 to which Iran is a
party.

34. We are told by the Iranian leaders that the hostages
have not been and are not being ill-treated. We most earnestly hope not, but the mere fact of their having been
deprived of their freedom during four long weeks under
degrading conditions and of their not being allowed to
communicate with the outside world is in itself an inexcusable form of cruel and inhuman treatment.

28. This view was clearly expressed in the statement made
by the President of the Security Council on behalf of its
members on 9 November [S/Z3616J. It was strongly reiterated on 27 November [2272ndmeefing]. It is now high time
that the Iranian authorities complied with these repeated
appeals.

35. In any country, the rule of law is the best defence of
ordinary people against oppression and tyranny. Similarly,
between States, international law is the only defence of
the small, poor and weak countries against the rich and
powerful,

29. It is incumbent on the Council as a whole to assist
constructively .in the search for a peaceful solution to the
problem in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. However, the Council can only proceed
with its consideration of other aspects of this matter after
the Government of Iran has complied with the appeals of
the Council.

36. As the United Nations organ primarily responsible for
maintaining peace and security, the Security Council has
the duty uncompromisingly to defend and uphold intemational law and the principles and procedures that allow for
the peaceful solution of conflicts.
37. The system of international relations is a painstakingly built edifice of which diplomatic immunities are an
essential pillar. As the Portuguese Government made clear
in its statement issued on 20 November:
“The violation of diplomatic immunities represents . . .
a serious breach of the norms governing relations
between States, which nothing can legitimixe or justify.
These principles constitute the main thrust of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations, as well the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes
against Internationally
Protected Persons, including
Diplomatic Agents [General Assembly resolution3166
(XXVIII)], instruments to which Iran is a party”.

30. Norway pays a tribute to the President of the United
States for the courageous and mature leadership he has
provided for his nation at a time when it has been put to a
severe test. His deep .commitment to finding a peaceful
solution has our full support. The United States can rely in
its demand for the release of the hostages upon the support
of the world community. The action by the Iranian students, condoned by the Iranian authorities, is a challenge
not only to the United States, but to all of us, as we have a
common stake in the inviolability of the basic principles of
international law which must govern relations between
nations.
3 1. In conclusion, I have been authorized by the Govemments of the other Nordic countries, Denmark, Iceland,
Finland and Sweden, to state that they join us at this
meeting of the Security Council in our deep concern over
the fate of the United States diplomatic personnel held
hostage at Teheran in violation of international treaties and
norms of international conduct respected by the community of nations throughout the ages. They too give their
firm support to the action taken by the Secretary-General
and to the appeals issued by the President of the Council
demanding the immediate release of the hostages and their
safe return to their homeland.

38. The accepted rules of diplomatic practice and the statute of immunity that all nations of the world have agreed to
grant reciprocally to each other’s diplomatic personnel are
indeed to the sine qua non both for peaceful coexistence
between States and for rational discussion of existing differences. Without them, the whole process of international
relations would become impossible, and we would not be
able to sit around this very table.
39. It is precisely because it threatens, at an essential level,
the possibility of a peaceful dialogue between States with
different social and political structures, often with opposing
interests or even in a situation of open conflicts, that the
violation of these rules constitutes such a serious threat to
peace and security.

32. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): I should like
to begin by expressing to the Secretary-General the deepest
appreciation of the Portuguese delegation for his relentless
efforts in trying to find solutions to this most grave situation
’ United

Nations,

Z’reufy

40. If the letter recently addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by the former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iran

Series, vol. 500, p. 95.

3

[s/1362&J is still to be taken as expressing the point of view
of the’ Iranian leaders, it would seem that Iran wishes to see
the ,C&ncil analyse the responsibilities of the former ruler
of that country and those of his supporters, at home and
abroad, for the situation in that country today.
.,
. . ’

48. ‘Weare all very‘g&&rl to the President ofthe Council
for the ‘month of November, the rcpresentative’of Bolivia,
and to the Secretary-General for the ceaselessand vigorous
activity which they have deployed in recent wLeks to bring
about.. . .an early solution to the problem which confronts us.

41. It is, of course, the right of,every’Member of the
United Nations to bring to the attention of the Council any
issue considered to fall within its competence, but my delegation thinks that we should not lose sight of a few relevant
facts.

49. In’s recent statement in the House of Commons in
London, my Prime Minister described the taking of the
United States Embassy ‘as an outrage to diplomatic relations everywhere. ‘She went on to say that we would do
anything we could to assist our friends the Americans in the
grievous position in which they and the American hostages
found themselves.
:
,
50. What has happened in Iran is not only a clear violation of international law, it has also caused much suffering
to the hostages themselves and to their families. My delegation extends its warmest sympathy to them.

42. The first is that the writing of past history does not
seem to fall within the competence of the Council. The
second is that it is doubtful whether the Council is compctent to pass judgement on deposed r&imes. And the third,
and most obvious, is that the threat to peace and security
which has forced us to meet has arisen from the taking and
detention of american diplomatic hostages at Teheran a
month ago, and not from the events which may have led to
that detention.

51. My delegation, and indeed the whole world, have been
made aware through the events of the past I8 months of the
deep feelings of the people of Iran towards the previous
@ime in that country. We have been made ,awarethat the
Iranian people believe that they have sutfered major deprivations of their human rights and misappropriation of
the wealth of the State. In a statement issued at Dublin on
30 November [S/Z366~, the Heads of State or Government
and the Foreign Ministers of the nine member States of the
European Community expressed their consciousness of the
importance which the Iranian people attach to the changes
which have taken place in their country.
,’
52. Nevertheless, these feelings, however strongly held, in
no way justify the invasion of diplomatic property and the
taking and the holding of hostages. In the statement of the
nine member States of the European Community to which I
have referred, the point was emphasized that it was fimdamental that diplomatic missions should be protected. The
failure to uphold this principle and the taking of hostages to’
exert pressure on Governments wasiotally unacceptable. It
was, the statement went on, the duty of all Governments to
oppose energetically such a breach of international law.

43. That is why, in the opinion of the Portuguese delegation, before any discussion can be held about past circumstances that may have led to the present crisis that threat
must be removed-that
is, those hostages should be
released. Then, and only then, will the international community be able to dedicate ~11its attention to the issues
raised by Iran in both the competent organs of the United
Nations and all other appropriate international bodies.
44. States wishing to avail themselves of the United
Nations machinery must abide by the fundamental rules of
international law. If they fail to respect those principles and
the commitments undertaken through the agreements to
which they have subscribed, they lose the moral authority to
level accusations at others.
45. The Portuguese delegation deeply regrets the decision
of Iran not to participate in this meeting, which was
adjourned a week ago p.recisely to allow it to be present.
Nevertheless, we hope that the present leaders of Iran will
heed al) the appeals addressed to them for the immediate
release of the diplomats who lived in Iran, relying in good
faith on the protection of their hosts. That, and that only, no
matter what grievances Iran might feel it has against the
United States, will be in keeping with the honourable traditions of Iranian culture and with the basic principles of
justice embodied in Islam.

53. I reiterate the call made in that statement for Iran to
respect fully the rights of others and observe the established
principles that govern relations between States. I urge the
Iranian authorities most strongly to ensure the well-beiig of
the hostages, to take action immediately to release themin
complete safety and allow them to return to their own
country. This is the burden of the appeal which your predccessor, Mr. President, issued last month on behalf of all of
us in the Council. The release of the hostages is an essential
precondition of the peaceful resolution of the remaining
issues between the Governments of Iran and the United
states.

46. Before concluding, I should like to express the personal solidarity of all members of the Portuguese delegation
with our colleagues detained in Iran, who at this moment
are certainly hoping that all their fellow diplomats, wherever they may be around the world, arc trying their utmost
to secure their release and the regaining of their freedom
and their dignity.
.-.

54. My delegation believes that the Security Council must
remain seized of this problem until a satisfactory conclusion
is reached, and I would urge you, Mr. President, and the
Secretary-General to continue the s&h for ways and
means of achieving our immediate objective-the early
release of the hostages and their safe return to the United
states.

47. Sir Anthony PABSQNS.(United.Kingdom):
It would
be di!Ecult to underestimate the gravity of a situation which
has induced the Secretary-General to take the rareinitiative
of bringing a matter to the attention of the Security Council
in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter.
4

,

55. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (intetpretationj?om French):
The situation created by the state of relations between the
United States and Iran is sufficiently grave to deserve.
thorough examination on the part of the Security Council,
and the Secretary-General was not wrong to take the welcome initiative of convening the present meeting. I should
like to take this occasion, therefore, to congratulate him on
i&-in view of the serious threat weighing upon international
peace and security as a result of this situation, to which
your predecessor, Mr. President, Ambassador Palacios de
Vitio, alluded.
..
56. In this context, ‘my delegation wishes to say how
deeply preoccupied it is by the course which events seem to
be taking. Indeed, if free rein is given to passions and
impulsiveness, peace, security and stability, not only in the
region but throughout the whole world, willbe seriously
threatened. There is no need to repeat here how disastrous
the consequences would be.

60. Respect for these diplomatic customs is even more
fundamental for countries such as ours, which owe their
very existence in the face of power politics and hegemony of.
all kinds to the recognition of this international law,
which has brought us all together here, in spite of our
differences, our all-too-often deep opposition and our
respective dimensions.
61. ~Accordingly, despite our sympathy for the cause
defended by the Iranians, we are bound to regret the fact
that the diplomatic personnel of a mission, as well as its
premises, should be the object of aggression and violation,
because, need we recall, article 22 of the Vienna Convention
of 1961 stipulates that:
“The premises of the mission shall be inviolable. The
agents of the receiving State may not enter them, except
with the consent of the head of the mission.**
Therefore, we .fully approved,- and are still in agreement
with, the statement of the President of the Council of 9
November; in which he urged in the strongest terms that the
diplomatic personnel being held in Iran be released without
delay and provided protection.

57. The use of force, be it military, economic, spiritual or
other, leads nowhere, because it implies a total lack of
respect for the human person. It is perhaps appropriate to
say that the deliberate disregard of this principle underlies
the present situition, which all .of us deplore. Once the
validity of this evident proposition is recognized, it follows
that the best settlement of this dispute lies in peaceful chalogue, which alone is capable of generating respect for man
as such.

62. If our attitude is clear in terms of principles, it is just as
clear in terms of the lessons to be drawn from this experience. Indeed, this experience proves quite eloquently that
force does not necessarily reside in power, and that in this
century of interdependence, where everything is being done
with the participation of us all in this world organization to
work closely together as peoples in every way possible, this
should be a time not for confrontation but for harmoriixa-’
tion, the essential condition of the “dialogue of nations”
referred to by the President of the Republic of Gabon in his .
work of that title. __I

58. There is no doubt that Iran at present constitutes a
spiritual force that must be reckoned with, especially since
that country, the cradle of an ancient civilization, draws its
energy from within itself. But if this force is to be recognized
for what it is, it must not defy the universally recognized
principles which are the very ones that can confer upon it
that mark -of seriousness without which it cannot achieve
the full measure of iti international dimension. For, unless
it wishes to live in isolation, no State can claim to be part of
the great community of nations while ignoring the principles which confer that right on it, and which, moreover, are
recognizd by all systems, whether religious, political or
philosophical.

63. Rather than darken even further %,horizon heavy
with tragedy”, it seems to us that we must, above all, try to
brighten it so that it may recover its former serenity. There
can be no doubt that the two principal parties concemedIran and the United States-are convinced of this. It is in
this context of the search for a peaceful solution, which
should lead in principle to the immediate liberation of the
hostages, that the delegation of Gabon will support any new
initiative of the Council that is likely to end this conflict.

59. Indeed, I have read in a major French daily an article
by Mr. Maxime Robinson, director of studies at the Ecole
pratique des Hautes Etudes, in which he said that
%he States of the Moslem world during the classical era,
like everybody else, had necessarily to negotiate with
external Powers. It has been recognized since prehistoric
times that there can be no negotiation without rules to
safeguard the negotiators.

64. Mr. LEPRl?ITE
(France) (interpretation from
French): When, at the request of the Secretary-General, the
Security Council decided to meet it thus demonstrated its
grave concern at the possible repercussions of the existing
tension in the relations between the.United States and Iran.
I wish to state that my delegation shares the concern of
other members of the Council at the recent developments in
the situation, and that we fully associate ourselves with the
efforts undertaken to put an end to this very serious crisis.
In particular, we wish to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his activities during these past weeks.
We should like to pay a tribute also to your predecessor,
Mr. President, for the appeals he made and for his perseverance, skill and calmness._
.-

“The extensive body of ideal standards that are called
Moslem law scarcely deals with this problem. It speaks
of the rights and obligations of believers or of the community of believers. But these were rules derived from
pre-Islamic Arab customs and confirmed by Islam
according to which a believer could grant safe conduct,
or protection called an am&-to non-Moslems, real or
potential enemies. Diplomatic envoys ‘automatically
enjoyed the privilege of the am&z.”

65. As the Council of Ministers of the French Republic
recalled following its meeting on 21 November, France
views as paramount the principle of respect for the independence of States-and the right of each people to determine

The author concludes by saying that “‘for the Islamic relias We& diplomatic immunity is a sacred rule”.

gion

5

freely their political, economic and social choices. This has
guided our actions in our relations with Iran and in our
attitude with regard to the Iranian revolution. We were
prepared to hear Iran express its aspirations before the
international community which we represent.
66. Likewise, France recognizes the reality and significance of the Iranian revolution; this was confirmed by the
President of the French Republic during his televised interview on 27 November. However, the President also emphasized the unacceptability of any violation of international
law, and in particular the taking of hostages among diplomatic personnel who are covered throughout the entire
world by conventions that are respected by all.
67. The fundamental principles of international law and
the general rules governing relations among States, in particular those relating to diplomatic immunities, are in accordance with universal law and apply to all, in all circumstances. They have been established ovef the course of
history precisely in order to preserve the peaceful nature of
international relations, and this has been in the interest of all
States and of the weaker even more than of the stronger.
This is not the opinion of France alone, but of its partners in
the European Community as well, as was strongly reaffirmed on 30 November by the Council of Heads of State or
Government of the nine members of the European Community at its meeting at Dublin [ibid.]. It is also that of
virtually alI members of the international community.

tional conventions currently in force. The Council also
appealed to the Government of .&an to release all diplomatic personnel as soon as possible and to grant them the
::
necessary protection.
.‘*
72. Similarly, on 26 November the Permanent Council of
the Organization of American States, of which ‘my country
is a member, adopted a declaration which stated in its main
:’
pa*
1,. :.
“that the occupation of the United States Embassy in
Iran and the detention of members of its st&Ias hostages
constitute actions which clearly violate the principles and
rules of international law and may also constitute a
factor disrupting harmonious, international coexistence”
*
*
and which appealed
“‘to the Government of Iran that, in compliance with
universally recognized international law and ‘practice, it
terminate the occupation of the United States Embassy
in Teheran, secure the release of all hostages and nrovide
them with adequate security and appropriate guarantees” [S/Z%%rj.
73> Such statements eloquently demonstrate the attitude
the international community has taken concerning a precise
fact. The taking of hostages from among diplomatic personnel, with the apparent support of a Government, is an
extremely dangerous precedent that must be avoided by a11
States. Otherwise, the most elementary ground rules of the
international community would give way to chaos.

68. Thus, while understanding the feelings of the Iranian
people and believing that their complaints deserve consideration, my country once again makes an urgent appeal for
the return of the hostages safe and sound to their country
and their anxious families and for a solution to be found
through the means provided by international law to the
tragic situation that has been the cause of our meeting.

74. The delegation of Bolivia gave favourable consideration to the formal request by the delegation of Iran for a
postponement of the Council’s official dehberations on this
matter, since we were firmly convinced that the presence of
representatives of the Government of Iran- at the highest
level would have made it possible to have a positive dialogue, The exchange of views and negotiation are the most
suitable, if not the only, means to arrive at the peaceful
solution of disputes among States and the development of
sound relations, and this is ail the more true when such
exchanges are supported and sponsored by one of the
world’s most important political organs, the Security
Council.

69. Mr. PALACIOS de VIZZIO (Bolivia) (interpretation
from Spanish): Allow me to express my most sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the very kind words you
addressed to me and. my thanks for similar statements made
by my colleagues of the Council. I wish also to express my
gratitude to the Secretary~GeneraI for the efficient and
constant co-operation that he himself and the members of
the Secretariat gave me during my term as President of the
Council.

75: For those reasons, my delegation profoundly deplores
the decision of the Government of Iran not to participate in
the present deliberations. Nevertheless, since it cannot be
otherwise, the Council must make a suitable response to
this chahenge. In the opinion of my delegation, this means
that in the present circumstances, it must make every possible effort to devise a scenario that will permit theinitiation
and development of constructive negotiations. To this end,
my delegation believes that the participation and good offices of the Secretary-General are and will be of fundamental
importance.

70. My delegation wishes to express its profound concern
at the gravity of the events that have occurred recently at
Teheran with regard to relations between the United States
and Iran. The repercussions of those events not only
endanger international peace and security; they also constitute a serious threat to the very stability of the international
system, based as it is on respect for the elementary and
universally accepted principles of international law. The
decision of the Secretary-General to call for an urgent meeting of the Council could not therefore have been more wise
or more timely.

76. In the consideration of the present problem, my delegation’s primary and fundamental concern is humanitarian
in nature..We consider that the release of the.hostages must
take place promptly, nay immediately.

71. In its statement on 9 November, reiterated at its meeting of 27 November, the Council has made known its
‘unanimous concern at the prolonged detention of American diplomatic personnel at Teheran in violation of intema-

77. ‘In this regard, without speaking of conditions, without speaking of any prior requirements, and with all the
6

respect and understanding accorded by the people and
Government of Bolivia to the people ,of Iran-a brother
people in the non-aligned movement-in
the ditIicult and
emotional moment of history they are experiencing, we
wish simply to state an incontrovertible fact: were the
urgent appeal, of the international community to be considered favourably by the leaders of Iran, who at present hold
in their hands the power of decision; the international image
and negotiating position of that country would be enormously improved.

85. Those were my preliminary remarks. We reserve our
right to speak again at a later stage.
86. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union d Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrerpreration from Rudanr): The con&t between the United States and Iran has for some time now
been a cause of concern throughout the world and has been
the object of the careful attention of the members of the
Security Council.
87. With regard to the question of the takeover of -the
United States Embassy at Teheran, the Soviet Union proceeds from its position of principle concerning the need to
respect diplomatic privileges and immunities. The Soviet
Union is in favour of strict compliance with the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations. That position has
been explained frequently in the Security Council by the
Soviet delegation. In accordance with it, the Soviet delegation, together with all the other members of the Council,
supported the statement by the President of the Council
regarding compliance with the principle of the inviolability
of diplomatic personnel and premises, and the necessity to
liberate speedily the United States diplomatic personnel
detained in Iran. That position of ours is a position of
principle and remains unchanged.

78. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Bangladesh fully shares
the concern expressed by the Secretary-General in his letter
to the President of the Security Council that the grave
situation which has arisen in relations between the United
States and Iran poses a serious threat to peace and security.
Since that time, the situation has further deteriorated as
tensions continue to escalate. The threat to peace and stability in the region, and indeed in the whole world, is a matter
which must receive the most urgent and serious attention of
the Council.
79. In this context, as a member of the Council, Bangladesh deems it important to recall the statement of 9 Novcmber by the President of the Council and his strong
reiteration of the unanimous appeal on behalf of all Council
members on 27 November, urgently asking for the release
and protection of diplomatic personnel detained in Iran
since 4 November.

88. On 24 November, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko, stated the following during a press conference at Bonn:

80. Bangladesh firmly believes that upholding the principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well as intemational law and conventions is a binding obligation on all
Member States, and their observance and promotion are
the ultimate safeguard of all nations.

“We are for compliance with the relevant intemational convention on respect for the diplomatic immunity of representatives of the States concerned. We had
.already taken that position when the question was discussed in the Security Council. It is therefore known both
to the Government of the United States and to the
Government of Iran. We wish to express the hope that a
solution to this question will be found, to the mutual
satisfaction of the parties. But the parties, including the
United States, must show patience and must keep calm;
them should be no possibility for their emotion to
overflow.”

81. The allegations by the Government of Iran about
injustices and violations of human rights committed by the
previous regime deserve to be considered in the Council on
their merits. In the absence of the representative of Iran, we
request the Secretary-General to get in touch with ‘and
assure the Government of Iran that Iran’s case, if presented
to the Council, would receive full and fair consideration.
.For its part, Bangladesh would do everything possible to
ensure that Iran’s case received fair and just consideration
under international law.

89. The Soviet people is carefully following the historic
transformations that have been taking place during the past
year in Iran, a neighbour of our country. The young Iranian
republic is living through difficult times as it tries to overcome the heavy legacy of the overthrown regime of the
Shah. Complex political, economic, social and national
problems are being solved by the people of that country,
which has taken its destiny into its own hands.

82. Consistent with our uns.verving commitment to the
principles of the Charter and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and in conformity with the Islamic principles of
tolerance, compassion and magnanimity and, above all, of
peace and justice, Bangladesh believes that it is imperative
,that the Council should explore all avenues for a peaceful
and honourable settlement of thii problem. It’should be our
collective effort to do everything in our power to defuse the
present tense situation and work with restraint to wards a
negotiated settlement in conformity with international law.

90. The Soviet Union has deep sympathy for the Iranian
people in its struggle for its interests, its democratic rights,
and its genuine independence. The Soviet Union has consistently adhered in its relations with Iran to principles of
respect for sovereignty, independence, temitorial integrity
and non-interference in domestic affairs. We understand
full well the wish of the Iranian people to restore justice,.
trodden underfoot by the previous regime. That wish
should be taken into account.

83. ‘In this context, we highly commend the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to find such a peaceful solution to this
crisis. We.assure him of our fullest co-operation and sup
port in his continuing endeavours.

91. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation deems it necessary to confirm again its position that the violation of the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations-whoever

84. We’ hope that the present ‘discussion will be objective
and constructive.
7

commits the violation-constitutes
an act that-is contrary to
international law. The Soviet Union, as a, party to .the
Convention, deems it necessary to state this once again in
the Security Council, and expresses the hope that the conflict that has arisen between the United States and Iran will
be settled to the satisfaction of both parties, on the,basis of
respect for the Convention.

Finally, I wish to echo theappeal ofthe SecretaryGeneral to the parties to exercise maximum restraint in the
situation and to persevere in the search for a peaceful
solution.
9?.

98. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): When-we adjourned&r last
meeting, on Tuesday 27 November, held under the able
presidency of Mr. Palacios de Y&J, the representative of
Bolivia, my delegation was convinced that the Security
Council must relentlessly continue to pursue its urgent,
efforts to seek a peaceful solution of the tragic crisis which
has arisen between the United States of America and the
Islamic Republic of Iran. We continue to be so convinced.’
,,
99. That meeting, which wasconvened under Article 99 of
the Charter in, response to ‘the letter from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Council, fully underscored
the grave precedent which the underlying issues of the crisis.
could establish. We wish to pay a warm tribute to the
Secretary-Generalfor his most commendable initiative and
efforts.

92. Proceeding from that position of principie;the Soviet
delegation considers that in the present situation the security Council must act in such a way as to make a real
contribution to the speedy settlement of theconflict that has
arisen between the United States and Iran.
93. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): The’-Security Council is
undoubtedly considering a delicate and urgent matter. We
have followed with anxiety and considerable concern the
developments in the relations between the United States
and Iran. We are aware of the passions and strong feelings
in both countries in respect of the issues which have poi:
soned their relations.
94. In Zambia’s view, the Secretary-General acted correctly in invoking his powers under Article 99 of the Charter. The Secretary-General’s letter to the President of the
Security Council clearly brings out the issueswith which the
Council is seized. On the one hand, we have theseizure of
the United States Embassy at Teheran and the continued
detention of American diplomatic personnel. On the other
hand, we have the claim of the Government .of Iran for
redress in respect of injustices and abuses of human rights
which are reported to have been committed by the previous
regime in that country. This situation has given rise to
tension between the United States and Iran which the
Secretary-General has recognized as constituting a threat to
international peace and security.

100.. Once again, we meet under a climate of perplexity
and fear. We are perplexed that there could be a misunderstanding of such monstrous proportions between erstwhile
friends. We are perplexed that events, however deplorable,
could affect any Member Stafe’s perception of ifs intemational obligations. We .are afraid that rules and norms of
international law which have been developed over the years
are being seriously jeopardized, if not damaged. We fear
that dark passions may lend credence to’fhe impression that
more can be gained from bullying or the use of force than
from recourse to the methods of conciliation.
101. On 4 November we learned with dismay that the
Embassy of the United States at Teheran had been invaded
and that some 62 American diplomatic personnel and other
locally recruited staff therein had been detained as hostages.
The incident is most disturbing not because it is another
case of hostages being held. It is most disturbing because it
is the first time that hostages have been herd for such a
prolonged time with the oflicial approval of the host cotmY
try. It is indeed doubIy more disturbing. because the hostages are diplomatic agents duly accredited to a State
Member of the United Nations, and to compotmd matters,
the premises and establishments of a diplomatic mission
have also been occupied for all this time.
.

95. Zambia has always been among those in the United
Nations that have consistently advocated strict respect for
the rule of law in international relations. In ourapproach to
the present item beforethe Council, we cannot fail to recognize that the continued occupation of the United States
Embassy and detention of American diplomatic personnel
in Iran is not in keeping with intemational.law and that it
violates the relevant conventions on diplomatic privileges
and immunities. Guided by this and by humanitarian.considerations, my Government has joined others in calling for
the immediate evacuation of the United States Embassy and
the release of diplomatic personnel, without prejudice to the
position of Iran in respect of other matters in dispute
between it and the United States.

102. These actions, in the view of my.delegation, constitute a most serious violation of international law and practice which govern the conduct of States. Indeed, for my.
delegation, one of the most indestructible pillars of intemational relations is the inviolability of,diplomatic personnel
and establishments. It is for that reason that my delegation
fully supported and still supports the appeal for the immediate release and protection of the hostages made in the
statement issued by the President of the Security Council on
9 November and the subsequent appeal in the same vein by
the Council at its last meeting on that question, as well as the
other efforts by the Secretary-General and the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and.
Cultural Organization and the appeals by the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity and President
Sekou To& of the sister Republic of Guinea.

96. My delegation hopes that this meeting of the,Council
will contribute to the early release of the American hostages
and, it is to be hoped, to the normalization of relations
between the United States and Iran. My delegation stands
readyto join with other members of the Council in reiterating the earlier call made through its previous President for
the releaseof the hostages. We also stand ready to join with
others in encouraging Iran and the United States to enter
into direct negotiations, under the auspices ofthe SecretaryGeneral, in respect of Iran’s grievances. In this, regard, I
wish to stress that my Government firmly subscribed to the
principles of non-use of force in international relations and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.
8

103. The authorities in Iran have determined that the
previous r@ime had consistently committed many unpardonable acts of injustice and abused the human rights of the
Iranian people with reckless abandon and impunity. For
these, the people seek redress. Because of their experiences
with what they have termed “the interference of successive
United States Governments in their internal affairs”, the
Iranian people are makingthe extradition of the ex-Shah to
Iran a precondition for the release of the hostages.

conflicts of sympathies and loyalties in our mind-on the
one hand, ‘loyalty to Iran, a third world country and a
non-aligned nation whose people and mine are bound by
ties of friendship and religious persuasion, a country which
has lately shown. understanding of Africa’s concern in
South Africa by refusing to export oil to South Africa and
by breaking diplomatic relations with South Africa; and, on
the other hand, our friendship with the United States and
loyalty to the irreplaceable principles of international law
and practices and to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the non-aligned movement.

104. Coming from a continent which has had its fair share
of presidents and heads of State who had allegedly emptied
their national treasuries for personal aggrandizement and
who have been driven into exile, coming from a continent
where foreign Governments and interests have for too long
arrogated to themselves the power to determine and influence the destinies of peoples, coming from a continent
where misguided foreign interests have sought and in many
instances succeeded too well in propping up regimes whose
leaders colluded with them to ruin the national economies,
again for personal aggrandizement, I can understand the
grievances of the Iranian people. But to understand that is
not to approve the methods the Iranians have selected to
redress their deeply felt grievances.

110. It is therefore in full consideration of all those facts
and factors that we earnestly implore the Government and
the people of Iran to release the American hostages without
further delay and unconditionally. We believe that. their
legitimate grievances will be properly addressed in suitable
forums once they take the first indispensable step of heeding
the appeal of the Security Council and abide by their obligations under the Vienna Convention of 1961.
111. Mr. HULINSkY
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from &r&n):
The Czechoslovak delegation shared the
view that, in the light of the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral, which was published in his letter to the President
of the Security Council, a genuine hope appeared that the
Council could make a positive contribution to the peaceful
resolution- of the serious situation which has emerged in
relations between the United States and Iran. An important
element in the initiative of the Secretary-General when it
was undertaken wasthe fact that it wasbased on the consent
of the Governments of both those countries.

105. The Security Council, which is charged with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, is now faced with the challenge of the deepening crisis in Iranian-American relations. The Council is now
obliged to give effect to such measures as would meet this
particular contingency.
106. Many developing countries, including mine, are concerned that, as hysteria and tensions build up, emotions rise
and interests of negative influence surface, precipitate or
wrong judgement or even miscalculation could have disastrous consequences not only for international peace and
security but also for the lives of the hostages. In other
words, the only alternative to a judicious Council line of
action could bewar. I have every confidence that the collective wisdom represented here will not let that happen.

112. In the search for a peaceful solution of the situation
arising out of the dangerous level of tension between the
two countries, which is threatening peace and stability in
that region, it is extremely important to try to maintain this
basic premise upon which the initiative of Mr. Waldheim
was based. Such an approach would undoubtedly, in the
last analysis, contribute to a satisfactory solution of all
other questions, including the serious question of the consistent compliance with universally recognized rules of
international diplomatic law.

107. Nigeria is and will always remain committed to the
peaceful settlement of disputes among nations. As an earnest of that national commitment, the President of Nigeria,
His Excellency Alhaji Shehu Shagari, has already addressed
letters of concern to President Jimmy Carter of the United
States and to Ayatollah Khomeini, in the prayerful hope
that there will be a peaceful end to the present crisis without
harm to the hostages and with full respect for international
law and custom.

113. Basing itself on the actual state of affairs, my delegation considers that the Council should in future also make
every effort to create conditions for the adoption of considered and reliable measures to do away with the situation
that has been produced, a situation which, in the words
of the Secretary-General, “could have disastrous consequences for the entire world” [S/ZJ6463. Indeed, any
hasty incorrect step could have a negative effect upon the
further course of events and threaten peace-and not only
in that part of the world.

108. In this connexion, Nigeria has noted with interest
that the United States has already lodged a complaint
against the Islamic Republic of Iran before the International Court of Justice. That the International Court of
Justtce has already scheduled hearings on, this matter to
begin on 10 December is further proof of how seriously the
international community would wish to assume its responsibilities. We wish to add our voice to that of the President of
the Court that neither party-the United States or Iranshould do anything now to aggravate the situation further.

114. The Czechoslovak delegation strictlv adheres to the
position that, for the development of compiehensive peaceful relations between States, it is a sine qua non that there
should be consistent compliance with generally recognized
rules of international diplomatic law in all casesand by all
States. Those rules can under no circumstances be violated
or bypassed, inasmuch as they have to serve the purpose for
which they have been created. The basis of diplomatic law is
the guarantee’of the inviolability of a diplomatic mission

109. The unfortunate events in Iran and their wider impli:
cations for international peace and security arouse many
9

and its staff and their exemption from the jurisdiction of the
host State. All host States must unconditionally comply in
that. respect with those obligations. At the same time, my
delegation cannot agree that any disputes, however serious
they may be, should be resolved by the threat or use of force
in any shape or form.
115, In view of the serious situation that has been produced and which constitutes a threat to international peace
and security, the Czechoslovak delegation is ready to sup
port such measures in the Security Council as are designed
t? achieve both the speedy liberation of the diplomatic
personnel at Teheran, detained in violation of the relevant
international conventions, and the satisfaction of the just
demands of Iran. The Charter proposes, in Chapter VI in
particular, a number of peaceful measures which, in the
present circumstances, could, with the assistance of the
Council, be used by the parties concerned, provided they
displayed maximum forbearance, a sense of compromise
and mutual understanding in so doing.

dent, Mr; William R. Tolbert, Jr., is the curre& Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity, the honour and high
responsibility of taking part in thii historic debate tonight.
123. As the Council deliberates, the eyes of the world are
fued upon it as perhaps never before. Many grave threats to
world peace have claimed the Council’s attention in the past
and, doubtless, graver ones will do so in the future. But,
tonight, the danger which the whole world faces is more
than an ordinary threat to peace. What we face is nothing
short bf the catastrophe that the very process by which
peaceful intercourse among nations is made possible and
takes place may be damaged irreparably. As awareness of
that has grown, it has become recognized in every country
without exception that what is involved in this crisis is more
than a.serious dispute between two States, each with credible claims. What, even more importantly, is at stake, is the
protection of the vital diplomatic process, the impairment
of which would have the most far-reaching and disastrous
Consequences for the future of mankind.

116. in that connexion, my delegation wishes to emphasize that any measures that the Council may adopt in that
respect should not be interpreted by anybody or under any
circumstances as a cause for the further escalation of tbe
conflict or for interference in the domestic affairs of Iran.

124. The actions and decisions of the Security Council are
always of great significance, but this meeting tonight has
particular significance because it reaffirms the motivations
that gave birth to the United Nations itself, namely, the
conviction that in this modem world, when the grave issues
of war or peace are in the balance, rational man ultimately
has no ch&ce but to rely not on the power of arms but on
the force of reason. Thus, in response to the statesmanlike
and wise request by the Secretary-General pursuant to Article 99 of the Charter, the Council has convened this meeting, which could very well be described as a town meeting of
the world and for which the Council and the SecretaryGeneral have earned the gratitude of all nations.

117. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chnese):
Now I should like to make a statement as the representative
of CHINA.
118. Fit of all, the Chinese delegation would like to
express its appreciation for the initiative taken by the
Secretary-General on the relations between Iran and the
United States.

125. Through many centuries intercourse among States
has essentially taken two forms: a state of war or a state of
peace. In war nations have relied on soldiers, in peace on
diplomats. But civil&d man-hasby definition always preferred the ways of peace to those of war. Wars in fact ensued
only because or when diplomacy had failed. Therefore,
since diplomacy played so vital a role in the safeguarding of
peace, the inviolability and protection of the diplomatic
process, its persons and property have been recognized and
respected since ancient times and in all cultures.

119. The Chinese Government is concerned about recent
events in the relations between Iran and the United States.
We always hold that the internal affairs of each country
should be managed by its own people and that there should
be no interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
But, at the same time, we hold that the principles guiding
international relations and the accepted diplomatic immunities should be universa1Iy respected. We support the
appeal made on behalf of the Council by last month’s
President for the immediate release of the detained American hostages in Iran. We sincerely hope that a’ reasonable
and appropriate solution to these events can be found at an
early date through peaceful consultation in accordance with
principles of international law and diplomatic practice.
120. Now, I shall resume my capacity as PRESIDENT
the Council.

126. Since the birth of the United Nations, dedicated as it
is to the prohibition of war and the preservation of peace,
the role of the diplomat in international relations and consequently the protection of the diplomatic process assumed
greater importance. That importance found concrete expression in at least three major international conventions: the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations2 and the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents.

of

121. The next speaker is the representative of Liberia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

127. All of &se international conventions reaffirmed the
principles of customary international law, hoary with age,
that diplomatic agents are to be kept free from any form of
arrest or detention, that they-are absolutely immune from
the criminal jurisdiction of the receiving State, and that they

122. Mr. TUBMAN (Liberia): Permit me at the outset to
extend congratulations to you, Mr. President, as, most befittingly, your great country, China, assumes the presidency of
the Security Council for this closing month of the final year
of a tumultuous decade. I am grateful to you and the other
members of the Council for affording Liberia, whose Presi-

‘United

10

Nations,

Treuzy Series, vol. 596, p. 261.

today will achieve Beater urouortions as the hearts of so
many more wouldbe gladdened when news is given that
as a further manifestation, of Islamic clemency you would
have caused the release of the remaining hostages being
held at Teheran. As we have mentioned in an earlier
message to you, such a gesture of grace can only enhance
the image and respect of your great country and people.”

must be treated with due respect and protected from any
attack on their, person. freedom and dignity. The premi%s,
archives and documents of diplomatic establishments are
likewise inviolate under international law and States are
obligated to. co-operate in the prevention of crimes against
diplomatic ofIicial$ premises and staff.
128. As a lawyer, I should delight in an opportunity to
elaborate on the principles of international law to which I
have referred. But we ate. not in a court of law. Moreover,
the Council, speaking unanimously through its President
several times in. recent days, has already placed itself
squarely on record in support of the cardinal principles of
international law which are at stake in this crisis.

131. History teaches, and the whole world knows, mat no
people anywhere have suffered greater abuses, injustice and
exploitation than have the people of Africa. In spite of that,
the States and the peoples of Africa have always sought and
still seek to redress their grievances by law and through a
peaceful process. By legal means, and largely through a
peaceful process, we Africans have within less than a generation achieved the virtually total decolonization of our
continent. At this moment successseems imminent in London for the African leaders from Zimbabwe who, even
while their forces approached the threshold of victory in a
costly and cruel war of liberation, opted for a negotiated
path to the resolution of their conflicts. But that is not to say
that we Africans arc satisfied with our condition in this
world. We realize that the international system is in many
respects-in the area of law, in economics, in respect of the
basic demands of justice-far from perfect, but progress
and justice are possible and we shall persevere.

129. The appeal which Liberia therefore makes, here
tonight, although supported by international law and practice, is based on and offered from humanitarian considerations and a deep concern for the peace of the world. It is the
earnest and abiding desire of the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity to assist worthy endeavours
in the interests of peace. Within our region of West Africa,
and throughout Africa, his exertions in the cause of peace
are widely known and respected. It wasthus no surprise that
in the early days of this crisis he addressed the following
telegraphic message to the Iranian leader which, with the
Council’s permission, I have the honour to read:
!‘Ln the name of Allah I greet you and wish to register
our appreciation for the action taken by you in the
release of two Marines and one female secretary from
among the hostages being held at the United States
Embassy at Teheran. It was because of our deep humanitarian concern for those who are being held in confinement that we addressed an earlier message to you
appealing for their release so as to avoid a heightening of
tension in the world which could disturb international
peace and security. We maintain the view that the holding of hostages will not redress any wrongs which may
have been committed against the people of Iran in the
past. Nor do we believe that the trial of diplomats in
violation of all principles of international law will bring
to the people of Iran the justice which they feel is their
entitlement. For these reasons and our respect for the life
and dignity of the human person, we again fervently
appeal that as a great gesture of grace you will intercede
for the release of all of the hostages regardless of race, sex
or creed. Such an act, I assure you, Ayatollah, will not
only be pleasing in the sight of Allah the merciful and
compassionate but will also enhance the image and
respect of your great country and its people. Let me
reassure you that in making this appeal I do so with no
intention whatsoever of interfering in the internal affairs
of your country.”

132. The challenge of our era in Africa and throughout
the world during this nuclear age is to improve international
relations while there is still time. If so laudable and desirable
a goal is ever to be achieved, there can be no doubt that safe
and protected contacts among and between States are indispensable pre-conditions.
133. If, God forbid, as we are about to enter the 1980sthe
world is allowed to become an unsafe piace for diplomats to
pursue their noble calling, mankind would quickly become
engulfed in a dark barbaric world too dangerous to
contemplate.
134. The PRESIDENT
(interpreturion from Chinese):’1
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
just received a letter from the representative of Zaire in
which he asks to be invited to participate in the discussion of
this agenda item. In accordance with the usual practice I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and of rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kaman& wa
Kamanab(Zaire) took theplacereservedforhimat thesideof
the Council chamber.

130. A few days later when some more hostages were
released the current Chairman of the OAU sent the following message to the Iranian leader:
“In the name of Allah the merciful, I again greet you as
I convey our deep appreciation for the gesture of Islamic
clemency you have demonstrated in the release of the 10
other hostages from among those being held at the United
States Embassy at Teheran. The joy which has come to SO
many from the release of the 13 hostages yesterday and

135. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese):1
invite the representative of Zaire to take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
136. Mr. KAMANDA wa KAMANDA (Zaire) (interpretation from French): First of all, Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you most sincerely on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
11

&ember. The Republic of Zaire rejoices in seeing as President of the Council the representative of China, a country
which is a great Power and which, at the same time, shares
so many things and so many preoccupations with all the
States of the third world; a country which has never ceased
tosupport all the just actions and causesboth of the Organization of African Unity and of the countries of the nonaligned movement.
137. I also wish to conaratulate most sincerelv the om~oing President, the representative of Bolivia, 0; the skcful
and wise manner in which he guided the work of the Council and for the efforts he has made in this delicate affair.
i38. Thii meeting of the Security Council which, under
the Charter, has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, is held at a particularly
crucial moment in the development of international relations. From the north, south, east and west of the world
there converge on the Council numberless appeals, all
equally desperate, and all due to the troubles and turbulences of thii era of transition.
139. The world certainly seeks peace and security and
effective guarantees against the ins&&y which menaces us
from all sides and threatens the survival, progress and cooperation among nations and peoples in good faith.
140. It has not escaped the attention of any observer, of
any responsible person that the situation facing the world in
the wake of the talcmg as hostages in Iran of persons whose
inviolability is covered by diplomatic immunity, guaranteed
and protected by existing international instruments pertaining to the matter, carries the seeds of incalculably grave
consequences which could be catastrophic for future conlidence in international relations and the peace and security
of all.

importance to this, bearing in mind the means available to
us, because we are convinced that in a world without principles and laws we should be the losers. If the indispensable
respect for these principles were to be challenged, our present civilization would be shattered and, tith it, the already
precarious order and justice which we have endeavoured to
maintain in international relations. Small and mediurnsized States, which are the most numerous and the most
vulnerable on earth, would ultimately be the major victims
of any disregard of the objective rules and principies of the
Charter and of international conventions which guarantee
order and justice in international relations. ,
144. We are convinced that those who are responsible for
events in Iran will not accept such a responsibility before
history. That is why we now launch a solemn and brotherly
appeal to them to liberate the hostages without conditions,
not to jeopardize their integrity, but to restore them safeand
sound to their country in the clearly understood interests of
the world in general and of Iran in particular. The victorious
Iranian revolution, inspired and supported by extremely
noble, respectable and respected motives, will surely emerge
greater and strengthened after the liberation of the hostages, and Iran will thus resume, with head held high, its
place in the community of free nations.
145. We till on the Government of the United States,
despite the diflicult dircumstances it is experiencing, to be
patient, to use every available nsource of diplomacy, negotiation, law and goodwill in the patient and noble quest for a
peaceful settlement of the dispute and to refrain from the
use of force, in ordei to safeguard the international prestige
of a great nation called upon to play a decisive role in
intemationa! relations.
146. At the same time, we invite the Secretary-General to
continue to offer his good offices and to make every effort
required by the urgency and gravity of the problem to find a
solution which conforms to the principles of the Charter
and international law so as to protect the institutions of
States and international relations against any excesses,
including the excess& of adventurism.

141. While we fully respect the independence of Iran, its
sovereignty and all its rights, including the rights of its
people freely to determine its future, we share the anguish
and anxiety not only of the families plunged into deadly
uncertainty, who for weeks have been awaiting the return of
their relatives, but also of all those who are responsible
throughout. the world, of all those right-minded people
throughout the world who are wondering what will become
of relations and co-operation among States if such acts are
to be accepted and tolerated.

147. ‘The kepublie of Zaire is firmly opposed to the taking
of hostages as well as to political assassination and the use
of force in the settlement of international disputes.
148. At the present meeting, the Security Council is faced
with extremely serious responsibilities in its capacity as the
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. This evening the eyesof the worId are on
this important body of the United Nations. The Council
must live up to these expectations by making a wisedecision
marked by firmhess in the defence of principles and flexibility in their application, for human lives are at stake.

142. We therefore appeal sincerely to those responsible in
Iran fully to respect the rights of others in accordance with
the traditions of their centuries old civilization and to
observe internationally recognized and established principles which govern relations and co-operation among peoples and States in modem times. Those principles, like all
the democratic conquests of which present generations are
rightly proud, are the result of bitter and arduous efforts
and struggles and belong to the heritage of values of the
whole world.

149. In these difficult hours, the Republic of Zaire wishes
to express its sympathy to the people and Government of
the United States and to the families concerned.
150. No State in the world will in future be protected from
such acts unless the Council responds appropriately to this
exceptionally disturbing problem.

143. We in the third world who continue unswervingly to
strive for the democratization of international relations, for
a more just and equitable system of international relations,
protected from-fear, arbitrary actions and the rule of force,
but guaranteed by the force of law, attach the utmost

Tlie meeting rose at 11.20 p.m.

12

.

‘.(

,..

,
. .

‘.

I.,

.’

:

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
throughout
Section,

Nations
publications
tbe world.
Consult
New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations.
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

L.es publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente
dans
les librairies
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
de votre
libraire
a : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.
FCAK

IIOIIYSEITh

ZiBAAHHlI

OPPAHH3A9UU

OG’6EA~HE.JWF~X

et les agences
ou adressex-vous

HAUHR

tI3~axm
wmax
s3amea3
HauuR.

Oprami3aqww
06%e~wxeHxbw
HausR
rroacrro
Kynwrb
a KRN~KHMX
xaraH arenreraax
ao acex
panorrax
~Kpa.
HaaonKre
CnpasKH
06 HsAanHRX
a
KHN~~XON
a9araxixe
xnx nHmmTe
no anpecy:
Oprann3auna
Ol+hennaenxbrX
Ce~qnn
no npo&axe
maamd,
Hbro-FiepK
Knn )Keneaa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las pubficaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Se&&r
de Ventas,

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estan
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

+CIONES

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfas
a su librero
o dirfjase

y casas distria: N&ones

1.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

Price:

LU.S.

1.50

75Lmoo2--March

M82-2&0
