A/59/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-ninth session

64th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 1 December 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Musambachime
(Zambia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/59/431 and
A/59/574)
Draft resolutions (A/59/L.39 and A/59/L.40)
Mr. Ballah (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to extend its thanks to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations for his report
on item 36, the situation in the Middle East.
My delegation attaches prime importance to the
evolution of the situation in the Middle East, which has
direct effects on international peace and security, not to
mention its regional repercussions. Israel’s continued
defiance — reflected in its violations of international
legitimacy on the pretext of protecting its national
security and ensuring the safety of its settlers and in its
blatant defiance of the will of the international
community — obstructs efforts to reach a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East in conformity with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). Those resolutions stipulate that Israel must
withdraw completely from Arab territories occupied on

(Gabon)

4 June 1967, including the Syrian Golan, and the
Lebanese Shab’a farms.
The Sudan welcomes the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, which declares the
building of the separation wall to be null and void. It
declares the racist wall to be a further manifestation of
the oppression and State terror still exercised by Israel
against the Palestinians, not to mention that the wall
divides the Palestinian territories into separate,
unconnected cantons. In that regard, we call upon the
occupying Power to comply with the Court’s advisory
opinion and pay compensation for damages resulting
from the construction of the wall.
The United Nations, which recognized the State
of Israel, has a responsibility to urge Israel to abide by
resolutions of international legitimacy and to cease
forthwith the practice of State terror against the
defenceless Palestinian people, using all the destructive
war machinery available to it. Israel’s behaviour
violates the very spirit of the United Nations Charter
and international humanitarian law, particularly the
Geneva Conventions. We cannot fail to recall that
Israel continues to engage in all forms of killing,
torturing and intimidation of Palestinians, and in the
destruction of their infrastructure and their economy.
The Sudan also warns against calculated attempts to
confuse terrorism with the legitimate right of peoples
to achieve freedom, dignity, independence and selfdetermination.
The Sudan pays tribute to the civilized manner in
which the Palestinian people have dealt with the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-62904 (E)

*0462904*

A/59/PV.64

transition of authority, which will be completed
through the forthcoming free elections. We call upon
Israel to do nothing to obstruct the various stages of
the electoral process in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank
and Jerusalem.
Israel’s decision to withdraw from the Gaza
Strip — which we hope will be coordinated with the
Palestinian Authority in such a way as not to leave a
political or security vacuum — should be viewed as
part of the road map and should be followed by
complete withdrawal from the entire occupied
Palestinian territory, in accordance with international
resolutions and the principle of land for peace. At the
same time, this is a test of Israel’s credibility at a new
stage when the Arab-Israeli conflict is characterized by
political movement.
We hope that these developments will lead to a
new era in which Israel will withdraw completely from
the Palestinian territory, the Syrian Golan, and
southern Lebanon. We also hope that a final,
comprehensive and just peace will prevail in that area.
Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Let me first express
the appreciation of my delegation to the SecretaryGeneral for his reports on the situation in the Middle
East over the past year (A/59/431 and A/59/574).
My delegation takes note of the SecretaryGeneral, following the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 58/21 of 3 December 2003, having contacted
all parties to the conflict regarding steps taken by them
to implement the relevant provisions of the resolution.
Unfortunately, as it had in the past, Israel responded to
the Secretary-General’s contact by dismissing the
enabling resolution as unbalanced and undue
interference in the matter, and as “counterproductive to
the very spirit of peace” (A/59/574, para. 4).
Furthermore, we express great concern at the
acquisition of nuclear capability by Israel, which poses
a serious and continued threat to the security of
neighbouring and other States. Therefore, we reaffirm
the need for the speedy establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East and call upon all
parties concerned to take urgent steps towards the
fulfilment of that need. In this regard, we demand that
Israel, the only country in the region that has not joined
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) or declared its intention to do so,
renounce the possession of nuclear weapons and to

2

place all its nuclear facilities under International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
We find it difficult to comprehend a situation
where a State that claims to be interested in peace
would insist on the imposition of its rules on all the
other parties as a precondition for peace. That is what
Israel has continued to do, using its military might.
Israel’s high-handed approach, linked to its militarism,
has seen nearly a million Palestinians affected by its
construction of the separation wall, and Palestinians
isolated from one another. Israel’s insistence on
playing by its own rules has resulted in a tremendous
worsening in economic and humanitarian affairs in the
West Bank and Gaza, and it reflects general disrespect
for international humanitarian and human rights law.
The Secretary-General observes correctly that, as
a result of this, the peace process in the Middle East
has stalled. He also points out that “The rising number
of deaths and injuries is evidence of the lack of
progress in advancing the peace process over the last
year” (A/59/574, para. 6). The truth is that progress is
impossible in any endeavour if individual entities are
playing by different rules. It is in the interest of peace,
and in Israel’s interest, that the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations apply to everyone.
Israel cannot continue with the construction of
the wall and other activities of serious concern, such as
Israeli military raids, assassinations, closures, curfews
and blockades, and expect Palestinians to believe that
there is indeed a peace process under way. Israel must
comply with the Geneva Conventions and, in addition
to halting the construction of the wall, comply with its
obligations to protect civilians.
On the issue of the Syrian Golan, we would like
to reaffirm the absolute need for Israel to end its
occupation, as stipulated in General Assembly
resolution 58/23, entitled “The Syrian Golan,” and in
other relevant Security Council resolutions. Israel’s
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan is null
and void and without any validity whatsoever.
Similarly, we call on Israel to terminate its illegal
activities and violations of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon; and we call on the Security
Council to assume its responsibility towards ending
that longstanding conflict.

A/59/PV.64

We would also like to reaffirm General Assembly
resolution 58/22 entitled, “Jerusalem”, which calls
upon the international community to exert pressure on
Israel to end its occupation of the Arab territories
occupied by it since 1967, including Jerusalem.
In addition, Security Council resolution 478
(1980) did not recognize the enactment by Israel of the
“basic law” on Jerusalem and affirmed that Israel’s
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration on Al-Quds Al-Sharif was illegal and
consequently null and void.
Having said that, it is reassuring that during this
period, the Security Council has continued to regard
the situation in the Middle East as one of the most
important items on its agenda, devoting a variety of
briefings to the subject, as well as holding five open
meetings and regular informal consultations. It is also a
matter of record that the Council has adopted two
resolutions on the issue. In resolution 1515 (2003) of
19 November 2003, the Council endorsed the road map
and called on the parties to fulfil their obligations
under it. Similarly, on 19 May 2004, the Council
adopted resolution 1544 (2004), in which it called on
Israel to respect its obligations under international
humanitarian law.
While that is reassuring, we feel that there is need
for the Council to do more than adopt resolutions and
then watch them being flouted. Resolutions adopted by
that body under its mandate to maintain international
peace and security are not worth the paper upon which
they are printed unless they are implemented. It is the
responsibility of the Council to ensure that those
resolutions are implemented. It is impossible to
imagine peace in the Middle East without a just
solution to the Palestinian issue, just as it is impossible
to imagine any progress on the road to peace without
full implementation of the relevant resolutions.
Turning to Iraq, my delegation would like to
stress the importance of halting the violence and
addressing the lack of security as a matter of priority.
The importance of those tasks cannot be
overemphasized — particularly with the approach of
the elections scheduled for January 2005 and the need
to create conditions conducive to holding them. With
regard to that process, Indonesia calls on the
international community to recognize and respect the
Iraqi people’s right to independence and territorial
integrity. The holding of free, fair and orderly elections

is of the utmost importance to the future of that great
country.
Peace in the Middle East is within reach.
However, Indonesia believes that a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East cannot be
achieved without a just and comprehensive settlement
of the issue of Palestine, which is the key to peace in
the area. In that regard, there is no need for a new
peace plan, but rather there is need of the opportunity
to implement the existing one — the road map. The
objective of the road map, which is to have two
independent States living side by side within
internationally recognized borders, is valid and
achievable. We call on all the parties to approach the
achieving of that objective with a sense of realism;
otherwise, the concept of peace in the Middle East will
remain only a concept.
Before I conclude, permit me also to take this
opportunity to call upon the international community to
support the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
by helping to eliminate the obstacles to its work.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): The General Assembly will very shortly be
concluding its debate on the situation in the Middle
East, at the heart of which lies the question of
Palestine. In taking the floor in that debate, my
delegation first of all would like to associate itself with
the unanimous tribute that was paid a few weeks ago to
the memory of the President of the Palestinian
Authority. Yasser Arafat for four decades symbolized,
embodied and bore the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people.
My delegation would like to note and welcome
the level-headedness and moderation demonstrated by
the speakers who have taken the floor during this
debate. That is a sign of our times. We would like to
see in that an expression of the will of the parties and
the international community to create conditions for a
peaceful settlement of the situation in the Middle East.
Cameroon would like to recall that a peaceful
settlement is predicated upon a dual recognition: the
recognition of the right of Israel to exist within safe
and internationally recognized borders and the
recognition of the right of the Palestinians to the
creation of an independent and sovereign State side by
side with the State of Israel.

3

A/59/PV.64

That right was reaffirmed the day before
yesterday during commemoration of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People — a day
organized by the Committee for the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which is
happily being chaired by my friend and colleague,
Ambassador Paul Badji, from Senegal. It is my
pleasure to hail and to praise the skill and dedication
with which he has been discharging his most
responsible and sensitive mission.
My delegation, finally, would like to thank all of
those who have been toiling patiently and doggedly to
restore peace to Palestine, the land of peace. Our
thoughts are particularly with those who, through their
words and deeds, are helping to create a culture of
peace among and around the Israelis and Palestinians.
Despite the numerous setbacks which, up until now,
have studded the road leading to peace and despite that
violence and injustice for which the Middle East seems
to be a magnet, the international community must
continue to affirm forcefully that peace is possible in
the Middle East. Everything here depends on the
Israelis and the Palestinians, and everything depends
on their leaders.
Cameroon reiterates today, as it has always said,
that peace cannot be taken for granted. Peace is created
and is built, first and foremost in the hearts of men and
in their relationships to each other. Creating peace
means working together to build a society of justice
and fraternity.
Peace is possible in the Middle East if the
inhabitants of Palestine, that is the Israelis and the
Palestinians, take a decision to be the creators, the
crafters and the builders of that peace. How could
things be otherwise for two brotherly peoples
condemned by the very ethical logic of brotherhood to
live together according to the theory of positive
differences. Why cannot the inhabitants of Palestine,
why cannot Israelis and Palestinians create that peace
and be its craftsmen? Why can they not reflect in deeds
that peace to which they are so deeply devoted, that
peace that they designate using the same phonemes,
“shalom” and “salaam”, which for them has the
meaning of harmony? Harmony with self and with
others, and harmony with nature. “Shalom/salaam”
also has the meaning of absolute happiness, of
fulfilment, of harmony in a brotherly existence and
mutual confidence.

4

Peace is possible if Israelis and Palestinians
decide, as faithful adherents to that doublet,
“shalom/salaam”, to live together and to build their
future together. To do so, they must on the one hand,
learn again to trust each other in mutual recognition
and acceptance, and on the other hand to be committed
to a patient and constructive dialogue.
Peace is possible if leaders show even more
courage and a farsighted sense of history, if, to cite
Francois Mauriac,
“they decide to be of that race of statesmen who
can analyse a given political situation and act on
it, without losing sight of the broad guidelines
required, and without failing to meet any of the
demands imposed by the honour of the country or
its security;”
and I would add, in this case, by its birth and its
survival. It is with such leaders that the peoples of the
Middle East will break the shackles of the past, will
cast off their anchors, will unfurl the sails of their
destiny to open themselves to the winds of peace and
chart a course towards the future.
As Pope John Paul II hoped to see, courageous
men are needed who can agree to look at each other
and to listen to each other. Only such people will be
able to find the appropriate instruments to build
societies in which each person is indispensable to all
others and which diversity is recognized as a boon.
Peace is not written in letters of blood, but rather
with intelligence and with the heart. The various
resolutions which have been voted on the Middle East
and the various peace plans drawn up have perhaps not
fully borne fruit because precisely what was missing
was that spiritual element, those elements which are
essential for a culture and position of peace, as is so
properly summed up by the encyclical message of Pope
John Paul II for the celebration of the World Day for
Peace:
“In the end, peace is not essentially about
structures but about people. Certain structure and
mechanisms of peace — juridical, political,
economic — are of course necessary and do exist,
but they have been derived from nothing other
than the accumulated wisdom and experience of
innumerable gestures of peace made by men and
women throughout history who have kept hope
and have not given in to discouragement.

A/59/PV.64

Gestures of peace spring from the lives of people
who foster peace first of all in their own hearts.
They are the work of the heart and of reason in
those who are peacemakers.”
Let us all be peacemakers, by promoting a
consensus in the Middle East, by creating around the
Israelis and the Palestinians a genuine culture of peace.
Otherwise, differences will continue and the roads
towards peace will remain long and arduous. That, in
any, case, is the firm conviction of Cameroon and that
is the origin of its positions on the various resolutions
on the Middle East.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): On behalf of the
Government and the people of South Africa, we wish
to express our deep sorrow and heartfelt sympathy to
the people of Palestine on the recent passing of
Mr. Yasser Arafat, the late President of the Palestinian
Authority and the Chairman of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization. We also wish to convey our
condolences to his wife and daughter during this time
of grief.
Allow me to repeat a message expressed by
President Thabo Mbeki on the passing away of
President Arafat. He said:
“A great son of Palestine will be laid to rest in
Ramallah, a titan of the Palestinian struggle for
self-determination is no more. A giant tree has
fallen. His life almost seems like a biography of
the people of Palestine, covering five and a half
decades of hope, despair and perseverance. To the
Palestinian people he was a beacon of hope in
their long struggle for self-determination and
independence”.
Even during this time of mourning, the
Palestinian people have experienced many deaths as a
result of the indiscriminate and excessive use of force
by Israel, the occupying Power. The destruction of
property, economic strangulation and increasing levels
of unemployment have become divisive. All these are
contrary to Israel’s obligations under international
human rights law, as well as international humanitarian
law.
We therefore call on the international community
to prevail upon Israel to respect its obligations. We
have a collective duty to stop all the atrocities and the
abhorrent policies and practices being committed
against the people of Palestine.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on agenda item 36, entitled “The
situation in the Middle East” (A/59/431), issued
pursuant to resolutions 58/22 and 58/23 of 3 December
2003.
This year is yet another in which our
Organization takes on one of the most important and
long outstanding issue on its agenda. Sadly, though, we
have witnessed the unfortunate course of events in the
Security Council in which the Council failed three
consecutive times to adopt resolutions on important
issues regarding Palestinian territory.
We wish equally to reaffirm the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations with regard to the
question of Palestine until it is resolved in all its
aspects. We believe that a peaceful settlement is within
reach through the implementation of existing
agreements between the Israeli and Palestinian sides,
including the efforts of the Quartet, aimed at
establishing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
We also welcome the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by
the Arab States in Beirut in March 2002. In that regard,
we also wish to underscore the importance of
establishing a credible and effective third-party
monitoring mechanism that would include the
participation of all members of the Quartet.
General Assembly resolutions on the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine have
traditionally reaffirmed the rules and principles of
international law that are central to the peaceful
settlement of the longstanding question of Palestine. It
is, therefore, incumbent upon all parties to revive the
Middle East peace process. They must demonstrate the
necessary courage and leadership to break through the
present deadlock, to put an end to the hostilities and to
re-engage in a serious political process, as set out in
the road map. We further support agreement on a twoState solution and the principle of land for peace, as
well as the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), and Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of
20 July 2004.
The international community has a collective role
to play in finding a lasting and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian question. We must all work together
towards the attainment of that goal. Let us work in
unison to fulfil the long-desired goal of the Palestinian
people for peace, independence and statehood.

5

A/59/PV.64

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 36. I would like
to remind members that action on draft resolutions
A/59/L.39, as orally corrected, and A/59/L.40 will be
taken after action on the draft resolutions under agenda
item 37, “Question of Palestine”.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/59/L.34, A/59/L.35,
A/59/L.36 and A/59/L.37)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on this item at
its 61st and 62nd plenary meetings, on 29 and
30 November 2004.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Paul Badji of
Senegal to introduce an amendment to draft resolution
A/59/L.34.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the sponsors, I would like to propose a small
correction to the draft resolution on the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/59/L.34).
In the sixth preambular paragraph, the words
(spoke in English)
“in this regard” should be replaced by the words “also
its”.
(spoke in French)
The paragraph should thus read as follows.
(spoke in English)
“Recalling further the Advisory Opinion
rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International
Court of Justice on the Legal Consequences of the
Construction of a Wall in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, and recalling also its
resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,”.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider and take decisions on draft resolutions
A/59/L.34, as orally corrected, L.35, L.36 and L.37.
We turn first to draft resolution A/59/L.34,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable

6

Rights of the Palestinian People”, as orally corrected.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kenya,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian

A/59/PV.64

Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tonga, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/59/L.34, as orally corrected,
was adopted by 104 votes to 7, with 63
abstentions (resolution 59/28).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/59/L.35, entitled “Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Grenada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/59/L.35 was adopted by 103
votes to 8, with 64 abstentions (resolution 59/29).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/59/L.36, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,

7

A/59/PV.64

Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Grenada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Haiti, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Uganda,
Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/59/L.36 was adopted by 162
votes to 7, with 9 abstentions (resolution 59/30).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/59/L.37, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central

8

African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Grenada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Haiti, Honduras, Nauru, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Uganda, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/59/L.37 was adopted by 161
votes to 7, with 10 abstentions (resolution 59/31).

A/59/PV.64

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolutions just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Ms. Núñez de Odremán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation wishes
to explain its vote in favour of draft resolution
A/59/L.37, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine”. The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in favour of
the resolution because we believe that the right to selfdetermination is an inalienable right of all peoples.
Therefore, the Palestinian people, whose territory is
occupied by Israel, is exercising its right by seeking to
build its own State. Not to permit that would constitute
a violation of international law and of the Charter of
the United Nations and a clear threat to international
peace and security.
Along those lines, however, agreeing with the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legal consequences of the construction of a wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory, we want to make
clear that we reject any interpretation that would
consider the International Court of Justice as a body
for the settlement of disputes among States in a
specific case without their consent.
Mr. Berry (Canada): Canada voted against draft
resolution A/59/L.34 because of serious reservations
we have about the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Canada has consistently supported the rights of
the Palestinian people — including the right to selfdetermination and to a Palestinian State — and we will
continue to do so until those rights are realized through
a negotiated process. However, as we said in our
statement yesterday in this Hall, Canada strongly
questions the added value of the work of the
Committee in the pursuit of that ultimate goal. We
believe that the time has come for the General
Assembly to assess the effectiveness of that particular
body and to consider reassigning resources to the
implementation of activities more strategic with regard
to the protection and promotion of Palestinian rights
and to the achievement of a peaceful settlement.
Canada has the same concerns about the Division
for Palestinian Rights, which supports the Committee,

although we abstained again this year in the voting on
draft resolution A/59/L.35. We will continue to view
this resolution from the perspective of consistency with
our policy, and we will seriously consider voting
against a similar draft resolution next year unless it can
be demonstrated that the work of the Division makes a
constructive contribution to the peace process.
With regard to draft resolution A/59/L.37,
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”,
Canada voted in favour, because we welcome fair and
action-oriented language reaffirming the obligations of
both parties, such as that in operative paragraph 4.
The resolution on the peaceful settlement of
conflict, which could be the most important resolution
on the Middle East conflict adopted by the General
Assembly, should apply fair criticism to and encourage
positive action from both parties in a constructive and
effective way, consistent with the obligations under the
road map. Canada would have welcomed more
references to the obligations and responsibilities of the
Palestinian Authority. For the record, we would also
like to reiterate our previously stated reservations
concerning the non-binding status of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 37.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions A/59/L.39 and A/59/L.40
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/59/L.39, as orally
corrected, and draft resolution A/59/L.40.
We turn first to draft resolution A/59/L.39,
entitled “Jerusalem”, as orally corrected. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,

9

A/59/PV.64

Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Costa Rica, Grenada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Cameroon, El Salvador, Fiji, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Kenya, Nauru, Nicaragua, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Vanuatu.

10

Draft resolution A/59/L.39, as orally corrected,
was adopted by 155 votes to 7, with 15
abstentions (resolution 59/32).
The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/59/L.40 is entitled “The Syrian Golan”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana,
Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Grenada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,

A/59/PV.64

Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Kenya,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/59/L.40 was adopted by 111
votes to 6, with 60 abstentions (resolution 59/33).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolutions just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Berry (Canada): Canada supports the
negotiation of a peaceful solution to all aspects of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, including with regard to the
Golan Heights, which has been under Israeli
occupation since June 1967. We encourage the parties
not to miss any opportunity to resume negotiations.
However, we abstained on the vote on draft resolution
A/59/L.40, in part because it points blame at only one
of the parties. The resolution also puts the onus on only
one party — Israel — to resume negotiations, when the
reality is that confidence-building measures and
goodwill gestures are needed from both sides.
Moreover, in the interests of efficiency, Canada does
not support the introduction of this resolution year
after year, given that the Assembly adopts a broadly
supported resolution from the Fourth Committee on the
same issue every year.
Mr. Van Loosdrecht (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey
and Croatia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro, and the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Liechtenstein, members of the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this explanation of vote.
I would like to explain the vote of our countries
on the draft resolution on the Syrian Golan.

The EU is deeply concerned about the continued
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East. The
current spiral of violence must cease. There can be no
military solution to the Middle East conflict. A just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement of the situation
in the Middle East, including on the Syrian and
Lebanese tracks, must be based on Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) — which emphasizes the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
and the need to work for a just and lasting peace in
which every State in the region can live in security —
and subsequent Council resolutions 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the Madrid terms of
reference, in particular the principle of land for peace,
and the implementation of the road map and all
existing agreement between the parties. We will
continue to work relentlessly with the regional parties,
and within the Middle East Quartet, towards that goal.
The European Union also wishes to point out that
a final peace settlement will not be complete without
the Israel-Syria and Israel-Lebanon aspects being taken
into account. Negotiations should resume as soon as
possible with the aim of reaching an agreement.
It should be recalled that last week the European
Union voted in favour of the draft resolution on the
Syrian Golan under agenda item 76, which called on
Israel to desist from changing the demographic
composition of the occupied Syrian Golan and in
particular to desist from the establishment of
settlements.
We believe that the draft resolution on the Syrian
Golan under the agenda item under consideration today
contains geographical references which could
undermine the process of bilateral negotiations. For
that reason, as in previous years, the European Union
abstained in the voting on this draft resolution.
Finally, in the spirit of the rationalization of the
agenda of the General Assembly, the European Union
would prefer to have only one resolution with this issue
before this body.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to explain the votes of the delegations of
Argentina and of Brazil on draft resolution A/59/L.40
on the Syrian Golan, which was recently adopted by
the General Assembly.
Argentina and Brazil voted in favour of the draft
resolution because we believe that its essential aspect

11

A/59/PV.64

is linked to the illicit nature of the acquisition of
territory by force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
of the United Nations prohibits the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity of any State. That
is an imperative norm of international law.
I should like also to clarify the position of our
delegations with regard to operative paragraph 6 of the
draft resolution in question. Our vote does not prejudge
the content of that paragraph, in particular the
reference to the border of 4 June 1967.
Finally, I should like also to reiterate, on behalf
of the Governments of Argentina and of Brazil, a call
for the resumption of negotiations between Israel and
Syria, with a view to finding a definitive solution to the
situation in the Syrian Golan, in conformity with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and with the principle of land for peace.
Mr. Azor (Haiti) (spoke in French): As we said
last week in the Fourth Committee, the delegation of
Haiti remains dedicated to the sacrosanct principle of
the self-determination of peoples. Its renews its support
for the peace process in the Middle East.
The delegation of Haiti believes, however, that
recent political events in the region of the Middle East
have given rise to a new set of circumstances — one
that is likely to promote a new, dynamic process that
could relaunch the peace process in that region. That is
why my delegation abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I call on the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my honour to express our great appreciation to the
General Assembly and to its members — representing
the entire international community — for the adoption,
by an overwhelming majority, of these two important
resolutions on the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Middle East.
These resolutions deal with mechanisms for
action within the United Nations in connection with the
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
including Jerusalem, and of the Syrian Golan. These
questions are therefore of the greatest importance not
only for Palestine but also for the international
community as a whole.

12

We appreciate the political support and solidarity
of the members of the Assembly, in particular given the
difficult circumstances that the Palestinian people are
now facing.
Allow me to express our heartfelt gratitude to the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, and in particular to Ambassador
Paul Badji, Chairman of the Committee, as well as to
his colleagues, members of the Bureau. I would like
also to thank the sponsors of the draft resolutions, the
Arab Group and the Non-Aligned Movement, and all
of those delegations that voted in favour of them.
Here we would like to express particular gratitude
to those delegations that have newly voted in favour of
the draft resolutions, thereby joining the overwhelming
majority of the international community. That has led
to an improvement in the results of the voting.
I should like also to thank the political groups
that participated in the discussions and negotiations on
these texts, in particular the European Union. On the
other hand, we regret the fact that the sole negative
voice here was that of Canada, which changed its vote
from positive to negative — the sole changeover. With
all due respect to the political sovereignty of Canada,
we reject its explanation of vote, which we deemed
equivocal. That in no way changes the positive general
nature of the results we have achieved today.
We believe that the General Assembly today once
again has taken a stand based on clear principles. We
believe, first of all, that there must be respect for
international law and its norms; secondly, that the
United Nations must shoulder its permanent
responsibilities, namely vis-à-vis the question of
Palestine; and, thirdly, that efforts must be made to
build a clear international consensus and to achieve
unanimity regarding the settlement of the question of
Palestine and the establishment of peace in the region.
These are important principles, and we insist on respect
for them. For our part, we will be working towards that
end. We are certain that the members of the Assembly
will continue to take such a stand.
Once again, I express, on behalf of the
Palestinian people and the Palestinian leadership, our
great appreciation and gratitude to the General
Assembly.

A/59/PV.64

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 36.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before adjourning this
meeting, I should like to remind members that, in
addition to the items already scheduled for the
afternoon of Thursday, 2 December 2004, as
announced in today’s Journal, the General Assembly

will resume consideration of the following agenda
items to take action on draft resolutions: agenda item
12, “Report of the Economic and Social Council”, to
take action on draft resolution A/59/L.27/Rev.1; subitem (c) of agenda item 39, “Assistance to the
Palestinian people”, to take action on draft resolution
A/59/L.24; and agenda item 55, “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”, to take action on
draft resolution A/59/L.38.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

13
