TWENTY-FIRST

th MEETING:

YEAR
18 MAY 1966

he Si!?ANCE: 18 MAI 1966
VINGTIiME
ANNiE

NEW

YORK

TABLEOFCONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/lZbO).
Adoptionoftheagenda

,.,.,,,,

Page
1
..,..,,,.,.. ,.,,.,. .. .. ,.....,.., .....

.,..,.,,,..,.,

....... .... ...............

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963
addressed to the President of the Security Councilon behalf of the representatives of thirtytwo Member States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 10 May 1966 addressed to the President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Dahomey, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia,
Libya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, Upper
Volta and Zambia (S/7285 and Add.1 and 2). . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

TABLE
C&e

du jour provisoire

(S/Agenda/l280).

Adoptiondel’ordredujour..

. . . , , , ,..

DES

MATIkRES

....,,...,.,,................ .....
.,,

. , . ,. . . . .,.

, , . . . . . . . . . .,.

......

(Continued overleaf - suite au verso)

S/PV.1280

(27 p.)

TABLE

DES

MATIikRES

(suite)
Page

Question concernant la situation en Rhoddsie du Sud: lettres, en date des 2 et 30 aoQt
1963, adressges au Prgsident du Conseil de sbcurit$ au nom des reprksentants de 32 Etats
Membres (S/5382 et S/5409):
Letrre, en date du 10 mai 1966, adress&eau Prkident du Conseil de skuriti! par les reprbsentants de l’Alg&rie, du Burundi, du Cameroun, du Congo (Brazzaville), de la C&e d’Ivoire,
du Dahomey, de l’Ethiopie, du Gabon, du Ghana, de la Guinie, de la Haute-Volta, du Kenya,
du Libbria. de la Lihve. du Malawi, du Mali, du Maroc, de la Mauritanie, du Niger, du
Nigbria, d; l’ouganda, he la R&p&lique a&be unie, de la RBpublique dgmocraique du
Congo, du, Rwanda, du Sierra Leone, de la Somalie, du Soudan, de la RBpublique-Unie de
Tanzanie. du Tchad, du Togo, de la Tunisie et de la Zambie (S/7285 et Add.1 et 2). . . . . .

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mentlon of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in
quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Councilil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of
the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively
to
resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
*
*

*

Les totes des documents de IQrganisation
des Nations Unies se oomposent
de Iettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d’une tote dans un texte
signifie qu ‘il s lagit d k.n document de 1 ‘Organisation.
Les documents ciu Conseil de skurite
(totes S/. . .) sont, en rbgle gt%6rale,
publies dans des Supplt?ments trimestriels
aux Documents officiels du Conseil
de se’curit&.
La date d’un tel do,cument indique le suppl6ment dans lequel on
trouvera soit le texte en question, soit des indications le concernant.
Les resolutions du Conseil de skurit6,
num6rotees selon un syst&me adopt6
en 1964, sont publiees, pour chaque annge, dans un recueil de R&solutions et
d6cisions du Conseil de s&urit&
Ce nouveau systeme, applique r&roactivement
aux r&olutions
ant&ieures
au ler janvier 1965, est entre pleinement en vigueur
& cette date.

TWELVE

HUNDRED

Held in New York,
MILLE

DEUX

on Wednesday,
CENT

Tenue a New York,
President:

AND EIGHTIETH

le mercredi

Present: The representatives
of the following States:
Argentina, Bulgaria, China, France, Japan, Jordan,
Mali, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Uganda,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of
Amesica and Uruguay.
agenda

18 May 1966, at 10.30 a.m.

QUATRE-VINGTIl&lE

Mr. J. G. DE BEUS (Netherlands).

Provisional

MEETING

(S/Agenda/l280)

SiANCE

18 mai 1966, a 10 h 30.
Pr&ident:

M. J. G. DE BEUS (Pays-Bas).

Prtkents: Les representants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Bulgarie, Chine, Etats-Uhis d’Am&ique,
France, Japon, Jordanie, Mali, Nigeria, NouvelleZBlande, Ouganda,Pays-Bas, Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et dYrlande du Nord, Union des Rgpubliques
socialistes sovi&iques et Uruguay.
Ordre

du jour provisoire

(S/‘Agenda/l280)

1. Adoption of the agenda

1. Adoption de l’ordre du jour.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963
addressed to the President of the Security Council
on behalf of the representatives of thirty-two
Member States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 10 May 1966 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad,
Congo (Rrazzaville), Dahomey, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia, Libya,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocoo,
Niger,
Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan,
United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Repu.blic, Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/7285 and Add.1 and 2).

2. Question concernant la situation en Rhod&ie
du Sud: lettres, en date des 2 et 30 aoat 1963,
adressees au President du Conseil de skurite
au nom des repr&entants de 32 Etats Membres
(S/5382 et S/5409):
Lettre, en date du 10 mai 1966, adressee
au
Prgsident du Cons.eil de s&u&.8 par les rep?%sentants de llAlg&ie, du Burundi, du Cameroun,
du Congo (Brazzaville), de la Gate d’Ivoire, du
Dahomey, de l’Ethiopie, du Gabon, du Ghana,
de la Guinke, de la Haute-Volta, du Kenya, du
Libgria, de la Libye, du Malawi, du Mali, du
Maroc, de la Mauritanie, du Niger, du Niggria,
de l’ouganda, de la RBpublique arabe unie, de la
RGpublique democratique du Congo, du Rwanda,
du Sierra Leone, de la Somalie, du Soudan, de la
RBpublique-Unie de Tanzanie, du Tchad, du Togo,
de la Tunisie et de la Zambie (S/7285 et Add.1
et 2).

Adoption

of the agenda

The agendawas adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed
to the
President
of the Security
Council
on behalf of the
representatives
of thirty-two
Member States (S/5382
and S/5409):
Letter dated 10 May 1966 addressed
to the President
of the Security
Council
from the representatives
of Algeria,
Burundi,
Cameroon,
Chad, Conga
(Brozzaville),
Dahomey,
Democratic
Republic
of
the Congo, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghhna, Guinea, Ivory
Coast,
Kenya,
Liberia,
Libya,
Malawi,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Morocco,
Niger,
Nigeria,
Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda,
United Arab

Adoption

de l’ordre

du jour

L ‘ordre du jour est adopt&
Question
concernant
la situation
en RhodQsie du Sud:
lettres,
en date des 2 et 30 aodt 1963, adresshes
au Prksident
du Conseil
de &curit&
au nom des
reprkentants
de 32 Etats Membres
(S/5382
et
S/5409):
Lettre,
en date du 10 mai 1966, adressee
au PrBsident
du Conseil
de skuritk
par les rep&
sentants de l’Alg&ie,
du Burundi,
du Cameroun,
du Congo (Brazzaville),
de la C&e d’lvoire,
du
du Gabon, du Ghana, de
Dahomey,
de I’Ethiopie,
la GuinLe, de la Haute-Volta,
du Kenya, du LibCria,
de la Libye, du Malawi,
du Mali,
dw Maroc,
de
la Mauritanie,
dw Niger, du NigQria,
de I’Duganda,
de la Ripwblique
atabe
wnie, de la Rbpublique

Republic,
Upper
Add.1 and 2).

Volta

and

Zambia

(s/7285

ddmocratique
du Congo,
du Rwanda, du Sierra
Leone, de la Somalie, du Soudan,de la Rkpublique.
Unie de Tanzanie,
du Tchad,du
Togo,de la Tunisie
et de la Zambie (S/7285 et Add;1 et 2)

and

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1278th’ meeting, I now invite the representatives of India, Pakistan, Senegal,Zambia, Algeria
and Sierra Leone to take the seats reserved for them
in front of the Council table and to participate, without
the right to vote, in the discussion of the question
before the Council.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Conform&
ment 3 la dkcision prise B la 12’78Bmes&nce, j’invite
les representants de l’Inde, du Pakistan, du S&d@,
de la Zambie, de l’hlggrie et du Sierra Leone8
prendre place 8. la table du Conseil pour participer,
sans droit de vote, 2 l’examen de la question inscrite
& l’ordre du jour du Conseil.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Parthasarathi (India), Mr. Amjad Ali (Pakistan), Mr. C.
Eelgado (Senegal), Mr. S. M. Kapwepwe (Zambia) and
Mr. A. R&xl (Algeria) took places at the Council
table.

Sur l’invitation du Pr&ident, M. G. Parthasarathi
(Inde), M. Amjad Al1 (Pakistan), M. C. Delgado(S&x5gal), M. S. M. Kapwepwe (Zambie} et M. A. Rahal
{Algdrie) prennent place ti la table du Conseil.

2. The PRESIDENT: Before I Call upon the first
speaker on my list, I call upon the representative of
Nigeria who wishes to raise a question.

2. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Avant de
donner la parole au premier orateur inscrit, je la
donne au representant du Nigeria qui voudrait poser
une question.

3. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): Mr. President, I am
grateful to you for giving me the floor. I apologize to
my colleagues for intervening again at this stage. But
I have just read in a newspaper publishedin New York
a reference to a communication which has been
addressed to the Secretary-General from a source in
Southern Rhodesia. It is stated in that newspaper that
the Secretary-General has taken up a certain attitude.
I think that in the circumstances it would be useful if,
subject to the concurrence of yourself andmy other
colleagues, the Secretary-General wouldmakea statement should he feel in a position to do so.

3. M. ADEBO (Nigeria) [ traduit de l’anglais]: devous
remercie, Monsieur le PrBsident, de me donner la
parole et je prie mes coll&ues de m’excuser d’intervenir a nouveau a ce stade. Je viens, en effet, de lire
dans un quotidien new-yorkais un article mentionnant
une communication que le Secretaire g&&al aurait
regue de Rhoddsie du Sud. Cet article indique que le
Secretaire g&&al a adopt6 une certaine position, Etanl
don& les circonstances, avec votre assentiment et
celui des membres du Conseil, il serait peut-&tre
utile que le Secrgtaire g&&al fasse une d&claratlon,
si toutefois il estime devoir en faire une,

4. The PRESIDENT: I understand that there have
indeed been some communications from the side of
the Smith rggime. Since those communications were
addressed to the Secretary-General the SecretaryGeneral has handled them, and I should like to call on
him now, if he agrees, to say something about this
to us.

4. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Je crois
savoir que le regime Smith a fait parvenir certaines
communications, et comme elles ktaient adressees
au Secretaire g&n&al, celui-ci s’en est occupe et je
lui donne done la parole en lui demandant de nous
fournir, s’il veut bien, quelques prkcisions & ce sujet.

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I thank the representative of Nigeria for having raised this question.

5. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (traduit del’anglais):
Je remercie le representant du Nigeria d’avoir SOUleve cette question.

6. Yesterday I made available to the Council copies of
telegrams from Salisbury received from Mr. Lardner
Burke who calls himself Minister of Justice. He
invoked Article 32 of the United Nations Charter and
requested an invitation to participate in the Security
Council debates concerning Rhodesia, Members of
the Council are aware that Article 32 cf the Charter
says:

6. J’ai fait mettre hier a la disposition desmembres
du Conseil le texte de t&Bgrammes de Salisbury,
Bmanant de M. Lardner Burke qui se dit Ministre de
la justice. 11 invoque 1’Article 32 de la Cbarte des
Nations Unies et demands 8. &re invite??i partiC@r
aux d&bats du Conseil de s8curit8 sur la Rhodgsie.
Les membres du Conseil savent que l’brticle 32 de
la Chaste stipule que:

“Any Member of the United Nations which is not
a member of the Security Council or any state which
is not a Member of the UnitedNations, if it is a party
to a dispute under consideration by the Security
Council, shall be invited to participate, withoutvote,
in the discussion relating to the dispute.”

“Tout Membre des Nations Unies qui n’est Pas
membre du Conseil de s8curit8 ou tout Etat qui
n’est pas Membre des Nations Unies, s’il est Partie
& un differend examine par le Conseil de securlt6,
est convie a participer, sans droit de vote, aux discussions relatives a ce diffgrend.”

7. Members of the Council are also aware that the
legal status of Southern Rhodesiais that of a Non-SelfGoverning Territory
under resolution 1747 of the
sixteenth SeSSiOn
of the General Assembly,
and
Article
32 of the Charter does not apply.
In the
CirCUIYLStanCeS,
it is for the Council to decide what

7. Les membres du Conseil savent Bgalement que le
statut juridique de la Rhodes& du Sud SSt celui de
territoire non autonome aux termes de la ri%oluticn
1747 (XVI) de l’Assembl8e g&&ale et quel’Articl@ 32
de la Charte n’est pas applicable en l’occurrence*
11 appartient done au Conseil de &curit& de decider
2

-

consideration,
if any, it wishes to give to these
telegrams.
It is for that reason that I made available
-to the members of the Council copies of the telegrams
I received from Salisbury,

quelle suite il entend donner Eices t818grammes; c’est
pourquoi jrai mis B la disposition des membres
du
Conseil le texte des tel~grammes que jcai requs de
Salisbury,

8. I need hardly recall to the Council that in several
resolutions
on the subject the Council has labelled
the regime in Southern Rhodesia as illegal. For this
reason, and in line with the policy of the Secretariat
not to enter into correspondence
with illegal regimes,
I decided not to reply to the various telegrams from
Salisbury,

8. I1 n’est gu&re besoin de rappeler au Conseil que
dans plusieurs r&solutions relatives 8. cette question,
il a qualifie d’ill8gal le regime de Rhod&ie du Sud.
Pour cette raison et conformement au principe selon
lequel le Secr&ariat
n’entretient pas de correspondance avec des r&@mes illggaux, j’ai decide de ne
pas repondre aux divers teli5grammes provenant
de
Salisbury.

9. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
heard the statement of the Secretary-General.
Unless
any representative
wishes to speak on the subject, I
thihk that the statement of the Secretary-General
both covers and settles it. I believe that we can now
continue our debate on the item on the agenda.

9. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : Les membres
du Conseil viennent d’entendre la dgclaration
du
Secr&aire
g&&al.
Si aucun representant
ne d&sire
prendre
la parole sur ce point, je pense que C&e
declaration
r&gle la question et que nous pouvons
maintenant poursuivre
l’examen de la question inscrite
11l’ordre du jour.

10. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I may have an
opportunity later to reply to questions of detail raised
in this debate, but I think that it would be useful if I
made a statement now, a positive statement of the
policy which we have pursued and the action so far
taken to give effect to it. I shall do so in the hope that
such a statement will assist the Council in assessing
the present position and in considering how our aims
can best be achieved,

10. Lord CARADON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de l’anglais]: Peut-etre
aurai-je plus tard l’occasion
de
repondre aux points de d&ail qui ont BtB soulevds
au tours du dbbat, mais je pense qu’il serait utile
que je fasse maintenant une declaration definissant
la
politique que nous avons suivie et les mesures
que
nous avons adopt&es jusqu’ici pour l’appliquer.
J’esp&e que ma declaration aidera le Conseil ?i Bvaluer
la situation actuelle et 3 examiner
les meilleurs
moyens d’atteindre nos objectifs.

11. When this question was discussed in the Council
early in April, we were dealing with one immediate
and urgent issue, the danger that the sanctions
imposed against Rhodesia would be breached by a
succession of cargoes of crude oil shipped to Beira
for pumping to the Rhodesian refinery at Umtali. A
very elaborate and very expensive operation designed
to defeat the oil embargo had been worked out. Had
it succeeded, Rhodesia would have re-established
its
full and normal supply of oil; the oil embargo would
have been at an end; the policy of sanctions would
have been severely frustrated,
to say the least; new
confidence would have been pumped into the illegel
regime in Rhodesia;
resistance
would have been
greatly encouraged and strengthened.

11. Lorsque la question a BtB discutee au Conseil de
securite au debut du mois d’avril, nous &ions directement aux prises avec un problame urgent, le danger
de voir les sanctions imposees B la Rhodesie du Sud
mises en echec par des arrivBes
successives
de
cargaisons
de p&role brut expediees 3, Beira, pour
alimenter
la raffinerie
rhodesienne
dWmtali.
Une
operation t&s complexe et tr& coMeuse, visant B
tourner l’embargo sur le p&role, avait BtB mise au
point, Si elle avait r&ssi, la Rhodesie aurait entibrement r6tabli son approvisionnement normal enphtrole;
llembargo aurait tSte vide de sens et lapolitique
de
sanctions
aurait Bte, pour le moins, s&ieusement
compromise, pour ne pas dire plus. Le regime ill&gal
de Rhodesie aurait bgngficie d’un regain de confiance
et la r&istance
s’en serait trouvi5e fortement encouragge et renforci5e.

12. Looking back to our debate on 9 April [1276th
and 127’7th meetings] and to the resolution 221 (1966)
adopted that evening, I very much doubt if it will be
disputed that the limited hut decisive action which we
took that day, necessarily
at speed and only just in
time, was opportune and essential and fully justified.
It was the right action at the right time. Had we
hesitated and delayed and consequently
failed, the
Purposes
which we all support would have been
rendered far more difficult to achieve. It was a
decisive step which we took on 9 April. It was a
decisive step in the campaign of sanctions on which
We first embarked on the day of the illegal declaration
of independence. By taking that decisive step we gave
Plain warning in very practical and vigorous terms to
the regime in Salisbury, and to others too, that we
meant what we said, that we would continue to take

12. Me reportant
& nos dBbats du 9 avril [1276&me
et 12778me seances] et a la &solution
221 (1966)
adoptee ce jour-13, je doute fort que l’on puisse contester que lea mesures restreintes, mais di5cisives.
que nous avons prises alors, evidemment en toute
h&e et tout juste a temps, n'aient 6t6 opportunes,
indispensables et enti??rementjustifiees. Nous avons
fail ce qulil fallait au bon moment, Si nous avions
h8sit8, si nous avions tarde, et, partant, BchouB, les
objectifs que nous appuyons tous auraient 6tg infiniment plus difficiles 2 atteindre. C’est un pas decisif
que nous avons fait le 9 avril da% la campagne de
sanctions que nous menonsdepuis le jour de la proclamation illegale de l’indgpendance. En prenant cette
mesure decisive, nous avons, en termes t&s 8nergiques et t&s concrets, lance un avertissement parfaitement clair au regime de Salisbury et B d’autres
3

was fully

aussi pour leur faire comprendre que nous pensions
ce que nous disions et que nous continuerions de
prendre l’initiative jusqu’a ce que nos objectifs soieaa
pleinement atteints.

13. The ‘importance
of what we did.has been widely
recognized far beyond this Council. It was not only a
decisive action in the Rhodesian sanctions campaign;
it was an unprecedented action in the history of the
United Nations. Never before in the twenty years of
the existence of the United Nations had the United
Nations taken such action. It was moreover of fundamental importance that when that historic decision was
taken it was not an empty threat or a vain gesture.
It was essential that the decision which we took was
capable of being put into immediate effect, Immediate
and successful action was in fact taken,

13. L’importance
de cette mesure a 6t& largemat
reconnue bien au-delh du Conseil. 11 ne s’agissalt nm
pas seulement d’une mesure decisive dans la campagna
de sanctions me&e oontre la Rhodesie du Sud, maIs
aussi d’un fait sans p&&dent
dans l’histoire des
Nations Unies. Au tours de ses 20 ans d’existeaoe,
l’organisation
des Nations unies n’avait encore jam&
pris semblable d&ision. I1 &ait en outre d’une importance fondamentale qu’une fois cette d&ision historlque
prise, elle ne reste pas une menace creuse ou w
geste gratuit. 11 Btait indispensable que cette d6cialon
soit aussitot mise en application. Des mesures inn&diates et efficaces ont effectivement Btk prises.

14. I know that there are some who sought to make
little or make light of the actiontakenby
this Council,
but I am confident that when they later look back of
these events they will agree that what we did was
both essential and of the highest importance. Certainly,
the importance of what we did was not lost on the
outside world, Let me quote from a source which has
a worldwide reputation for impartial judgement. This
is what the Christian
Science Monitor wrote a few
days after we made our decision on 9 April:

14. Je sais que certains ont cherche a minimiser
la decision du Conseil et en ont fait peu de cas, map
je suis oonvaincu que lorsqu’ils
reflechiront
plus
tard B ces ev&ements,
ils reconnaltront que ce q~?
nous avons fait &ait alafois indispensable et extr&nu+
ment important. 11 est certain que l’importance de M
que nous avons fait n’a pas dchappe au monde extCrieur. Permettez-moi
de titer une source qui a une
reputation mondiale d’impartialitg
dans son jugemen:,
Voici ce que le Christian
Science Monitor Bcrivain
peu de jours apres notre decision du 9 avril:

“This deed is important, The implications are even
more so; for Britain’s
turnback of the oil tanker
Manuela is an amazingly bold and resolute step to
have been taken in peacetime. This act introduces a
new chapter both in the life of the United Nations,
under whose resolution
Britain acted, and in the
field of the international
maintenance of law, order
and justice. It is an act full of significance, not
only for the effort to bring the Smith regime in
Rhodesia to heel, but also for the role which the world
is prepared to see the United Nations play in international disputes. I’

“Get acte est important;
ses incidences le scax1
plus encore, car, en d&ournant le petrolier Manuals,
le Royaume-Uni
a pris, en temps de paix, u13e
mesure particuliarement
audacieuse et Bnergique.
Cet acte ouvre un nouveau chapitre aussi bien dans
l’histoire de l’organisation
des Nations Unies, quia
adopt6 une r&solution
autorisant le Royaume-Cut
?t agir, que dans le domaine du maintien de 1’0r~ke
et de la justice dans le monde. Cet acte est Lr8!~
significatif, non seulement pour l’effort visant &
reduire 2 merci le &gime Smith en Rhod&is dti
Sud, mais aussi pour le role que le monde est dispos& 2 voir les Nations Unies jouer dans leS diilfb
rends internationaux.”

15. With that comment on the action which we took,
let me now go back to remind the Council of the
policy towards Rhodesia which my Government has
taken since it took office in October 1964. I want to
establish conclusively
that our policy has throughout
been clear and consistent.
I shall defend that policy
and, although therefore
I cannot accept much of what
was said yesterday by the representative
of Nigeria
[1279th meeting], that does not, of course, detract in
any way from my admiration for the eloquence and the
conviction
and the force of his very remarkable
speech. Let me assure him that our policy has not
been dictated by expediency; nor has it been affected
by the size of a parliamentary
majority. Thepurposes
which we set from the start will be maintained, the
pledges which we gave will be honoured, the decision
to endeavour to achieve our aim without bloodshedto avoid if we can a conflict
with incalculable
consequences-was
not dictated by weakness,
but by
conviction,

15. Apr.& oe commentaire sur la mesure qu@nw+‘s
avons prise, je voudrais rappeler au Conseil qtleg!@
a BtB la politique suivie a 1’Bgard de la Rhodesle &a
Sud par mon gouvernement depuis qu’il a acckd@!er:
pouvoir en octobre 1964. J’entends Btablir de fag@2
concluante que notre politique n’a cess6 d’8tre Claire
et coherente. Je vais defendre cette politique +a
encore que je ne puisse accepter une bonne partie
de ce qu’a dit hier le repri%entant dU %#pia
[ 1279Bme sgance], cela ne diminue bien entendu en
rien mon admiration pour l’&oquence, la oonvi’%+%%
et la fermete de son remarquable discours, Je Heras
& lui donner l’assurance que notre politique n’oaf
pas dicteepar des raisons d’opportunismeni influe&%?
par l’importance d’une majorit parlementaire. l&%
objectifs que nous nous &ions fixes au dhpart seXtR!
maintenus, les engagements que nous avions Fio
seront honor&, la decision d’atteindre notre but
sans effusion de sang, d%viter, si nous le Pouvon$~
un conflit dont les consdquences seraient incaielnlables, n’a pas BtB inspiree par la faiblesse’ mais
par nos convictions,

and pursue
attained.

the initiative

until

our object

16. It may be attractive to think that a little violence
can settle everything and that force is the answer,
but I shall ask you to consider
again whether the
course which we have already set and now follow is
not sound, and whether that course does not offer
an acceptable alternative to conflict. And specially I
shall ask you at least to accept the principle that
before calling for a conflict it is nearly always right
to explore every possibility
of negotiation.

16. L’idBe qu’un peu de violence pourrait tout &gler
et que la force est la reponse au prohlBme peut etre
seduisante, mais je vous prie de vous demander une
fois de @US si la ligne de conduite que nous nous
~OmmeS fixes et que nous suivons n’est pas judicieuse
et Si elle n’est pas prgff8rable & un conflit. Surtout je
VOW
demanderai d’accepter, & tout le moms, le prinCiPe selon lequel, avant de preconiser un conflit, il
est presque toujours indique de rechercher toutes les
possibilit&
de n8gociations.

17. Members
of the Council will remember
that
amongst the first acts of the Government formed in
the United Kingdom in October 1964 was to give a
very plain warning of the disastrous
consequences of
an illegal declaration of independence. That warning
was widely welcomed in the world. No one can say that
the consequences
of an illegal declaration
were not
made plain in advance.

17. Les membres du Conseil se souviendront que l’un
des premiers
actes du gouvernement constitud au
Royaume-Uni
en octobre 1964 a BtB de donner un
avertissement
t&s net sur les consdquences d&astP3W3S
qu’aurait une proclamation illegale d’independance. Get avertissement a &B bien accueilli dans le
monde. Nul ne peut dire que les consbquences dlune
proclamation illegale d’indgpendance n’ont pas &B bien
p&i&es
B l’avance.

18. Thereafter,
for more than a year every possible
effort was directed to persuading the Government in
Rhodesia to see the folly of illegal action and to
persuading that Government to pursue a path of constitutional advance, Again, I do not believe that anyone
will doubt that every conceivable
step was taken to
save Rhodesia-all
the people of Rhodesia-from
the
inevitable consequences
of an act of rebellion. We
gave a clear warning and, at the same time, a clear
and positive assurance, an assurance
that the British
Government would not grant independence except on
a .basis acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as a
whole, Hut at the same time, and right up to the end,
and in the light of that warning and in the light of
that assurance,
the British
Government
was always
ready to negotiate. No one can say that the British
Government
failed, by warning
and by assurance
and by negotiation,
to do everything
possible to
prevent the evil consequences
which the illegal
declaration has caused,

18. Apres cette date, pendant plus d’un an, tous les
efforts possibles ont &B tent& pour amener le Gouvernement de Rhodesie a se rendre compte de la
fatale lBg&ete de cet acte ill&gal et le convaincre de
suivre la voie du progr&s constitutionnel. Ici encore,
je crois que personne ne doutera que toutes les
mesures possibles n’aient 8te prises pour gpargner
?I la Rhod&ie - a la population tout entiere de la
Rhodesie du Sud - les con&quences in&itables d’un
acte de rebellion. Nous avons lance une mise en garde
t&s nette et en meme temps nous avons don& l’assu‘rance Claire et positive que le Gouvernement britannique n’accorderait
l’indgpendance que sur une base
acceptable 3 toute la population de la RhodBsie. Mais,
par ailleurs et jusqu’au bout, compte tenu de cet
avertissement
et de cette assurance, le Gouvernement
britannique a toujours &B p&t & negocier. Personne
ne peut dire que le Gouvernement britannique n’a pas
fait - soit en donnant des avertissements et des assurances, soit en ni+gociant - tout ce qui lui Btait possible de faire pour prbvenir les con&quences nefaSteS
de la proclamation illegale.

19. What then was our action when, in spite of
those persistent
and protracted
efforts,
the illegal
declaration was made on 11 November
19657 We
came at once to this Council,
As members will
remember, my Foreign Secretary, Mr. Michael Stewart
having called for an urgent meeting of the Council,
came immediately to New York and addressed this
COUnCil
on 12 November 1965 [1257th meeting], on
the day after the illegal declaration.
He reported
what had happened. He reaffirmed
the policy which
my Government had made plain, He stated the action
which my Government had decided to take. He called
on others to support and match our actions.

19. Comment avons-nous agi en effet lorsque,malgr6
nos efforts persistants et prolong6s, la proclamation
ill6gale a &B faite le 11 novembre 1965? NOW avons
imm&liatement
port6 la question devant le Conseil.
Comme vous vous en souvenez, le Secrktaire d’Etat
aux affaires Btrangeres de mon pays, M. Michael
Stewart,
apr&s avoir demand6 la convocation d’urgence du Conseil, s’est rendu immgdiatement & New
York et a pris la parole devant le Conseil le 12 novembre 1965 [1257&me skance], le lendemain r&me
de la proclamation illbgale; il a rendu compte de ce
la politique que
qui s%tait pas&; il a reaffirm6
mon gouvernemsnt
avait clairement dgfinie; il a
indiqu6 les mesures que mon gouvernement avait
d&i&$ de prendre et il a fait appel auX autres
membres du Conseil pour qu’ils les appuient et s’Y
associent.

20. So it was that on 20 November
the CoUnCil
adopted the resolution 21.7 (1965)1a resolution which
we welcomed and supported-calling
on all States to
“refrain
from any action which would assist and
encourage the illegal regime”
and calling on them
also “to do their utmost in order to break all economic

20, C’est ainsi que le 20 novembre le Con&l
a
adopt.6 la &solution
217 (1965) - que nouS avions
accueillle avec satisfaction et appuye - dans laquelle
il priait tous les Etats “de s’abstenir de toute action
qui aiderait et encouragerait le regime illegal” et
“de s’efforoer
de rompre toutes les relations Bcono5

relations with Southern Rhodesia,
on oil and petroleum products”.

including an embargo

miques avec la Rhod6sie du Sud, notamment enimposant un embargo SW le p&role et les Produits
p&rolicrs
“,

21. We immediately
set to work to give effect to the
Council’s
decision.
I need not refer in detail to the
far-reaching,
drastic and unprecedented action which
tie took in implementation
of the warning given in
the previous year. The first decisions were announced
by Mr. Michael Stewart here in this Council on the
day following the illegal declaration. Having ourselves
refused
to recognize
the illegal regime, we asked
that every State Member of the United Nations should
likewise
refuse
to recognize
it, We prohibited all
exports of arms to Rhodesia, We prohibited all exports
of United Kingdom capital to Rhodesia. We denied
Rhodesia
access to the London capital market, We
denied to Rhodesia the advantages of Commonwealth
preference.
And we announced a ban on the import
to the United Kingdom of Rhodesian tobacco and
sugar, thus cutting off purchases
amounting to over
$50 million,
which made up more than 70 per cent
of our total purchases
from Rhodesia, We followed
this up by imposing a banon all exports to and imports
from Rhodesia.

21. Nous nous sommes immediatement
employ& &
dormer effet ?L la decision du Conseil. Je n’aipas
besoin d’entrer
dans le d&ail des mesures rigoureuses, sans pr6cGdent et de vaste port&e quenous
avons prises afin de mettre & exBcution l’avertisssment lance l’ann6e pr6c6dente. Les premieres d&isions ont &6 annoncees au Conseil par M. Michael
Stewart, le lendemain meme de la proclamation ill&
gale. Nous &ant nous-lnemes
refuses ?I.reconna&e
le rEgime ilEgal, nous avons demand6 B tous Ies
Etats Membres de l’organisation
des Nations Unies
d’en faire de mame. NOUS avons interdit toutes les
exportations
d’armes
a destination de la RhodBsie.
Nous avons interdit toutes les exportations decapitaux
britanniques
vers la Rhodi%ie du Sud. Nous avons
refuse B la Rhodesie l’acc8s du march6 des capitaux
de Londres; nous lui avons refuse tous les avantages
du regime prGf6rentiel du Commonwealth et nous avons
annonce l’interdiction
d’importer
au Royaume-Uni le
tabac et le sucre de la Rhodesie du Sud, mettant ainsi
fin B des achats se montanl: a une somme de plus de
50 millions de dollars et repr6sentant plus de 70 Pa100
du total de nos achats en RhodBsie. NOW avons fait
suivre ces mesures d’une interdiction de toutes les
exportations
et importations
de Rhodi%ie du Sud,

22. These were costly measures
for us. They have
an adverse
effect through the loss of our export
market
in Rhodesia,
through the need to replace
imports
from
Rhodesia
from other sources,
and
through the loss of return from British investments
in Rhodesia. These add up to a very substantial total.
But that is by no means the extent of the effort which
my country has been prepared to make.

22. Ces mesures ont Bt6 o&reuses
pour nous; elles
nous ont imposi! des sacrifices puisqu’elles nousontfait
perdre notre march6 d’exportation
en Rhodesie du
Sud, qu’il nous a fallu chercher
d’autres sources
pour remplacer les importations
rhodesiennes et Que
nous avons perdu les dividendes des investissements
britanniques
en Rhod6sie; le total est consid6mble.
Cependant, cela ne donne nullement tOUte la mssUPe
de Ifeffort que mon pays s’est montr6 dispos6lfaire,

23. In accordance with our undertaking to the Council
last November, we at once examined all the problems
to which an oil embargo gave rise, and here, as the
Council knows, the needs of Zambia had to be taken
into full account. If we had imposed an immediate
Oil embargo,
the effect would have been that while
Rhodesia could draw on its reserves
Zambia would
at once have been cut off from oil on which it
is So dependent for its industry
and, indeed, for its
whole economy. It was essential,
therefore,
first to
Create new channels of supply of oil to Zambia by
air and road. The cost to my Government
of the
airlift
to Zambia of oil alone ran at nearly $3 million
a month and, in addition to that, my Government, as
well as providing
over a hundred experts
at our
expense to help in these problems
of supply, has
committed
more than $10 million of British funds
for the equipment and maintenance
of alternative
SUP&J
routes to Zambia, In these urgent measures
we have worked in full and close co-operation
with
Zambia. We have the dvfficulties
and needs of Zambia
as our constant concern, We admire, if I may say so,
the courage
and resource
and determination
with
which Zambia has faced the sacrifices
andthe dangers
of the situation, and our Concern throughout .has been
to take effective action to achieve a return to constitutional
rule in Rhodesia without
inflicting
un-

23. ConformBment
$ l’engagement
que nous avons
pris devant le Conseil de s6ourit6 en novembre dsr6tudi6 tous les
nier, nous avons immEdiatement
problbmes
soulev& par un embargo sur leP6troleF
a cet 6gard, comme le Conseil le sait, nous devions
tenir compte des besoins de la Zambie. Si nous avions
impose immediatement un embargo sur le p~troI% la
Rhod&ie
aurait Bt6 en mesure de puiser dans ses
r6serves
de p&role, alors que la Zambie aurait ktg
immediatement
couple de ses sources dcapprovi$ionnement en p&role, approvisionnement
dent ellsdePend
dans une large mesure pour les besoins de son industrie .et en fait, de son Bconomie tout enti8re. 11hta*t
done ind4spensable de cr6er d’abord un nOuVsaur~ssa*
d;approvisionnement
en p&role pour la Zambis, a la
fois par voie a6rienne et terrestre.
Le cofit du Pant
a&rien vers la Zambie a represent6 pour man gouvernement une d6pense de p&s de 3 millions de dollars
par mois, pour les seules fournitures de pGtrols; en
outre, mon gouvernement a fourni, g sss frais, les
services
d’une centaine d’experts
afin d’aider a 16
soudre ses probl&mes dtapprovisionnemsnt
st PIUs de
10 ‘millions de dollars de capitaux britanniques Pour
Bquiper et entretenir le nouveau r6seaud’aPProvisionnement de la Zambie. Dans lladoption de cssmesures
urgentes,
nous avons travail16 en collaboration complete et ittroite avec la Zambie. NoUS nous sommeS
6

necessary hardship and dislocation
is still very much our concern.

in Zambia. That

constamment
p&occup&
des difficult&
et des b@sQins
de ce pays. Nous admirons, qu+il me soit pesmis
de
le dire, le courage, l+ingt%iosit8 et la dgtermination
avec lesquels la Zambie a accept6 les sacrifices
et
fait face aux dangers de la situation, et notre Souci
constant, dans toute cette affaire, a Btg de prendre
des mesures
efficaces destinees B assurer
le r&our
au r&gime constitutionnel
en Rhoddsie du Sud, SanS
infliger 3 la Zambie des Gpreuves et une d&sorganisation inutiles.
Ceci reste toujours notre pS0ccLwtion pxincipale,

24. And, in addition to the losses we have suffered
arising from the British ban on trade with Rhodesia
and to the substantial
amounts we at once provided
to help Zambia, we sent, as the Council knows, a
Royal Air Force squadron of fighters
to Zambia
and we undertook an extensive naval and air operation
in the Mozambique channel to prevent the supply of
oil for Rhodesia by tanker to Beira.

24. En plus despertes quenousavons subies par suite
de l’interdiction de faire du commerce avec la Rhodgsie, que nous avons d&&Be, et en plus des sommes
importantes que nous avons immbdiatement mises%la
disposition de la Zambie pour lui venix en aide, nous
y avons, ainsi que le Conseil le sait, envoy(i: une
escadrille de chasseurs de la Royal Air Force et nous
avons entrepris une vaste operation navale et aBrienne
dans le canal de Mozambique afin d’empecher la
fourniture de p&role B la Rhodesie au moyen de
p&troliers via Beira.

25, These actions in banning trade with Rhodesia, in
giving aid to Zambia, in mounting a wide naval and air
operation, represent
a heavy financial commitment
on my country.

25. Toutes ces mesures d’interdiction du commerce
avec la Rhod&ie du Sud, d’assistance % la Zambie,
de mise sur pied d’une vaste opS?ration navale et
a&ienne, representent un faxdeau financier consid&
rable pour mon pays.

26. Why have we been prepared to undertake these
costly measures?
There are some who belittle our
effort, There are some who oppose it. There are
some who say that it was against our national interests
to embark on such an effort, But our motive and our
purpose are clear. We are, in the words of my Prime
Minister, determined
that “whatever
measures are
needed to restore Rhodesia to the rule of law, those
measures will be taken++.

26. Pourquoi nous sommes-nousmontres disposgs a
prendre ces mesures cofiteuses? Certains minimisent
nos efforts, d’autres y sont oppo&s; d+autres encore
soutiennent que s’embarquer dans une telle entreprise
est contraire P nos in&&s nationaux, Quoi qu’il en
soit, nos motifs et nos objectifs sont clairs. Pour reprendre les paroles de notre Premier Ministre,
“quelles que soient les mesures n&essaires pour
r&ablir en Rhod&ie le regime de la 18galit8, nous
sommes r&olus a les prendre”.

27. Let no one underestimate
the efforts we have
undertaken involving, as I have indicated, heavy costs.
Many others have joined us in these efforts. Many
others answered
the call of this Council to break
economic relations
with Rhodesia. We are grateful
for those decisions.
We acknowledge
that many
others have consequently suffered disruption of trade,
We respect the motives which led to those decisions.

27. Que personne ne sous-estime les efforts que
nous deployons en ce moment et qui, je viens de le
souligner, entra’lnent pour nous desdipensos consid&
rables. Nombreux sont ceux qui ont joint’leurs efforts
aux natres. Nombreux sont ceux qui ont repondu h
l+appel lance par le Conseil de s&curitg pour qu+ils
rompent leurs relations economiquesavec la Rhodi:sie.
Nous leur sommes reconnaissants de toutes ces
d&isions. Nous reconnaissons qu’elles ant cause 3
de nombreux autres pays de sgrieux inconv&ients
sur le plan commercial, Nous respectons les raisons
qui ont motive ces decisions.

28. Taken together these measures
represent
a
momentous international
endeavour,
a voluntary
association of most of the countries of the world in a
practical demonstration
of support for the cause of
racial justice and equality. It is a demonstration
showing in a very positive way that racial discrimination and racial domination flout the conscience of the
world. The response to the appeal for sanctions which
we made to this Council, and through this Council to
the world, resulted in aunique example of international
solidarity in support of a moral principle.

28. Prises ensemble, ces mesures sepxesentent un
effort international ConsidGrable, une association
volontaire de la plupart des pays du monde en vue
de maxquer en pratique leur appui & la cause de la
justice et de 1+6galitB raciales. C+est l& une manifestation qui montre, de fat;on t&s positive,
que
la discrimination et la domination raciales bafouent
la conscience du monde. La xeponse 2 l’appel que
nous avons adress au Conseil de &curite
et, par
l’intermgdiaire
du Conseil, au monde entier, pour
l’application de sanctions, a constitue un exemple
saris p&c&dent de solidarite internationale dans la
defense d+un pxincipe moral.

29. And at its last series
of meetings,
again in
response to our appeal, the Council took further

29. Au tours de la derni&re &ie de r&unions, le
Conseil, une fois encore en rgponse B notre appel,

of economic

a pris d’autres
mesures
Bnergiques pour appuyer
la politique des sanctions Bconomiques.

30. But while we,gratefully
acknowledge the backing
we have had, let no one underrate the effort we have
made. We have constantly maintained that the responsibility
in this matter was and is ours. It was right,
therefore,
that we should take the lead and that we
should shoulder the main burden. And why did we do
so? As I have said, there were some who from the
first decried the policy of sanctions. It would have been
much easier for us if we had accepted their defeatist
attitude. No, we took the lead, we faced the cost, we
undertook the action because we have been throughout
determined
to achieved the purposes which we have
from the first publicly declared.

30. Mais, tout en reconnaissant
avec gratitude lo
soutien qui nous a 6t6 apport6, nous voudrions qua
personne
ne sous-estime
l’effort
que nous avons
accompli. Nous n’avons cess6 d’affirmer qu’en cette
affaire, la responsabilit6
6tait et demeurait la natre,
11 Btait done juste que nous prenions l’initiative et
que nous assumions le fardeau principal. Pourquoi
l’avons-nous
fait? Comme je l’ai d&j& dit, certnins
ont, d&s le debut, d6nigr6 la politique des sanctions;
il aurait 6t6 beaucoup plus facile pour nous dlaccepter
leur attitude defaitiste. Mais nous avons au contraire
pris l’initiative;
nous avons accept6d’enpayer
leprix;
nous avons pris ces mesures parce que nous &ions
r&solus, d8s le d&but, a atteindre les objectifs que
nous avions publiquement fait conndtre au d6part.

31. Let me pause for a moment to say a general
word about the policy of sanctions. Weknow that there
are some who have advocated the use of force. We
understand
their eagerness and their impatience. But
we set ourselves
to achieve the purposes we stated
if possible without bloodshed, Those who advocated
violent action failed to understand
or to appreciate
either the practical
difficulties
or the possible consequences
of starting a conflict, a conflict the consequences
and repercussions
of which no one could
foresee.

31. Qu’il .ae soit permis de m’arr&kr
un instant
pour parler bribvement de la politique des sanctions
en g&n&al. Nous savons que certains ont prkconis6
l’emploi de la force. Nous comprenons leur impatience et leur empressement;
Mais nous avons d&id6
d’atteindre,
sans effusion de sang si possible, les
objectifs que nous nous @ions assign&,
Ceux qui
ont pr6conisB la violence n’ont pas compris ou nlont
pas mesur6 les difficult&
pratiques, ni le risque de
declencher un conflitdont personne nepourraitprkvoir
les cons6quences et les r6percussions.

32. But while honest differences
of judgement are
possible
on that, I suggest that it was shortsighted
and wrong
to take up here the cry that sanctions
cannot work. Those who did so fortified the obstinacy
and encouraged the continuation of the illegal regime.
More important
still, they belittled and questioned
the effectiveness
of one of the measures
placed in
the hands of the international
community by the United
Nations Charter. We were surprised
therefore to hear
talk yesterday
of the failure of sanctions and it was
even said that sanctions were known from the start
to be futile and ineffective.
“The senselessness
of
sanctions”
was a phrase used yesterday.
There are
those who say that economic sanctions
have never
and will never prove effective.
Some of them take
this attitude because they decry and fear international
action of any kind, That can be understood. But what
is difficult
to understand
is that the contention that
sanctions
cannot work has been repeated and echoed
by representatives
of States which are not opposed to
international
authority
and who do not wish to doubt
and denigrate in advance the effectiveness
of international economic action. By their attitude on sanctions, they have not only encouraged and so prolonged
the illegal regime,
they have doubted and belittled
one of the instruments
of international
authority,

32. Mais s’il est possible dlavoir de bonne foi des
opinions diffkrentes
sur ce point, j’estime que ceux
qui venaient clamer ici que les sanctions seraient
inoperantes manquaient de clairvoyance et Btaient dans
l’erreur.
11s ont renforc6
l’obstruction
du r+ime
illegal et favoris6 son maintien. Chose plus importante
encore, ils ont minimis
et contest6 I’efficacitB d’uns
des mesures que la Charte met B la disposition de la
collectivit6
internationale.
Nous avons dono 8t.6 surpris d’entendre parler hier de l%chec des sanctions,
et l’on est m&me all6 jusqu’a dire que l’on savait d&s
le d6but que les sanctions seraient vaines et inefficaces. “L’inanit6 des sanctions”
est une expression
que l’on a entendue hier. ‘Certains
disent quo les
sanctions
Bconomiques
n’ont jamais BtB effioaces
et ne le seront jamais. Parmi eux, il en est qui
adoptent cette attitude parce qu’ils denigrent et Craignent toute action internationale.
Cela peut se cornprendre. Mais ce qui est difficile a comprendre, C’eSt
que la thbse de l’inefficacit6
des sanctions a et6
r6pet6e et reprise par les representants
d%tats qui
ne sont pas opposi% a une autorite internationale et
qui ne souhaitent pas contester et d6nigrer ?i l’avancs
l’efficacit6
d’une action Bconomique internationale.
Par leur attitude & ltbgard des sanctions, ils n’ont Pas
seulement encourage et, partant, prolong6 le regime
illGga1, mais aussi mis en cause et minimise la valeur
d’un des instruments
de l’autorit6 internationale.

33. Certainly
economic sanctions are not a weapon
to be lightly employed. Indeed, as the Council well
knows,
we have often stated the arguments
against
embarking
on a course of economic sanctions except in
circumstances
of obvious and overwhelming
justification. In particular
we have been and are firmly
opposed to resolutions
which are mere emptythreats.
Moreover,
wheneves
action is taken by the inter-

33. Assurdment,
les sanctions bconomiques ns sent
pas une arme que l’on puisse employer h la 16gbre.
En fait, comme le Conseil le sait, nous avons souvent
&ion06 les arguments qui militent centre un reoours
aux sanctions Bconomiques, sauf dans des airconstances qui, de toute gvidence, justifient amplement
une telle mesure. En particulier,
nous demeuronst
comme par le pas&, fermement oppos6S aux r&so-

drastic
action
sanctions.

in support

of the policy

national community,
we regard it as essential that
the means and the power should exist to put the international decision into full effect. Those were the
circumstances
which existed when our draft resolution
was approved in the Council on 9 April, British
warships
awaited that evening the order to act, and
act at once. And when the authority of this Council
was given, naval action was I&fact taken within hours
of our vote. It is no doubt right to urge deliberate
restraint
in embarking on economic sanctions, But
once the decision to apply sanctions is taken, we owe
it surely to our respect for international
authority
to persevere
in carrying out that decision until the
objective is attained, to persevere
in that direction
taking each step on the sound ground of clear capacity
to act and to act without delay.

lutions qui ne sont que des menaces creuses.De
plus,
chaque fois que la communaute internationale prend
une dGcision, il nous para% indispensable
que les
moyens et le pouvoir n&essaires
pour donner pleinement effet il cette dBcision existent, Cela Btait le cas
lorsque notre projet de &solution a BtB approuve par
le Conseil, le 9 avril. Les navires de guerre britanniques attendaient ce soir-l& l’ordre d’agir et d’agir
immediatement.
Lorsque l’autorisation
du Conseil, a
6th donn$e, une opEtration navale a effectivement
6th
entreprise
quelques heures apr&s le vote. 11 est sans
doute indique de recommander la retenue lorsqu’il
s’agit de decreter
des sanctions Boonomiques. Mais
une fois que la decision d’appliquer des sanctions
est prise, nous devons sans aucun doute $ notre
respect
de l’autorit8
internationale
de poursuivre
l’ex8cution de cette decision jusqu% ce que l’objectif
soit atteint, de pers&&rer
dans cette voie enadoptant
ohaque mesure sur la base solide qu’est la capaoite
manifeste d’agir et d’agir sans retard.

34. The effect of economic sanctions can seldom be
quick, But. that is no reason for losing faith in their
efficacy. The effect of the Rhodesian sanctions has
indeed been slower than we wished or expected, But
do not jump to the hasty and quite unjustified conclusion
that they are not slowly but surely having their
cumulative
effect, With the co-operation
of other
countries, a good deal more than half of Rhodesian
exports are now subject to embargoes by importing
countries. Combined with stringent financialmeasures
these embargoes have already had a far-reaching
effect. Rhodesia’s
foreign exchange earnings have
been severely reduced. Credit is hard to obtain, There
is growing
unemployment
and under-employment.
Emigration has increased,

34. L’effet des sanctions Bconomiques est rarement
rapide. Mais ce n’est pas une raison de perdre confiance en leur efficacith. L’effet des sanctions prises
& l’enoontre de la Rhodesie du Sud a assurement
QtB plus lent que nous ne l’avions pen& et esp&%.
Mais il ne faut pas seh&terd’enconclure,
tout B fait &
tort, qu’elles n’ont pas, lentement mais sarement, un
effet cumulatif.
Avec la ooop&ation d’autres
pays,
bien plus de la moitie des exportations de la Rhodesie
du Sud est maintenant soumise & un embargo de la
part des pays importateurs.
Joint ?i des mesures
financieres
rigoureuses,
cet embargo a dGj& eu des
effets oonsid&%rables. Les rentrees de devises Btrang&es en Rhodesie du Sud ont btg fortement r&luites.
Les credits sont diffioiles & obtenir. I1 y a de plus en
plus de chamage et de sous-emploi.
L%migration
augmente.

35. To conceal the progressive
weakness of its economic and financial position, the regime in Salisbury
has, as the Council knows, had to resort to all kinds
of extreme devices from press censorship and jamming
of radio reports, to manpower control orders. Every
possible measure has been taken in Salisbury to look
out the truth from Rhodesia and to keep everyone in
Rhodesia in a state of enforced ignorance,

35. Pour dissimuler
la faiblesse croissante
de sa
position
Bconomique et financibre,
le regime de
Salisbury a, comme le Conseil le sait, dQ recourir
B toutes esp&ces de mesures extremes allant de la
censure de la presse et du brouillage de l’kcoute
d%missions
radiophoniques
B la reglementation
de
la main-d’ceuvre.
Toutes les mesures possibles ont
Bte prises & Salisbury pour empecher que la v&rite
ne se saohe pas en Rhodesie et pour maintenir tout
le monde, en Rhod&ie,
dans un &at d’ignorance
forage.

36, But even in Salisbury there has been a change
in opinion about the effectiveness
of sanctions. A
month ago they were dismissed
in Rhodesia with
contempt. Now Salisbury has been obliged to concede in
public that some sectors of the economy have already
been hard hit and to admit that the real battle has
only just begun. There has been a sharp deterioration
in confidence in informed professional and commercial
circles where it is now realized that Rhodesia is in
serious trouble, It is now increasingly
realized that
sanctions are shaking the whole structure of credit on
which the economy ultimately depends.

36. Mais meme 3 Salisbury, l’opinion a change sur
l’efficacitg
des sanctions. I1 y a un mois, on n’en
faisait aucun cas, on en parlait meme aveo mgpris.
Maintenant, Salisbury
a Bte oblige de reconndtre
publiquement que certains secteurs
de l’bconomie
ont d&j% BtB durement touches et d’avouer que la
veritable bataille ne fait que commencer. Depuis, la
confiance dans les milieux bien inform&s des affaires
et des professions
lib&ales a fortement baisstS et l’on
se rend compte maintenant que la Rhodesie est dans
une situation grave, Deplus enplus, on se rend compte
que les sanctions gbranlent toute la structure du credit
dont depend en definitive l’bconomie du territoire.

37. There is no doubt that the diversion
of the
Manuela and the immobilization
of the cargo of the
Joanna V were severe blows to the rggime. They have
been forced to abandon the prospect of reopening the

37. I1 est certain que le r6gim.e a subi des coups
t&s rudes lorsque le Manuela a BtB d&our&
et que
la cargaison du Joanna V a et6 bloquee. I1 a dQ renoncer 2 l’espoir de rouvrir la raffinerie,
et de r8tabli.r
9

refinery
supply

and thus of re-establishing

the usual economic

ainsi l’approvisionnement normal en p&role de l’i&nOmie
rhoddsienne par l’ol8oduc de Beira. Actuellsment, les depenses qu’entralne le maintien deslivraisons de petrole prBoccupent vivement le r&me et le
blocus petrolier aggrave consid&ablement ses embarras financiers, Le prix de l’essence a BtB releve
de 26 p. 100 et le nouveau syst&me de rationnement
reduit enoore la part reservee B la consommation
COWante.
Les agriculteurs seront durement touches
par l’augmentation du prix du carburant pour diesel,
11s ant eux-m&mes fait remarquer que cette hausse
fera monter le coat de la production agricole d’un
demi-million de livres par an. Mais lorsque l!Association des tabacs de RhodBsie, Rhodesian Tobacco
Association, s’est adressBe aux milieux des affaires
et aux banques pour qu’ils aident l’agriculture, le
Directeur du commerce et des Bchanges de Rhod$sie
a &i? contraint de leur rGpondre qu’en raison de la
grave penurie de credits il n%tait guBre mieux place
pour aider les agriculteurs.

of oil to Rhodesia via the Beira pipeline, The

regime is now very concerned at the cost of maintaining its oil supplies and the oil embargo is adding
very seriously to its financial difficulties, The price
of petrol has been increased by 26 per cent and the
new rationing system leaves the public worse off.
The increase in the price of diesel oil will hit the
farmers hard. The farmers themselves have pointed
out that this will raise the cost of agricultural
production by half a million pounds a year. But when
the Rhodesian Tobacco Association appealed to
commerce and. to the banks to help the farming
industry,
the Director
of Rhodesian Trade and
Commerce was forced to reply that they were in no
better position to help the farmers because the shortage
of credit had become so serious.

38. The world tobacco trade confirms our judgement
that the Rhodesian tobacco sales have gone badly.
There is little doubt that the regime itself is being
forced to buy neasly all the tobacco in order to pay
the farmers sufficient to cover their costs of production. This will mean that the Rhodesian Treasury,
already under strain, will have to find E26 million
to cover themselves in the period from April
to September.

38. Le commerce mondial du tabac nous confirme
dans notre opinion que les ventes de tabac rhod&sien
ont subi un recul. I1 ne fait guBre de doute que le
regime lui-m&me est contraint d’aoheter pratiquement toute la recolte pour permettre auxagriculteurs
d’obtenir des prix suffisants pour couvrir leurs frais
de production. Aussi le tr&sor rhodesien, dans une
situation deja difficile, devra-t-i1 se procurer 26
millions de livres sterling pour assurer sacouverture
pendant la p&riode d’avril a septembre.

39. The Rhodesian iron and steel industry too is
desperate for markets and there is evidence that the
Rhodesian Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. isattempting to sell
its pig iron at 50 per cent of the world price, and
even then is having the greatest difficulty in finding
outlets.

39. L’industrie siderurgique rhodesienne elle aussi
cherche d&espBrGment des debouch& et on a la
preuve que la Soci&e du fer et de l’acier de RhodBsie,
Rhodesian Iron and Steel Co, Ltd., s’efforced%couler
sa fonte 2 50 p. 100 du tours mondial, et meme ainsi
Bprouve les plus grandes difficult&
& trouver des
acqu&eurs.

40. The real unemployment situation continues to be
masked by manpower control, but the extent of it can
be judged from the article which the Rhodesia Perald
sought to print on 11 May: about 8,000 unemployed
in Bulawayo. But the article was, of course, censored.

40. La situation reelle pour ce qui est du chamage
continue d%tre masqueepar la reglementation appliq&e B la main-d’o-zuvre mais on peut juger de sa
gravite par un article que le phodesia Herald a tent&
de publier le 11 mai et 03 il Btait question d’environ
8 000 chameurs 2 Bulawayo. Mais, bien entendu, cet
article a Bt.6censur&

41. No wonder the regime does not dare to tell its
own people the facts of the situation. As a result the
dangers, indeed the hopelessness, of the course which
it has set have been concealed, All the more salutary
and sudden will be the effect when this curtain of
concealment is torn aside and when people in Rhodesia
wake up to face the inevitable truth. The hollowness
behind the campaign of secrecy to which they have been
subjected will then be fully apparent.

41. 11 n’est pas Btonnant que le regime n’ose pas
dire la v&it6 2 son propre peuple. En agissant
ainsi,
il a pu dissimuler les dangers, voire le caractbre
dBsespBr6 de la politique qu’il poursuit. Les effets
seront d’autant plus salutaires et d’autant Plus SOudains lorsque ce voile de myst&e sera arrach6 et qus
la population de la RhodBsie du Sud prendra tout d’un
coup conscience de la &alit6 ,inbluctable. La futilitg
de oette campagne du silence a laquelle elle a&g
soumise se manifestera alors au grand jour.

42. We on our side have never underestimated the
difficulties and the dangers. Indeed they are great, We
have never imagined that there is any easy or even
safe solution. But the aims which we have set of
returning to constitutional rule, setting Rhodesia on
the path of democratic government and searching for
a settlement acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as
a, whole-people of all races and all sections of the
community-are
just and necessary and attainable.
The timing and the tactics of our action are our first

jamais
SoUs42. Pour notre part, nous n'avons
estime les difficult& et les dangers qui de fait: sent
consid&ables. Nousn’avons jamais pens6 qu’il existait
une solution facile ou mgme s&e. Mais les objectifs
que nous nous sommes fix&, 2~ savoir le retour au
regime constitutionnel, l’acheminement de 1aRhodesie
du Sud vers un gouvernement dGmocratique et la
reoherche d’un reglement que puissent acCsPtsr tous
les habitants de la RhodBsie, quelS que soisnt km’
race et leur milieu social, sont B la fois Wss9

10

responsibility.
They may give rise to differences of
judgement. I trust that such differences
need not
cause any of us here to doubt or to hesitate, still
less to weaken, in the pursuit of our declared purposes.

n&essaires et rBalisables. Tout d’abord, nous devons
nous prGoccuper de choisir le moment de notre action
et la tactique 2 employer, On peut avoir sur oo
point des opinions diff8rentes,mais j’espsre qu’elles
n’amsneront aucun de nous a manifester des doutes
ou de l’h&sitation, moins encore B flgchir dams la
poursuite des objectifs que nous avons prOClam’%

43.

Let me now come on to refer to the most recent
developments, As you know, on 27 April 1966my Prime
Minister announced in the House of CommonsY that
informal talks would take place “directed only to see
whether a basis for negotiation genuinely exists” and
that they were ‘fwithout commitment on either side”,
The Prime Minister at the same time made clear
that “Her Majesty’s Government are not negotiating
with the illegal regime. These are informal talks to
seewhether there is a basis on which proper negotiations could take place”. I am using the actual words
of the announcement, The Prime Minister at the same
time also confirmed what he had said earlier in the
House of Commons that “none of us in the House was
prepared to accept a settlement which condoned an
illegal act or which failed to satisfy the principles
which were laid down by my predecessor whenhe was
Prime Minister and by the present Government”. The
Prime Minister moreover specifically confirmed that
these principles included the safeguarding of British
responsibilities for African interests.

43. Je voudrais maintenant parler desderniers &hements. Comme vous le savez, le Premier Ministre du
Royaume-Uni a annonce le 27 avril 1966 Bla Chambre
des commune&/ que des entretiens officieux auraient
lieu “2 seule fin de voir s’il existe reellement une
base de negotiation” et il a ajoute que ces entretiens
n’impliquaient flaucun engagement de part nid’autre”,
Ce faisant le Premier Ministre a bien prftcise We
Ye Gouvernement de Sa Majest
ne dgocie
pas avec
le regime ill&gal. I1 s’agit d’entretiens officieux gui
ont pour objet d’btablir s’il existe Lanebase pour
df%
negotiations veritables”. Ce sont les termes mgmes
de la d8claration. Le Premier Ministre a Confirm&
en m&me temps ce qu’il avait deja dit a la Chambre
des communes, $ savoir que “personne aux Communes
n’accepterait un rbglement qui sanctionnerait un acte
illegal ou qui ne respecterait pas les principes &ion&s
par le Premier Ministre qui m’a precede et par le
Gouvernement actuel’, De plus, le Premier Ministre
a expressement confirm6 que parmi ces principes
figurait celui de la sauvegarde des obligations du
Royaume-Uni ?I l%gard des int&&s africains.

44. It is on this basis and with these assurances that
the informal talks have been proceeding in London.

44. C’est sur cette base et avec ces assurances
que se deroulent 8. Londres les entretiens officieux.

45. It is not for me to comment on the talks which
have continued this week, beyond saying that my
Government has repeatedly made plain over the past
five months that anyone in Rhodesia was free to
approach the Governor or the British representative
in Salisbury with proposals as to the basis on which
a solution could be reached. Consequently, to reject
the approach from Salisbury and to refuse to examine
whether such a basis existed would have been obviously
andentirely indefensible.

45, I1 ne m’appartient pas de faire des commentaires
sur les entretiens qui se sont poursuivis cette semaine;
je rappellerai simplement que le Gouvernement britannique a maintes foispr&i& aucours des cinq derniers
mois que chacun pouvait, en Rhodesie, prendre contact
avec le Gouverneur ou le representant du Royaume-Uni
2 Salisbury pour lui soumettre clespropositions quant
B la base sur laquelle une solution pourrait Btre
trouvge. Le Gouvernement britannique n ‘avait done, de
toute evidence, auoune possibilitB de repousser la
demarche de Salisbury et de se refuser 2 examiner
si une telle base existait.

46. It was essential to explore what the approach
meant and to find out whether or not it represented
or might lead to a basis for negotiations. That is what
is now proceeding. It is surely right that before we
take further decisions-decisions of very far-reaching
consequence and the utmost importance-we should
know whether or not those talks can lead to a new
situation. Surely we should know the answer to that
question before we take any new step or reach any
new conclusion here,

46. 11Btait indispensable de connaltre le sens de cette
dgmarche et de determiner si oui ou non elle constituait une base de negotiation ou pourrait y conduire.
C’est ce que l’on est en train de faire. I1 me par&t
indiqug, avant de prendre dlautres dgcisions - lesquelles auront de profondes r&percussions et seront
de la plus haute importance - que nous sachions si
ces entretiens sont de nature B crger une situation
nouvelle. Nous devons assur8ment conna?tre la rb
ponse a cette question avant de prendre de nouvelles
mesures ou de tirer ici des conclusions quelconques.

4’7. I have gone over the ground carefully to assess
the present position in the light of recent events. I
have done. so deliberately because our actions and
indeed our motives have been questioned. More
important still, ous determination to pursue the
Purposes and maintain the principles which we have

4’7. J’ai pris soin, dans mon expos8, d’&aIuor
la
situation actuelle Bla lumi&re desBvEnements r&cents.
Je l’ai fait i dessein car on a mis en cause nos actes
et memes nos motifs, Chose plus grave encore, on a
mis en doute notre volonte d’atteinclre les objectifs et
de dgfendre les principes que nous avons si souvent

’

u Voir Parliamentary
Debates (Hansard), house of Commons,
Report, Londres, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, Fifth Series,
col.9
B 712.

%a Parliamentary

Debates (Hansard),
House of Commons, Official
Stationery Office, Fifth Series, vol. 727,

&EE$ Lopdon,
HerMajesty’s
COI. 709 to 712.

11

Official
vol. 727,

repeatedly declared has been doubted. The principles
laid down by the British Government, principles which
we have publicly and repeatedly promised to pursue,
are not, I think, disputed here. I do not see how they
could be, since they are directed to achieve racial
equality and political
freedom. It is not principles
and purposes which we need to debate here, because
on principles and purposes we need have no differences
and no disagreements.
What we consider are questions
of methods and measures-and
questions of tactics
and timing. What we debate are the means of establishing those principles and achieving those purposes,

proclam&.
Les principes &on&s par le Gouvernement
britannique, principes qulaplusieurs
reprises &pub&
quement nous nous sommes engages a defendre, ne aon1
pas, je pense, contest& dans cette enceinte, Je ne vois
d’ailleurs pas comment ils pourraient l%trepuisqu’ifa
visent 2 assurer
l’Bgalit8 des races et la liberte
politique. Ce n’est pas de principes et d’objectifs qus
nous avons 3 debattre ici, car nous n’avons pas, 3
cet Ggard, des opinions differentes ou opposees &aoutenir. Ce que nous examinons, ce sont des questions
de m&hode et de mesures & prendre, des questions
de tactique et de choix du moment. Notre propos est
de degager les moyens d’appliquer ces principes et
d’atteindre ces objectifs.

48. No one, as I have said, will underestimate
the
dangers of the situation which we face or the difficulties
of the decisions we have had to take, Every decision
has been made after weighing those dangers and
difficulties,
But since such serious accusations have
been made, let me go back to the decisions already
taken. What have been the main decisions?

48. Comme je l’ai dit, nul ne sous-estimeles
dangers
de la situation qui se prksente
21 nous, ni les difficult&s des d&cisions que nous avons &B amen& B
prendre. Chacune d’elles a Bt.6prise enpleine connaissance des dangers et des difficult&.
Maispuisquedes
accusations aussi graves ont BtB lancges, je voudrais
dire quelques mots encore des deoisions dej& prises.
Quelles ont done F?tBles principales d&isions?

49. Was it right in October 1964 togive a plain public
warning
of the disastrous
economic and political
results which would occur if an illegal declaration of
independence was made? I do not think that anyone
will doubt that it was right and necessary to do so,

49. Le Gouvernement britannique a-t-i1 eu r&on.
en octobre 1964, de lancer publiquement et saris
ambages une mise en garde centre les con&quences
dtkastreuses
qu’entra’inerait
sur le plan Qconomique
et politique une proclamation
illegale de l’ind8pendance7 Nul ne contestera, je pense, qu’il Btait juste ea
necessaire d’agir de la sorte.

50. Was it right during the subsequent year to take
every possible step to prevent the illegal declaration?
Again I do not think that anyone will doubt that the
sustained effort made ‘by my Government to prevent
the illegal declaration
was necessary
and justified.
Nor will it be doubted that our effort was persistently
pursued,

50. Le Gouvernement britannique a-t-i1 eu I’sis%
l’an&e suivante, de prendre toutes les mesures pwssibles pour empacher cette proclamation ill&+?
L& encore, je ne pense pas que l’on puisse contester
la necessite et le bien-fond8 des efforts incessant%
que le Gouvernement britannique a deploy& dans CC
sens. Pas plus que l’on ne contestera lapers&&ancc
dont nous avons fait preuve.

51. When the illegal declaration
took place on 11
November 1965, was it right to call for a meeting
of this Council to report what had happened, to state
the policy we intended to carry out and to call on
other States to support
and match our action? We
have from the first maintained that this is a British
responsibility,
and that has not been disputed, But I
have no doubt that it was right to bring the matter
to the United Nations and to seek and obtain international support for the policy we had declared.

51. Lorsque l’indgpendance a BtB illegalement pro-olamee, le 11 novembre
1965, le Gouvernement
britannique a-t-i1 eu raison de demander la COIIVOCBtion du Conseil de skurite
pour l’informer des &&~f?ments, lui exposer la politique qu’il entendait suivr@
et demander aux autres Etats d’appuyer son action et
de sty associer? D&s le debut, nous avons affirm6 que
la situation conoernait le Royaume-Uni
et nul ne 1’s
contest& Mais je ne doutepas qu’il Btait normal de snJsir l’organisation
des Nations Unies de cette question
et de chercher a obtenir l’appui de la communaut&
internationale en faveur de lapolitiqueque nous aviolls
proclam8e.

52. Was it right to institute a policy of sanctions7
Some have advocated military
invasion without, as I
have suggested, an understanding
either of the practical
problems
or the far-reaching
consequences.
But I
have no doubt that it was right to endeavour to secure
our purposes
if possible
without
bloodshed, and
indeed I have no doubt that that should always be
the first object of this Council under the Charter of
the United Nations. We seek not to create conflict
but to prevent it.

52. Avons-nous eu raison d’instituer une politiquede
sanctions? Certains ont pr&onis~
une intervention
militaire sans envisager, comme je i’ai indiqu6, les
probl&mes pratiques
qu’elle posait ou les lourdes
con&quences
qu’elle pouvait avoir. Mais je ne doutc
pas que nous ayons eu raison de chercher a atteindre
nos objectifs en Bvitant si possible toute effusion de
sang, et, en fait, je suis convainou que telle devrait
btre en toute circonstance la premiere des pr%occupations du Conseil, conformement a la Charte des Nations
Uni’es. Nous ne cherchons pas a provoquer un conflft
mais en prevenir un.

53. Was it right that consultation
should take place
at every stage between Commonwealth
countries,

53. Etait-il indique que des consultations aient lieu
2 tous les stades entre les pays du Commonweafth
12

and wexe sound decisions
reached at the Lagos
Conference of Commonwealth
Prime Ministers? It is
well to recognize the closeness
of the continuous
consultation between Commonwealth
countries, particularly following the Lagos Conference since when
the Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee
has been
regularly meeting in London, It met only a few days
ago, It was moreover declared at Lagos that a further
meeting of Commonwealth
Prime Ministers
should be
called in July if the rebellion had not ended before
then, My Government has been and remains in direct
and constant contact with all Commonwealth countries
and particularly,
of cousse,
with Zambia. This
continuing and close Commonwealth
consultation has
been our concern throughout,
No one surely will
dispute the value or indeed the necessity
of that
co-operation.

et la Confexence des Premiers Ministres du Commonwealth r&nie & Lagos en janvier dernier n’a-t-elle
pas pris de sages d&isions?
11 convient de souligner
a quel point ont Bte Btroites les consultations
entre
les pays du Commonwealth,
surtout & la suite de la
Conference
de Lagos; depuis cette confgrenoe, en
effet, le Cornit
du Commonwealth
sus les sanctions
oontre la Rhodesie
slest r&mi
&gul@rement
&
Londres
et il a tenu seance il y a quelques jours
encore. De plus, il a Bt6 d&cid& a Lagos qu’une nouvelle rencontse des premiers ministres
du Commonwealth devrait &re convoqu6e en juillet si la rebellion
n’avait pas pris fin d’ioi 18. Le Gouvernement britannique s’est maintenu et se maintient en contact direct
et continu avec tous les pays du Commonwealth
et,
en particuiier,
cela va sans dire, avec 1aZambie. Ces
consultations
permanentes
et Btroites
au sein du
Commonwealth
ont &B notre p&occupation
de tous les
instants. Personne assurement ne contesteralavaleur
ni a vrai dire la &cessitB
de cette collaboration.

54. Was it right to impose an oil embargo, at the
same time giving urgent aid to Zambia to help
maintain her oil supplies, and, when the whole policy
of sanctions was threatened by a plan to restore the
normal supply of oil for Rhodesia by tanker to Beira,
was it right to come to this Council and seek and
obtain authority to foil this plan, to foil the plan
designed to defeat the purpose of the previous resolution of this Council?

54. Le Gouvernement
britannique
a-t-i1 eu raison
d’imposer
un embargo sur le p&role, tout en pr&ant
d’urgence son conoours 2 la Zambie pour ltaider &
assurer ses approvisionnements
enpetrole, et, lorsque
toute la politique des sanctions a et& menacke par
un plan visant B r&ablir
les livraisons
normales de
p&role & la Rhod&ie par des petroliers
deohargeant
h Beira, le Gouvernement britannique a-t-i1 eu raison
d’en appeler au Conseil pour obtenir ltautorisation
de
dkjouer oe plan destine B faire Bchec au but meme de
la r&solution prI%dente
du Conseil?

55. In the letter dated 10 May 1966 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives of thirty-two
Member States [S/7285 and
Add.21 it is stated that supply through Beira and
Umtali is a “relatively
minor sector”. But this is not
so. The Beira-IJmtali
route was the normal route for
the full supply of Rhodesia’s
oil requirements,
It
has been closed since the embargo was imposed. Bad
it been re-opened and had a succession
of tankers
delivered crude oil to Beira to be pumped through
the pipe line for refining and distribution
in Rhodesia
the result would have been decisive. The oil embargo
would have failed. The policy approved,
indeed
initiated, by this Council would have been frustrated,
I am astonished that attempts should have been made
here to belittle the effective action taken by this
Council-action which had an immediate and important
effect both as evidence and warning, in Rhodesia and
elsewhere, of our purpose and our determination,

55. Dans la lettre du 10 mai 1966 adressbe au President par lea reprgsentants
de 32 Etats Membres [S/
7285 et Add.21, on peut lire’que les livraisons
passant
par Beira et Umtali ne repri?sentent
qu’un “secteur
relativement
peu importanttt,
mais cela est inexact.
L ‘oleoduc Beira-Umtali
servait normalement h pourvoir a tous les besoins enpetrole de la Rhodbsie. I1 a 6th
ferme depuis que l’embargo a ktb impos8. S’il avait &te
rouvert et si une serie de pdtroliers
avaient livre du
p&role brut & Beira d’oti il aurait 8te aohemine par
l’oleoduc pour Btre raffine et vendu en Rhod&sie, le,
rf$ultat
aurait 6% dBoisif. L’embargo sur le p&role
aurait 6chouB et la politique approuvee par le Conseil
et d’ailleurs
due ?i son initiative aurait BtB reduite
& rigant. Je suis surpris que l’on ait oherchk ?t minimiser les mesures efficaces prises par le Conseil,
mesures qui ont eu des effets immediats importants
car elles ont mis en Evidence, en Rhodesie et ailleurs ,
notre objeotif et notre volonte de l’atteindre
et ant
servi du meme coup d’avertissement.

56. Was it right when the new approach came from
Salisbury at the end of last month to explore whether
a basis for negotiation existed? Surely it was right
tc do SO, at the same time making it perfectly plain
that the declared principles would be maintained. To
refuse to respond to that approach wouldnot only have
heen a denial of the public undertakings
my Government had made but would have been to close the door
to the return to constitutional
rule which all along
we have been striving to achieve,

56. Le Gouvernement
britannique
a-t-i1 eu raison,
lorsque Salisbury
a fait une nouvelle demarche 8. la
fin du mois dernier,
de rechercher
s’il existait une
base de nggociation? Assurgment,
il a eu raisond’agir
ainsi, tout en p&cisant
bien que les principesproclam& seraient maintenus. SYl avait refuse de repondre
8. cette ouverture,
le Gouvernement britannique n’aurait pas seulement renie les engagements qu’il avait
pris publiquement mais il aurait rendu impossible le
retour a un regime constitutionnel,
oe que nous avons
constamment
cherchg B assurer.

57. These seven main decisions-to
give a plain
warning, to endeavour to prevent any illegal declaration, EO come to this Council immediately the direct

57. Ces sept grandes d$cisions - donner unavertissement sans equivoque, nous efforcer d ‘empecher une
proclamation
ill&gale, en appeler au Conseil d&s la
13

declaration was made, to embark on a comprehensive
policy of economic sanctions, to consult and aot with
the Commonwealth, to stop the oil tankers, and to keep
open the door to a return to constitutional
rule-1 am
sure that these decisions were right. They were all
steps deliberately planned and confidently taken in the
direction which we set ourselves from the start. They
represent
together a clear and consistent policy now
having a cumulative and a compelling effect,

proclamation unilaterale de l’ind&pendance,nous engager dans une politique g&&ale de sanctionsBconomiques, oonsulter les pays du Commonwealthet’agir
de concert aveo eux, arrgter les petroliers et maintenir la possibilite d’un retour au &gime constitutionnel- Qtaient, jlen suis certain, judicieuses. Toutes
ces mesures ont BtB soigneusementmises au point et
appliqu6es avec confiance dans la direction que nous
nous &ions fixee d&s le dgbut. Elles constituent dans
leur ensemble une politique Claire et logique dont les
effets combin& sont maintenant irr&istibles.

58. I need not say that I greatly respect the strong
feelings which have been expressed in this Council,
I respect the motives which have led those who have
put to us proposals for more extreme action, including
the use of force, But in supportingthepolicy which we
have followed and in defending the decisions that we
have taken, let me also say most earnestly that I
believe that to have taken the extreme action we have
been urged to take would have run grave dangers-the
grave danger not only of escalation, of starting a
widening conflict the consequences of which no one
could foretell, but also the danger that we should
prejudice and prevent the attainment of the very
purposes we have set. Our purpose has been by every
practicable means to isolate and contain the problem,
not to extend and add to it, These are the means by
which we have sought to open the way to return to
constitutional rule and pursuit of the principles we
have declared.

58. 11 va saris dire que jdkprouve le plus grand
respect Pour les fermes convictions exprimees devant
le Conseil. Je respeote les raisons qui ontincite certains d’cntre nous 2 presenter des propositions en
vue de l’adoption de mesures plus radicales, y compris l’usage de la force. Mais en defendantla politique
que nous avons suivie et en justifiant les decisions
que nous avons prises, je voudrais ajouter trbs sinc&ement qu% mon avis, si nous avions suivi ceux
qui pri%onisaient oes mesures extr&mes,nous aurions
couru de grands risques, non seulement celui de voir
la situation slaggraver, de provoquer un Blargissement du conflit dont nul ne pouvait prevoir les conskquences, mais aussi le risque de compromettre et
d’empbcher la rBalisation des buts m&mesque nous
nous sommes assign&. Notre objectif est d’isoler
et de circonscrire le Problhme par tous les moyens
possibles, et non pas de l%tendre et de l’aggraver.
Tels sont les moyens par lesquels nous cherchons
Zi preparer le retour au regime constitutionnel et
l’application des Principes que nous avonsproclam8s.

59. If hasty action were taken now when we do not
know the outcome of the talks which have been proceeding in the past week, and if we were to depart
from the policy persistently pursued for the past six
months, and if this Council were to achieve only
deadlock, we should be doing a disservice not only
to the people of Rhodesia but also to the authority of
the United Nations.

59. Si nous prenions maintenant des mesures prhipitges, alors que nous ne connaissonspas le resultat
des entretiens qui se sont d&oul& la semainc
dernigre, si nous devions nous ecarter de la politique
que nous poursuivons syst&matiquement depuis six
mois et si le Conseil de securite n’aboutissait qu’h
une impasse, non seulement nous rendrions un mauvais service & la population de la Rhodgsie du Sud
mais nous affaiblirions de surcrolt l’autorit8 de
1’Organisation des Nations Unies,

60. And on these questions of timing and tactics I
trust that it will be recognized and accepted that my
country, which has never sought to shirk its primary
responsibility, has a right and a duty to exercise its
best judgement, a judgement which will, I trust, be
fully taken into account as our deliberations proceed.

60. Sur ces questions de tactique et de choix du
moment, j’esp&re que l’on reconnaltra et que 1’011
admettra que le Royaume-Uni, qui n’a jamais cherchb
i se derober aux obligations qui lui incombent au
premier chef, a le droit et le devoir d’exercer son
jugement au mieux de ses facult&, jugement qui,
je l’esp&e, sera pleinement pris en consid8ration
dans la suite de nos cl&ib&+ations. Je vais dono
essayer de r&sumer la position demangouvernemeilt.

61. So then, let me try to sum up what I wish to submit to this Council, First, we have repeatedly affirmed
the six principles which have been publicly stated
and we have no intention of reaching any settlement
that departs from them. Second, we fully accept that
the peoples of Africa axe deeply concerned that no
settlement should be reached which will betray the
interests of their race, and we are equally determined
that no such betrayal shall take place. Third, we
certainly accept the legitimate interest of the United
Nations, and we ourselves took the initiative by
reference to this Council in November last and again
in April, Fourth, if it is not possible to achieve a just
settlement through the talks we are pursuing, then a

61. Tout d’abord, nous avons maintes fois reaffirm6
les six principes qui ont 132&non& publiquement:et
nous nlavons aucune intention d’aboutir sun rbglement
qui s’en Bcarterait. Deuxihmement, nousoomprenolls
parfaitement que les peuples d’Afrique ont PartiCuliY?rement 2~cceur qu’aucun rgglement n’intervienne
qui trahirait les int%r@s de leur race et nous Sommes
tout aussi r&olus & empecher une telle trahison.
Troisi??mement, nous reconnaissons assurkment l’int&+X 18gitime des Nations Unies a cet dgard et nous
avons pris nous-m8mes l’initiative de faire appel au
Conseil de s$ouritit en novembre dernier et de nouveau en avril de cette a&e. Quatrihmement, s’il
n’est pas possible d’arriver 3.un rbglement bquitable
14

new situation will arise and we shall need to consider
the whole problem further. Fifth, we are, however, at
the moment
engaged on exploratory
talks to see
whether a basis exists for a just settlement that
will protect the rights of all the people of Rhodesia.
I shall say nothing further at the moment which would
psejudice the success
of those talks, for we are
firmly
convinced that further
action by the United
Nations at this time could do nothing to help and
indeed would be likely to prejudice the achievement of
such a settlement,
but I finally confirm once again
that it is our determination
to settle this problem by
peaceful means and to settle it justly.

grace aux entretiens qui se poursuivent
actuellement,
une nouvelle situation aura 6te c&&e et nous devrons
reprendre l’examen du probG?me tout entier. Cinquibengages pour le
mement , nous sommes toutefois
moment dans des entretiens preliminaires
qui montreront
s’il existe une base en vue d’un rsglement
gquitable qui assurerait
la protection des droits de
tous les habitants de la Rhodbsie. Je n’ajouterai rien
pour l’instant
qui puisse compromettre
le suc&s
de ces entretiens,
car nous sommes fermement
convaincus que de nouvelles mesures prises par les
Nations Unies en ce moment ne pourraient
avoir
aucune utilite et risqueraient m&me de g&!ner la &alisation d’un tel rkglement. Mais, pour conclure, j’affirme une fois de plus que nous sommes r&olus
8, r6gler ce probleme par des moyens pacifiques et
a le regler de fagon Equitable.

62. I have thought it right to make this general statement of the position and policy of my Government, I
have done so because it seemed to me that it wou.lcl
be helpful at this tage in our debate for that position
and policy to be clearly restated.

62. I1 m’a paru necessaire
d’bnoncer
dans leurs
grandes lignes la position et la politique de mon
gouvernement.
J’ai estime en effet qu’il serait utile
de les rappeler clairement a ce stade de nos d8bats.

63. Mr.
FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translated
from Russian): The Security
Council has again to consider the situation prevailing
in Southern Rhodesia, It has been urgently convened
at the request of the independent States of Africa,
This fact is in itself further evidence that the Southern
Bhodesian crisis is an ever-increasingthreat
topeace
and security,
and not only on the continent of Africa.

63. M. FEDORENKO (Union des RBpubliques socialistes sovi&iques)
[traduit du russe]: Le Conseil de
sGcurit.8 est de nouveau appele 3 examiner lasituation
en Rhod&ie du Sud. C’est & la demande des pays
indi5pendants d’dfrique que le Conseil a QtB convoque
d’urgence. Voila qui suffirait % montrer que la crise
de la Rhodesie du Sud fait peser une menace de plus
en plus grave sur la paix et la sbcurit8, et pas seulemerit dans le continent africain.

64, At yesterday’s
meetings of the Council we heard
the representatives
of the independent African countries; the Foreign Minister
of Zambia, the l?oreign
Minister
of Senegal, the Secretary-General
of the
Ministry
for Foreign Affairs
of Algeria,
and the
representatives
of Nigeria ando%SierraLeone,
as well
as the representatives
of two Asian countries, India
and Pakistan. These representatives’
statements provided a comprehensive
analysis of the development of
events in Southern Rhodesia and an enumeration of the
claims arising out of the legitimate aspirations
of the
Zimbabwe people.

64. Hier, les reprgsentants
des pays indgpendants
d’Afrique
ont pris la parole au Conseil - le Xinistre
des affaires
Btrangares de la ‘Zambie, le Ministre
des affaires
&rangGres du SknBgal, le Secretaire
g&&al
du Ministgre
des affaires
&rang&res
de
1’Algbrie et les reprBsentants du Nigeria et du Sierra
Leone, ainsi que deux representants
des pays d’Asie,
1Yncle et le Pakistan. On trouve clans ces d&larations
l’analyse
oompl&e de l%volution de la situation en
Rhodesie du Sud et l%noncE de revendications
conformes aux legitimes aspirations
du peuple du Zimbabwe.

65. In recent months, the situation
in Southern
Rhodesia has commanded the close attention of the
peoples of Africa and of the entire international
community. Here, in Southern Rhodesia, the forces of
colonialism and racism are continuing their efforts
to deprive the 4 million African inhabitants of Southern
Rhodesia, the long-suffering
Zimbabwe people, of their
lawful and inalienable rights to national independence
and independent development,

65. Depuis quelques mois, la situation enRhod&iedu
Sud est suivie avec beaucoup d’attentionpar
les peuples
d’Afrique
et l’opinion mondiale. Lhrbas, en Rhodesie
du Sud, les forces du colonialisme
el; du racisme
per&v&rent
dans leurs efforts pour priver le peuple
cruelloment
Bprouve du Zimbabwe,
c’est-a-dire
4
millions d’bfricains,
de ses droits legitimes et inal&
nables 2 l’ind8pendance nationale et au progrss dans
la libert&

66. It is altogether understandable
that the African
States, which are the most interested in a speedy
solution of the Southern Rhodesian question, should
again be asking the Security Council to consider the
critical situation in Southern Rhodesia and, in conformity with the United Nations Charter,
to adopt
measures to eliminate the racist Smith regime and to
enable the Zimbabwe people to exercise their right to
national self-determination,
This demand of the
African countries is based, in particular, on an analysis

66. I1 est bien compr&hensible que les pays d’Afrique
qu’int&esse
au premier chef la solution rapide du
probl&me de la Rhodesie du Sud demandent une fOiS
de plus au Conseil de &curitg d’examiner lasituation
critique qui s’est c&e dans ce pays et de prendre
des mesures,
conformement
a la Charte des Nations
Unies, pour
Bliminer le regime raciste de Smith et
donner au peuple du Zimbabwe lapossibilit6 d ‘em%3
son droit B l’autod&termination.
Cette revendication
se fonde notamment sur l’analyse que le Cornit des

of the situation
of Twenty-F0ur.p

in the territory

by the Committee

Vingt-Quatrep
toire.

a donnee de la situation dansle terri-

6’7. kn recent months, at the request cf the African
countries,
the Security
Council and other United
Natiois
organs,
General Assembly,
Committee
of
Twenty-Four,
have repeatedly considered the situation
in Southern Rhodesia resulting
from the usurpation
of power by the white minority’s
racist regime.

67. A la demande des pays d’Afrique, le Conseilde
skcurite et d’autres organes de l’organisation des
Nations Unies, l’Assembl8e g&n%ale, le Cornit des
Vingt-Quatre, ont & maintes reprises au tours des
derniers mois Btudie la situation qu’a c&de en Rhod&ie du Sud l’usurpation du pouvoir par le regime
raciste d’une minorit blanche.

68. In this connexion, we should recall that, as far
back as 20 November
1965, the Security
Council
adopted resolution
21’7 (1965) in which the United
Kingdom Government,
as we well remember,
was
called upon to take “measures
which would prove
effective in eliminating the authority of the usurpers
and in bringing
the minority
regime in Southern
Rhodesia to an immediate end”, The Security Council
likewise
called upon the United Kingdom Government
“to take immediate measures
in order to allow the
people of Southern Rhodesia to determine their own
future
consistent
with the objectives
of General
Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) “, that is, in accordance
with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial
Countries
and Peoples, The Security
Council resolution
also provided for other measures
designed to contribute
to early elimination
of the
authority
of the usurpers
in Southern Rhodesia. In
particular,
the Security Council called upon all States
to refrain from supplying the racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia with arms, equipment and
military
material, and to do their utmost to break
all economic relations with Southern Rhodesia, including the establishment of an embargo on oil and
petroleum products.

68. 11faut 3 oe sujet rappeler quele Conseil de s&urit8, dbs le 20 novembre 1965, a adopt6 la resolution
217 (1965) dans laquelle il priait le Gouvernementdu
Royaume-Uni, nous nous en souvenons fort bien, de
prendre des “mesures appropriees qui sereveleraient
efficaces pour aneantir l’autoritg des usurpateurs
et pour mettre fin immediatement au regime minoritaire en Rhodesie du Sud”. Le Conseil de shourite
priait Bgalement le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
de ‘lprendre des mesures immediate9 pour permettre
au peuple de Rhodbsie du Sudde decider de sonpropre
avenir conformement aux objectifs de la resolution
1514 (XV) de l’Assembl6e g&&ralen, en d’autres
termes, conformement & la Declaration sur l’octroi
de l’ind6pendance aux pays et aux peuplescoloniaux,
D’autres mesures qui devaient permettre d’an8antir
tr& rapidement l’autorite des usurpateurs en Rhod&ie du Sud Btaient Bgalement prkvues dansla r&solution du Conseil de &curit&
C’est ainsi que le
Conseil priait tous les Etats de s’abstenir de four&
au regime de la minorit raciste de Rhoddsiedti Sud
des armes# de l’equipement et du materiel militaire,
et de s’efforcer de rompre toutes les relations Bconomiques aveo la Rhod&sie du Sud, notamment en imposant un embargo sur le p&role et les produits
petroliers.

69. The decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly were supported by the overwhelming majority of the States Members of the United
Nations, At their conference in Addis Ababa in
December 1965,Z/ the independent African States
belonging to the Organization of African Unity decided
to establish a complete economic blockade of Southern
Rhodesia and to sever all means of communication
with it.

69. Les resolutions du Conseil de skcurite et de
l’Assembl8e g&&ale ont recueilli l’appui de l’dCrasante majorit des Etats Membres de 1’0rganisation
des Nations Unies. A la Conference d’Addis-AbBba,
en di%embre 1965Y, les Etats indgpendantsd’Afrlque
membres de l’organisation de l’unit6 africaine ont
adopt& une decision concernant l’institutionditin bloous
&onomique total de la Rhod&ie du Sud et’la rupture
de toute relation aveo ce territoire.

70. It should also be recalled that the United Nations
Secretariat is constantly receiving reports of specific
action taken against the Smith regime by the majority
of Member States of the Organization in fulfilment
of those decisions, including cessation of oil supplies,
severance of trade and other relations and so on,

70. 11convient aussidemeutionner queles renseignements concernant les mesures concr&tes deja appliqu6es centre le regime Smith par la majorit des
Etats Membres de 1’ONU en vertu de ces d&cisions,
et notamment l’interruption des livraisons de petrole
et la rupture des relations commerciales ou autres,
ne oessent de parvenir au Secretariat de l’Organisation des Nations Unies.

71. However, the forces of Southern Rhodesia have
found powerful protectors in London, Washington,
Bonn and some other capitals, The alliance of
the notorious “unholy
colonialists
and racists,
alliance”, has come to the aid of the racist Smith
regime and is doing everything possible to preserve
and perpetuate the present colonial and racist order

71. Mais les forces du racisme sud-rhod6sien ant
trouv6 de puissants protecteurs BLondres, 2Washington, & Bonn et dans d’autres capitales, L’alliance
des colonialistes et des raoistes, lafameuse “alliance
impie” qui fait tout pour pr6server et perpetuer
l’actuel syst&me colonial et raciste danstoute1’Afriwe
australe, a vole au secours du regime Smith. C’esb

q Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of
the Declaration
on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples.
9 Sixth extraordinary
meeting
of the Council of Ministers
of the
Organisation
of African Unity held from 3 to 5 December
1965.

.?I Corn&& sphcial chargi d’itudier la situation en ce qui co*oerne
I’applicatlon
de la Dklaration
sur l’octroi de I’indGpendance aux PaYS
et aux peuples coloniaux.
3J Slxl-$me session extraordinaire
du Cons41 des minkDe
de
l’organisation

16

de l’unit6

africaine,

tenue du 3 au 5 dkembre

1965.

throughout southern Africa, As a result, the decisions
aimed at bringing the racist
regime in Southern
Rhodesia to an end and handing over authority to
representative
organs of the majority of the population
of that country remained unfulfilled.

pourquoi les d&cisions qui ont pour but l%limination
du regime racists
en Rhodesie du Sud et le transfert
du pouvoir & des osganes reprBsentatifs
de lamajorit6
de la population de ce pays n’ont pas BtB, suivies
d’effet.

72. The Security Council cannot but take note of the
fact that it is, first and foremost the United Kingdom
which has failed to carry out these decisions, although
it is itself mainly responsible for the present situation
in Southern Rhodesia, a situation which endangers
world peace and security. The accession of the racist
regime to power in Southern Rhodesia, as many
representatives
of African
countries
have rightly
pointed out in the Security Council, resultedprecisely
from widespread
collusion
among the forces
of
colonialism.
That is what has enabled the racist
Salisbury regime to gather economic and military
strength,

72. I1 ne peut gchapper au Conseil de s&usite que
le premier pays a n’avoir pas exBcut6 ces decisions
est. le Royaume-Uni, bien que ce pays Porte la responsabilite principale de l’actuelle situation en Rhodesie
du Sud, situation qui menace la paix et la skcurit6.
L’avgnement d’un regime raciste en Rhod&ie du
Sud, comme l’ont justement fait remarquer plusieurs
repri%entants des pays d’Afrique au Conseil de
s8curit8, est pr&i&ment
le r&sultat d’un vaste
complot des forces du colonialisme. Et c’est bien la
oe qui a permis au regime raciste de Salisbury de se
consolider dans les domaines Bconomique et militaire,

73. The facts about this shameful “operation” are well
known. As far back as 1961, a so-called constitution,
worked out by none other than the United Kingdom,
was introduced in Southern Rhodesia, consolidating the
racist order and laying the foundation of the present
regime of colonial domination of millions of Africans
by a racist clique, After this, as we know, the United
Kingdom armed the Southern Rhodesian racists, contributed to reinforcing their position, and encouraged
the establishment of the colonial alliance of Southern
Rhodesia with the racist regime of South Africa and
the Portuguese colonialists.
As a result, Southern
Rhodesia has been turned into a police State, into a
bastion of misanthropic racism.

73. Tout le monde conndt les circonstances de cette
ignominieuse wop8rationW.Une @[endue constitution
dont l’auteur etait ni plus ni moins le Gouvernement
britannique et qui consolidait le syst&me raciste et
jetait les bases de l’actuel regime de domination
coloniale d’une clique raciste sur des millions d’hfricains est entrEte envigueurd&s 1961,Puis le RoyaumeUni, comme chacun sait, a don& des armes aux
racistes de la Rhodesie du Sud et les a aid& a renforcer leurs positions, encourageant l’alliance coloniale de la Rhod&ie du Sud avec le regime raciste
sud-africain
et les colonialistes portugais. Voil&
comment la Rhod&ie du Sud est devenue un Etat
policier, le bastion d’un racisme inhumain,

74. Thus all the world is again convinced that United
Kingdom colonialism, though unstinting in its wordy
declarations about decolonization, in fact does not go
beyond such pious statements. Unconcerned about the
means it uses, it is taking all kinds of steps to preserve
the seed and the soil which gave rise to the forces of
racism and which maintain the de facto colonial
domination of the United Kingdom in African countries,

74. Sus cet exemple, le monde entier a pu une fois
de plus constater que le colonialisme britannique,peu
avare de d&clarations verbales SW la dtScolonisation,
ne va pratiquement pas au-dela de ces pieuses professions de foi et prend en m@metemps toutes sortes
de mesures, sans s’inqui&er du choix des moyens,
pour preserver le sol sur lequel ont grandiles forces
du racisme et qui permet au Royaume-Uni de maintenir certains pays d’Afrique sous une domination
coloniale de fait.

75. The Soviet Union fully shares the African States’
View
that British ruling circles bear the main responsibility for all the crimes
and evil deeds of the
colonialists
and racists
in Southern Rhodesia and
for the present tragedy of the Zimbabwe people, The
United Kingdom also bears full responsibility
for the
non-fulfilment of the Security Council decisions and
for the maintenance of the Southern Rhodesian racists
in Power. For it is the United Kingdom itself which
has failed to carry out the Security Council’s request
to Put an immediate end to the racist regime and to
Permit the people of Southern Rhodesia to determine
their own future. The question arises, how long will
London continue with impunity to sabotage execution
of the Security Council’s decisions.

75. L’Union sovi&ique partage pleinement l’opinion
des representants des pays africains selon lesquels
les milieux dirigeants britanniques portent la principale responsabilit.8 de tous les crimes et de tous
les mefaits des colonialistes et des racistes en
Rhodesie du Sud, la responsabilite de la tragedie
qui frappe aujourd’hui le peuple du Zimbabwe. De
m&me, si les r&solutions du Conseil de &curit& ne
sont pas appliquees et si les raoistes sud-rhod&iens
se maintiennent au pouvoir, le Royaume-Uni en Porte
I’enti?ze et totale responsabilit& C’est en effet le
Gouvernement britannique qui n’a pas appliqud les
d&isions du Conseil de s6curit8 exigeant qu’il soit
mis immgdiatement fin au regime raciste et que le
pcuple de la Rhod&ie du Sud ait la possibi1it.Q de
decider lui-meme de son avenir. Jusqu’a quand va-t-on
continuer de saboter impunement ?tLondres l’application des d&isions du Conseil de s&Xrit8?

76. While in fact refusing to take effective measures
against the Southern Rhodesian racists in accordance
with United Nations decisions,
the United Kingdom
Government at the same time is endeavouring to

76. Tout en refussnt en fait d’entreprendre centre
les racistes de la Rhod&ie du Sud une action efficace
conformement aux decisions de l’organisation des
Nations Unies, le Gouvernement britannique VeUt en

create the impression
that some sort of aCtiOn is
being taken in London, that something is being done
to settle the Southern Rhodesian problem. United
Kingdom
representatives
constantly assert that effective economic sanctions are being adopted against
the Smith regime. At the conference of Commonwealth
Prime Ministers
in January of this year, the head of
the United Kingdom Government gave an assurance
that the Salisbury regime would collapse within a few
weeks
as a result of these economic sanctions. But
the picture,
here, as before, is too far from that
painted in London. Today, too, the United Kingdom
representative,
sought in his statement to convince the
Security
Council of this-if,
that is, we can strip the
envelope of pious phrases from his statement.

mbme temps donner l’impression
que Londres applique
certaines mesures, fait quelque chose pour resoudre
le problBme de la Rhodesie du Sud. Les representants
du Royaume-Uni ne cessent d’affirmer
quo des sanctions Bconomiques efficaces sont mises en application
centre le regime Smith. C’est ainsi qu’au mois de
janvier dernier le chef du Gouvernement britannique
d&!larait ?t la Conference des Premiers Ministresdes
pays du Commonwealth
que le regime de Salisbury
s%croulerait
en quelques semaines du fait des sanctions Bconomiques. Mais, en fait, la situation est trPls
differente de celle que Londres d8crit, Aujourd’hui,
le representant
du Royaume-Uni
a encore une fois
tent6 de convaincre le Conseil de sgcurit8 - c’est du
moins ce que signifie son intervention une fois d4gag&
du manteau des pieuses dgclarations.

7’7. As the representatives
of the African and Asian
countries
have shown in their statements
in the
Security
Council,
on the basis of many and cogent
facts,
economic
sanctions
have in reality proved
ineffective,
precisely
because of sabotage by a number
of Members
of the United Nations; whisle the action
of the United Kingdom in the Southern Rhodesian
question, however it is depicted and advertised here,
in fact amounts to connivance with and support of the
racist
Smith regime.
Everything
is being done to
avoid any serious
injury to the economic situation of
the racist clique. And that is why international public
opinion rightly
qualified all this as a “comedy of
as a “farcel’.
That is why Portugal and
sanctions”,
the Republic of South Africa are taking advantage of
this moment to ignore United Nations decisions onthe
economic boycott of Southern Rhodesia.

77. Comme les repr&aentants
des pays d’Afrique et
d’Asie qui sont intervenus
l’ont montre 3 partir de
nombreux faits probants, les sanctions honomiques
ont QtB pratiquement sans efficacit8, en raisonnotamment du sabotage auquel se sont livr& plusieurs
Membres de l’organisation
des Nations Unies, et
l’attitude du Royaume-Uni dans l’affaire de la Rhodesie
du Sud, quelle que soit la faoon dont on la pr&ente et
la publicite dont on l’entoure,
aura BtB une attitude
de complaisance ?i l%gard du regime raciste deSmith
et de soutien ?t ce regime. Tout est fait pour ne pas
mettre &rieusement
en danger la situation Bconomique de la clique raciste.
C’est pourquoi l’opinion
mondiale a qualifid & juste titre les sanctions de
l’farcelt, de %omBdietl. Et voila pourquoi le Portugal
et la Rgpublique sud-africaine
profitsnt de ce moment
pour ne tenir aucun compte des d&isionsdel’Organisation des Nations Unies sur le boycottage 6conomique
de la Rhod6sie du Sud.

78. Instead of finally calling the Governments of these
countries
to order, as the African countriesrightfully
insisted
at a meeting of the Security Council as
early as 9 April of this year, London and Washington
have taken them under their protection. Incidentally,
the tanker Joanna V, whose arrival in the port of Beira
in Mozambique served the United Kingdom as a pretext
for convening
tne Security Council, was recently
authorized
to unload its cargo of oil in that very port
of Beira, where it had been lying until a very short
time ago, It has now become even more obvious that
the so-called
United Kingdom initiative was from the
outset intended to distract the attention of the Security
Council and of public opinion from the realities of
London’s policy in the Southern Rhodesian question. It
should be added that while the British
Navy was
chasing the two tankers,
oil and petroleum products
were being delivered overland, by road and rail, to
oil storage
depots in Southern Rhodesia. Representatives
of the African countries, as well as of India
and Pakistan,
have already adduced incontrovertible
factual evidence on that score and there is no need
for us to repeat it.

78.. Au lieu de rappeler enfin & l’ordre lesgouvernements de ces pays, comme les Etats africains les y
invitaient justement et & bon droit lorsque le Conseil
de s6curit6 s’est reuni le 9 avril dernier, Londres
et Washington les ont pris sous leur protection. Au
demeurant, le p&rolier
Joanna V, dont l’arrivge dans
le port de Beira au Mozambique avait servi de Prgtexte au Royaume-Uni
pour demander la convocation
du Conseil de s8curit8, a r&emment
regu l’autorisation de dgcharger sa cargaison de p&role dans le
mame port de Beira 09 il se trouvait encore oes
derniers
temps. 11 apparalt encore plus clairement
aujourd’hui que cette prdtendue initiative britannique
visait d&s le debut a d&ourner l’attention du Conseil
de sGcurit8 et de l’opinion publique de la veritable
politique du Royaume-Uni
sur la question de la
Rhod&ie du Sud. I1 faut ajouter que les r&ervoirs
de la Rhod&ie du Sud continuaient d%tre approvisionn&
en p&role et en produits p&roliers
Par
camions-citernes
et par chemin de fer au moment
oa la flotte britannique donnait la chasse aux dew
p&roliers.
Les rep&sentants
des pays d’Afrique et
ceux de 1’Inde et du Pakistan ont deja CitE! sur ce
point des temoignages et des faits irrefutables
et
nous n’avons pas besoin de les ri?p6ter,

79. In such circumstances,
the resolution 221 (1966)
adopted by the Security Council on 9 April of this year
has done nothing to increase the effectiveness
of
economic
sanctions;
nor has it brought the racist

79. Dans ces conditions,
la r&solution 221 (1966)
adoptee le 9 avril dernier par le Conseil de seourite
n’a pas renduplus efficaoes les sanctions Bconomiques,
elle n’a nullement rapproche le r@ime raciste de la
18

regime in Southern Rhodesia one iota closer to downfall, or the people of that country to freedom,
80. The facts show that the racists
of the Republic
of South Africa, carefully tended by the monopolistic
capital of the West, and the Portuguese colonialists,
acting as the storm troopers of the military-colonialist
NATO bloc, are not only violating the oil embargo
with impunity, but are also continuing to maintain
normal economic relations
with the racist Smith
regime and giving it financial and other assistance.
There are enough candid, as well as cynical, admissions of this in the American and BritishPress.
Here
are some examples.

RhodE;sie du Sud de l’heure de sa chute et le peuple
de ce pays de l’heure de la libert&
80. Les faits montrent que les racistes
de la Republique sud-africaine,
choyes par les monopoles capitalistes occidentaux et les colons portugais, d&achement CIe choc du bloc militaire
et colonialiste
de
l’OTAN, ne se contentent pas de violer impunement
l’embargo sur le p&role mais continuent d’entretenir
des relations
Bconomiques normales avec le regime
raciste de Smith et de lui fournir une aide financisre
et autre. On trouve & cet Bgard dans la presse am&
rioaine et britannique
suffisamment
d’aveux aussi
clairs
que cyniques. Je voudrais en titer quelques
exemples,

81. The Washington Post of 28 April 1966 qualified
the role of the Republic of South Africa in the matter
of the supply of oil to the racist regime as follows:
“Overland shipments of oil from South Africa have
enabled Rhodesia to meet much if not all of its daily
gasoline ration. I1

81. Dans son num&o du 28 avril dernier , $eWashington Post definissait
en ces termes
le rale de la
R&publique
sud-africaine
dans l’approvisionnement
du regime raciste en produits pgtroliers:
“La fousnilure de p&role a partir delaF@publique sud-africaine
permet en fait ?I la Rhodesie de couvrir une grande
partie, sinon la totali@, de ses besoins quotidiens en
carburant.”
82. Et le journal britannique 1’Observer
Bcrivait
le 24 avril 1966: “Les sanctions
Gconomiques ne
peuvent atteindre
leur but tant que Verwoerd
sera
rbsolu & les saboter en tolerant le passage du pdtrole
.?itravers les frontieres de 1aRGpublique sud-africaine
et en accordant des credits sous le manteau.”

82. The British Observer
wrote on 24 April 1966:
“Economic sanctions cannot achieve their purpose
so long as Dr. Verwoerd is determined to undermine
them by allowing
oil to trickle
through and by
surreptiously
extending credit.”
83. Moreover, there are also reports that the Smith
regime has concluded secret agreements with Portugal
and the Republic of South Africa on mutual use of
military air bases for the purpose of deployment of
the Southern Rhodesian air force.

83. Qui plus est, on a appris que le regime Smith
aurait
conclu, avec le Portugal et la Rgpublique
sud-africaine,
des accords secrets tendant bl’utilisation r&iproque
des bases aeriennes militaires
pour
faciliter
la dispersion
des forces a&iennes
de la
Rhod&ie du Sud.
84. Si tout cela est possible, c’est que les monopoles
britanniques
et les monopoles amgricains,
qui sont
les vbritables
maltres
de l’bconomie
tant de la
RBpublique sud-africaine
que de celle de la Rhodesie
du Sucl et de toute 1’Afrique australe, n’ont ni 1eS uns
ni les autres intbr&t !l ce que les sanctions soient
efficacement
appliqukes centre le regime raciste en
Rhodgsie.
85. Je voudrais B cet Bgard porter & l’attention du
Conseil
les aveux non Bquivoques de la revue ami%iCaine
U.S. News and World Report,qui
Ecrivait le
25 avril dernier:
ncomme le constatent les dirigeants de laRhod&ie
du Sud, ni le Royaume-Uni
ni les Etats-Unis
ne
veulent exercer une trop fortepression
sur 1’Afrique
du Sud, quoi que puissent dire les pays d’Afrique
noire. Toute action centre I’Afrique du Sudouvrirait
une boZte de Pandore remplie de difficult&
dont
aucune puissance
occidentale ne voudrait avoir a
s’occuper.”
86. On peut Bgalement titer des declarations
qui
ont BtB faites r&emment
au Parlement britannique;
le deputi: conservateur
Maudling disait, le 27 avril
dernier,
B propos des sanotions kconomiques:
“NOUS
n’acoepterions
jamais les sanctions si elles avaient
pour but de contraindre
la Rhod&ie & capituler sans
conditionY.n
Comme on peut le constater,
les d&la-

84. All this is happening because neither the British
nor the American monopolies are interested in having
sanctions against the racist
regime of Southern
Rhodesia effectively a.pplied. These monopolies are the
true masters of the economy not only in the Republic
of South Africa, but also in Southern Rhodesia and all
southern Africa,
85, In that connexion, may I be permitted to draw
your attention to the following candid statement which
appeared in the American publication, U.S. News and
World Report, on 25 April 1966:
“As Rhodesian leaders see it, neither Britain nor
the United States wants to clamp down too hard on
South Africa, no matter what the nations of black
Africa say, Action against South Africa would open
UP a whole Pandora’s
box of troubles that neither
Western Power is anxious to deal with.”

86. We might also refer to recent statements in the
British Parliament.
Thus a Conservative
member,
Mr. Maudling, speaking of British economic sanctions,
Said on 27 April 1966: ‘I., . we can never accept
sanctions if they are designed merely to beat Rhodesia
down into acceptance of unconditional
surrender.“!!/
As we see, the statements of high-ranking
repreDebates(Hansard), House
ajesty’s

Stationery

Office,

y

of Commons, Official
Fifth Series,vol.
727,

s;

19

Voir Parliamentary
Debates (Hansard), House of Commons, Official
Londres, Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office, Fifth Series, vol. 727,
.
.

sentatives
in London hardly conform, to put it mildly,
with what the Security Council hears from the mouths
of the official representatives
of the United Kingdom
Government
here,

faites & Londres par de hautes personnalit&s correspondent mal, c’est le moms qutonpuiasa
dire, a ce que le Conseil de seourit.6 entendioi de
la bouche des representants offioiels duGouvernsment
du Royaume-Uni.

87. As for the true intentions of Washington in regard
to Smith’s racist police regime, they too were clearly
demonstrated
by the United States representative’s
attitude when the Southern Rhodesian question was
discussed
in the Security Council on 9 April 1966. The
United
States,
together with the United Kingdom,
refused
to support
the proposals
of the African
members of the Security Council, which were designed
to ensure effective economic sanctions,
to put an end
to the sabotage on the part of the Republic of South
Africa and Portugal and to take practical
measures to
liquidate the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia. By
abstaining
in the vote on these proposals
[S/7243],
which were supported by seven members of the Seourity
Council,
the United States and the United Kingdom
applied the so-called
hidden veto and deliberately
wrecked
that decision. Thus again, and for how many
times, they acted as accomplices of the racist clique
in Salisbury,

87. Quant aux veritables intentions de Washington
2 l%gard du regime raciste et polioier de Smith,
elles ont BtB de nouveau clairement illustrdes par
l’attitude
du representant des Etats-Unis dana 1s
d&bat du Conseil de s&uriti: sur la question de la
RhodGsie du Sud le 9 avril 1966. Les Etats-Unis et
le Royaume-Uni ont refuse d’appuyer la proposition
des Etats africains membres du Conseil de s&urit&
tendant a appliquer des sanctions dconomiquesefficaces, & en finir avec le sabotage auquel se livrent
la Rgpublique sud-africaine et le Portugal et amettro
en ceuvre des mesures pratiques pour mettre fin au
regime raciste en Rhodesie du Sud. En s’ahstenant
lors du vote sur ces propositions [S/7243] qui avaient
&g appuyees par sept membres du Conseilde sgcuritb,
les Etats-Unis et le Royaume-Uni ont eu recours a
ce que l’on appelle le veto implicite et ont emp&ch&
de propos d&ib&e leur adoption. Ainsi, une fois de
plus parmi tant d’autres, ils se sontfait les oomplices
du regime raciste de Salisbury.

88. Nor can the members of the Security Council.
overlook the fact that another member of NATO-the
Federal Republic of Germany-is giving aid to the
racist Salisbury regime in a variety of ways, According
to information from a numbees of sources, the sportsmen in Bonn who fish in troubled waters have
apparently decided to take advantage of the situation to
strengthen the economic and political position of
Western Germany in Southern Rhodesia. There are
reports that Bonn is taking steps to expand trade
and increase its investments in Southern Rhodesia,
while West German specialists are training Southern
Rhodesian ofFmess in methods of conducting antiguerrilla and anti-popular warfare.

88. Les membres du Conseil de sl?curit&ne sauraient
mf%onnaltre non plus le fait qu’un autre memhrede
I’OTAN, la RBpublique fed&ale d’Allemagne, accorde
dans de nombreux domaines une assistance auregime
raciste de Salisbury. Conformement B des renseignements provenant de sources diverses, il faut croire
que ceux qui pechent en eau trouble & Bonn ont decide
de profiter de la situation pour consolider les positions Bconomiques et politiques de la R6publique
fed&ale d’Allemagne en Rhodesie du Sud. On a ainsi
appris que Bonn prenait des mesures destinees a
accroltre son commerce et & augmenter sesinvestissements en Rhod&sie du Sudtandis que dessp&cialistes
d’Allemagne occidentale forment les officiers de
Rhodesie du Sud aux tactiques de la guerilla, aux
m&hodes de lutte centre un peuple.

89. Now, after so many discussions of the question in
the United Nations, hardly anyone doubts that the
crimes which are at present being committed against
the African population of Southern Rhodesia could
be committed without the blessing of the members of
the NATO military bloc, which are linked with each
other by mutual guarantees andbear the responsibility
for these crimes before the African peoples.

89. Maintenant, ap&s les nombreux examensde la
question & l*ONU, il est peu probable que l’on doute
encore du fait que les crimes commis actuellement
centre la population afrioaine de Rhodesie du Sud
auraient pu Btre perp&r&s sans la b6nediction des
membres du bloc militaire de 1’OTAN qui SOnt li@%
par un engagement de solidarite et qui portent la
responsabilite de CBS crimes devant les PauPles
africains.

90. The United Kingdom’s stubborn unwillingness to
take real measures, in accordance with the Security
Council’s decision, to remove the Smith regime,
encourages and inspires the Southern Rhodesian
racists to further cirmes against the Zimbabwe people,
Despite strict censorship and the police cordon, ever
more reports are coming from Southern Rhodesia
about repression of the African population, about the
adoption of further repressive measures, about arrests
of and reprisals against Africans who are unwilling to
be reconciled with racist authority. The process of
spreading racist practices throughout the territory
on the model of the racist political regime in Salisbury
is being intensified, In this connexion, the weekly T&
Observer wrote on 10 April 1966that the Smith r6gime

90. Le refus tenace du Royaume-Uni de prendre,
conform8ment a la d&ision du Conseil de sgourtte,
des mesures effioaces centre le regime de Ian Smith
encourage et inspire les racistes de RhodtSsiedu Sud
et les incite ?tcommettre de nouveaux crimes Centre
le peuple du Zimbabwe, Malgr6 une censure stricte
et un cordon de police sexrb, des nouvelles ds Plus
en plus nombreuses filtrent de Rhode& indiquant
que des actes de repression sont a nouveau PerPGtrgs
centre la population africaine, que des arrsstationset
des repr&ailles sont exercees COntxe tous les Afxicams qui refusent de composer aveo leS racistes au
pouvoir . Cn impose en nombre toujours Plus grand
dans le territoire des mesures racistes oalqueess”r
le systeme applique par le regime sud-africain. A

XatiOnS

20

was becomingmore racist, doubtless inpafl as a result
of its increasing material and spiritual
dependence
on South Africa.

cet Bgard, l’hebdomadaire
1’Observer
de Londres
gcrivait,
dans son numero du 10 avril dernier, que
le regime de Smith devient de plus en plus raciste,
sans doute en partie B cause de sa dependance mat&
rielle et spirituelle
croissante 2 l%gard de 1’Afrique
du Sud.

91, This is borne out by reports in the British and
American Press, which in this instance can hardly
he susbected of a deliberate intention to exaggerate.
Thus, for example, The New York Times of 2i April
1966 reoorted the suaoression
bv Rhodesian police
of an African riot in-the suburbs of Salisbury. The
English weekly The Observer wrote on 24 April 1966
that “it was clearly established that there had been a
mutiny in the Rhodesian African Rifles immediately
after the illegal declaration of independence; . . . seven
of the mutineers
had been court-martialled
and
sentenced to gaol terms of from eighteen months to
five years”.
The London Times reported on 14 May
1966 that twenty Africans had recently been sentenced
to ten years! hard labour, and one to five years’ hard
labour, on the charge that they had been plotting the
overthrow of the racist Smith regime. The same paper
publishes many other facts about arrests of Africans
and legal proceedings
against them in Southern
Rhodesia.

91. Ceci est corsobore
par la presse britannique
et la presse
americame
qui, en ltoccurrence,
ne
sauraient iX.re soupConnees de vouloir forcer la note.
C’est ainsi que le New York Times du 21 avril
decrivait comment la police rhodesienne avait &ra&
l’agitation africaine
dans les faubourgs de Salisbury.
Dans 1’Observer
du 24 avril, on lisait: Wa btB olairement &abli que les tirailleurs
africains de Rhodesie
du Sud se sont soulev&
immediatement
aprBs la
declaration unilat&ale
d’independance . . , Sept dlentre
eux ont &e condamnks par un tribunal militaire & des
peines de prison allant d’un an et demi B cinq ans.”
Le Times de Londres signalait le 14 maique 20 Africains avaient BtB recemment condamnes B 10 ans de
travaux for&s
et un autre a cinq ans pour atteinte
& la s&ret6 de 1’Etat dans l’intention
de renverser
le regime raciste de Ian Smith. Ce meme journal cite
de nombreux
autres cas oil des Africains
ont et6
arr&t&
et poursuivis
en Rhod&ie du Sud.

92. In their attempts to suppress
the Zimbabwe
PeOPle’s will to true independence, the racist forces
are treating the African leaders with special cruelty.
According to the International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions, thirty-seven
trade union leaders in
Southern Rhodesia axe in concentration
camps or
in gaol,

92. Cherchant
B Btouffer la volont(! du peuple du
Zimbabwe
dfacc6der
$ une independance &eile, le
regime s’aoharne aveo uneoruaut6particuli8recontre
les dirigeants
africains.
Selon des renseignements
provenant
de la Confed&ation
internationale
des
syndicats libres, 37 dirigeants syndicaux de Rhodi%ie
du Sud se trouvent actuellement dans des camps de
concentration
ou en prison.

93. The United Kingdom representative
scrupulously
enumerated the millions of pounds sterling
which
sanctions against the Salisbury authorities have cost
his country. But he did not say one word about the
price in blood and suffering
which the Zimbabwe
People have paid for the tolerance the United Kingdom
Government has shown to racism, for the assistance
it has rendered it, for its assistance
to this misanthropic regime. Nor did the United Kingdom representative say one word about the hundreds of millions
of pounds sterling in profits accruing to British and
American capitalists and monopolies in the South of
Africa, which ensure the stability of the racist regime.

93. Dans sa declaration, le representant
duRoyaumeUni a calcule scrupuleusement
le nombre de millions
de livres sterling
que les sanctions centre les autorites de Salisbury ont coQt6 au Royaume-Uni.
Mais il
s’est tu sur le prix que .cette tolerance envers le
racisme,
I’aide accordhe par le Royaume-Uni
8, ce
regime raciste,
I’appui fourni par le Gouvernement
britannique
2 un regime qui pri%onise la haine de
l’humanit8
auront co0t.e au peuple du Zimbabwe en
sang et en souffrances;
de mame, il a passe sous
silence les centaines de millions de livres sterling
de b&-&fioes que les monopoles anglais et americain
tire& du Sud de 1’Afrique et qui assurent la stabilite
du regime des racistes.

64, From a careful analysis it is not hard to deduce
the general political principle underlying London’s
action in regard to Southern Rhodesia, Unwillingness
to
carry out the basic demands laid down in the
Security Council resolution 217 (1965) of 20 November
1965 for immediate removal of the racists
from
Power in Southern Rhodesia and protection
of the
hWi%l rights of the Zimbabwe people; outright connivance with the racists in connexion with the imposition of economic sanctions; provision of all possible
loop-holes whereby the Salisbury regime may circumvent these measures-these
are the principal and
determining factors in the United Kingdom’s action
towards Southern Rhodesian racism, This course of
action is’ designed not to bring about the removal of
the Smith regime but, on the contrary, to make some
kind of deal with it at the expense of the Zimbabwe

94. Si l’on analyse la conduite de Londres envers la
Rhod&ie
du Sud, il est facile de degager une ligne
de politique g&n$rale. be refus d’ex&uter
les dispositions essentielles
de la r&solution
2l.7 (1965) du
Conseil de s8curit8,
en date du 20 novembre 1965,
visant a mettre fin sans tarder aupouvoir des racistes
de Rhodesie du Sud et & permettre
au People du
Zimbabwe d’exercer
ses droits lggitimes, la COmplaisance dont il a t&s manifestement fait preuve envers
les racistes lors de l’application des sanctions Bconomiques, le maintien de toutes les issues permettant
au regime de Salisbury d%luder
les mesures
de
sanctions
oaracterisent
lVattitude du Royaume-Uni
envers les racistes
de la Rhodksie du Sud. Cette ligne
de conduite n’a nullement pour objet de mettre fin au
regime Smith; au contraire,
elle vise ?t conclure
un march6 aver lui auxdepensdupeupledu
Zimbabwe.
21

”

People. That is why we fully share the African States.’
assessment
of London’s
policy
in the Southern
Rhodesian question.

C ‘est pourquoi nous partageons enti&rement l’ot$n~On
des Etats africains concernant la politique de Lo&es
& l%gard de la Rhodesie du Sud.

95. Motivated
by. imperialistic
interests
in Africa,
London and Washington have taken a two-faced position
in the Southern Rhodesian question. In their statements, the United States and United Kingdom representatives
are unstinting
in eloquent words
and
expressions
of sympathy with the Zimbabwe people
and attempt
to clothe themselves
in the mantle of
standard-bearers
of the African peoples’ freedom.
Moreover,
as everyone will recall, the United States
and United Kingdom representatives
voted in favour
of the Security Council resolution
217 (1965). Thus
we see that, while using one hand to vote in favour of
a Security
Council resolution
aimed at the removal
of the power of the racists
in Southern Rhodesia, they
extend the other hand to the Salisbury
racists,
disregarding
even the decisions which theythemselves
had supported,
The question must therefore
arise:
which is the hand to be trusted, ifthey are alternately
raised ‘or lowered in diametrically
opposite directions?

95. Mus par des inter&s
imperialistes
en Afriqus,
Londres
et Washington
font preuve de duplicitb
dans oette question. D’une part, les representants
du Royaume-Uni
et des Etats-Unis
ne m&agent pas
dans leurs declarations
les bonnes paroles et les
expressions
de sympathie
a l’kgard
du peuple du
Zimbabwe,
allant jusqu% vouloir se. draper dans la
toge des defenseurs de la libertk des peuples africains. Qui plus est, oomme nul ne l’ignore, les
repr&entants
du Royaume-Uni
et des Etats-Unis
ont vote en faveur de la r&solution
217 (1965)du
Conseil de &curit&
11 est done evident que, d’une
main, ils votent pour les r&olutions
du Conseil de
skourit6
visant a Bcarter du pouvoir les racistes
de RhodBsie, mais qu’ils tendent l’autre main aux
racistes
de Salisbury, ne tenant ainsi auouncomptedes
r&solutions
qu’ils ont eux-m8mes
appuy6es. Aussi
est-on en droit de se demander 21laquelle des mains
faire confiance, alors qu’une main s%l8ve cependant
que ltautre s’abaisse dans des directions diamgtralement oppo&es,

96. This is precisely
why the talks initiated in London
with representatives
of the Smith regime have aroused
such serious concern and indignation everywhere.

96. C ‘est precis4ment pour oela que les n6gooiations
entamees & Londres par le Gouvernement britannique
avec le representant
du regime Smith ont souleve
une telle inquietude et une telle indignation.

97. In evaluating
political
actions in international
affairs, it is customary
to ask first of all: who benefits
from this or ,that specific action? In whose interest
was it undertaken?
The representatives
of a number
of African States in the Security Council have clearly
and unequivocally
answered
these questions.
The
talks with the Smith regime can signify nothing but an
attempted deal with the racists.
It is obvious that the
colonial Powers hope to preserve the basis of imperial
domination
in that part of Africa by concluding a deal
with
the Southern
Rhodesian
racists
behind the
Africans’
backs,

97. Dans les affaires internationales,
lorsquton veut
analyser un aote politique, on Commence par se
demander & qui il va profiter, quels int&%s il va
servir. Une reponse nette et sans BquivoqueBcette
questiona dejb &B fournie par les repr&entants’de
divers pays d’Afrique qui ont pris laparole au Conseil
de s&urit&
Les entretiens aveo le r&lime Smith
ne peuvent que signifier une tentative d’aocordavec
les racistes. I1 est evident’ que, gr%ce ala conclusion,
derri&re le dos des Africains, d’un march& avec
les raoistes de la Rhod6sie du Sud, les puissances
coloniales esperent conserver les bases de la domination imperialiste dans cette partie de l’Afrique,

98. The Soviet Union’s position on the question of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia is determined by its
fundamental policy of lending resolute and oonsistent
support to peoples fighting for their liberation from
colonial domination. The Soviet Union has supported,
and supports, respect for the sacred right of every
people to determine its own future and freely to
choose the path of its development,

98. La position de 1’Union sovietique en oe gui
concerne la Rhodesie du Sud lui est dictee par sa
politique de principe de soutien r6solu et syst6matique
des peupies qui luttentpour se liberer de la domination
coloniale. L’Union sovietique s’est toujoursprononc&
dans le passe comme a present, pour le respect du
droit sacrg qutont tous les peuples de choisir leur
propre avenir et de decider librement de l’organisation de leur d&eloppement.

99. Without repeating what we have said in the Security
Council and other United Nations organs which have
recently considered the problem of Southern Rhodesia,
we shall permit ourselves to emphasize anew that the
Soviet Union, as the Soviet Government has announced,
has firmly and consistently supported, and supports,
the struggle of the Zimbabwe people for freedom and
genuine independence and is ready togive the necessary
assistance and support to the action of the African
States directed to securing that right, As everyone
knows, the Soviet Government has resolutely condemned the racist Salisbury regime, which has usurped
authority in Southern Rhodesia by force, and regards
this criminal act of the .white racists as an open

99. Sans vouloir &peter ce que nous avons dit au
Conseil de securite et dans les autres organesde
l’organisation des Nations Unies qui, ces derniers
temps, se sont occup6s de la question de la Rhod&ie
du Sud, nous tenons & souligner B nouveau quelYJni0n
sovietique, oomme l’a declare son gouvernement,
continue, comme il l’a toujours fait, d’appuyer de
fagon ferme et constante la lutte que le peupledu
Zimbabwe mane pour la libert6 et une independance
rgelle, et qu’elle est prete 3 apporter tout son awui
aux mesures que les pays africains pourront prandre
pour permettre a ce peuple d’exercer ce drcit. Le
Gouvernement sovietique, on le sait, a Cat%oriquement condam& le regime raoiste de Salisbury qui a
22

challenge of colonialism to the Zimbabwe people, as a
challenge to the peoples of Africa and the whole world.
The Soviet Union has declared,
and declares,
its
whole-hearted
solidarity
with the Zimbabwe people
and reaffirms
its readiness to co-operate
with the
African countries
by offering them all manner of
support in their rightful struggle Pox the achievement
of true national independence.

usurp6 par la force le pouvoir en Rhod&ie du Sud;
selon lui cet acte criminel des racistes blancs constituait un dtSfi ouvert Ian06 par le colonialisme
au
peuple du Zimbabwe, aux peuples de 1’Afrique et du
monde entier. L’Union sovibtique a dit et &pate
qu’elle se solidarise
pleinement avec le peuple du
Zimbabwe. & elle se declare de nouveau p&e &
cooperer avec les pays d’Afrique et 8. leur accorder
tout l’appui neoessaire dans leur lutte legitime pour
la realisation d’une indkpendance nationale vgritable.

100. We voted in favour of the Security
Council
resolution 21’7 (1965) and have striven for its strict
fulfilment. In a letter of 5 January 1966 addressed to
the Secretary-General
of the United Nations [S/7068],
the USSR Government asserted its readiness to carry
out these Security Council decisions. The Soviet Union
does not recognize the criminal Smith clique’s regime.
It has never, of course, supplied it with arms, equipment or military material, nor ever will; neither does
it maintain any economic relations with it. The Soviet
Government
also informed
the Secretary-General
on 12 March that it had broken off postal relations
and telecommunication
with the Salisbury
regime
[S/7068/Add.l].

100, Nous avons vote pour la r&olution
21’7 (1965)
et nous avons cherche & la faire appliques sans r&
serve. Dans une lettre du 5 janvier 1966 adress&
au Secr&aire
g&&al
[S/7068], le Gouvernement
sovi&ique alest declare prt?t B mettre en ceuvre les
decisions prises par le Conseil de s&urit&
L’Union
sovi&ique
ne reconndt pas le regime de la clique
criminelle
de Smith et il va sans dire qu%lle ne lui
a fourni et ne lui fournit auoune arme, aucun Bquipement ni materiel militaire, de meme qu’elle n’entretient avec lui aucune relation Bconomique. Le Gouvernement sovi&.ique a Bgalement fait savoir au Secr&aire
g&&al le 12 mars qu’il avait d&id&? dene plus assurer les liaisons postales et les ti%%ommunications
avec le regime de Salisbury [ S/7068/Add.l J.

101. The Security Council can no longer agree to
the maintenance of the present situation in Southern
Rhodesia, which represents
a serious
danger to
international peace and security in Africa, and not
only in Africa. Every day the white racists
retain
power in Southern Rhodesia benefits only the forces
of imperialism
and racism,
which are hatching
criminal plans to establish a “sanitary
cordon” in
that part of the African continent, in order to safeguard
the southern part of Africa, which is still under the
domination of colonialism and of the white racists,
from the influence of the free African peoples, and
to check the spread of the purifying winds of national
liberation.

101. Le Conaeil de s&rit8
ne saursit tolerer plus
longtemps que persiste en Rhod&ie du Sud la situation actuelle qui constitue une grave menace pour la
paix et la &curitB internationale en Afrique et dans
le monde. Chaque jour qui voit se maintenir au pouvoir
les raoistes blancs de la Rhodesie du Sud fait le jeu
des imp&+ialistes
et des racistes qui nourrissent
le
dessein crimineldecreerdans
oettepartieducontinent
africain un “cordon sanitaire” destine a verrouiller
le sud de l’Afrique,
qui se trouve encore sous la
domination des oolonialistes et des racistes blancs,
afin de le soustraire
& l’influence des peuples africams libres et d’endiguer le deferlement des mouvemerits de liberation nationale.

102. We whole-heartedly
support the rightful demands
of the African and Asian countries
for urgent and
effective measures
to achieve a speedy solution of
the problem of Southern Rhodesia in the interest of
the Zimbabwe people and in the interest of all the
peoples of Africa. These demands can no longer be
ignored. They are as clear as can be: immediate
elimination of the authority of the usurpers’
regime;
revocation of the racist constitution
of 1961; establishment of a firm target date for the graiiting of independence; organization
of elections on the basis of
universal suffrage, on the principle
of “one man,
one vote”; immediate transfer
of authority
in the
territory to a government reflecting
the aspirations
of the African
majority
in Southern Rhodesia, in
accordance with the United Nations Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,

102. Nous appuyons pleinement les juste6 revendications des pays d’Afrique et d’Asie qui estiment
qu’il est necessaire de prendre d’urgence des mesures
efficaces pour resoudre au plus vite la question de
la Rhod&ie du Sud dans l’int&r&t du peuple du Zimbabwe et de tous les peuples d’Afrique. I1 n’est plus
possible de meconnaltre ces revendications.
Elles
sont absolument olaires: il faut &carter immgdiatement du pouvoir le regime des usurpateurs,
r&?oquer
la constitution
raciste de 1961, Btablir des dates
fermes pour l’octroi de l’indgpendance,
organiser
des Elections au suffrage universe1 selon le prinoipe
saris retard les
“a chaoun une voixR, et transfgrer
pouvoirs a un gouvernement representant les aspirations de la majorit
dricaine de la population de la
Rhodesie du Sud, conformement 3 la DBclaration sur
l’actroi
de l’independance aux pays et aux peuples
coloniaux.

103. The Security Council should condemn the Portuguese colonialists
and the South African racists
as
well as all those who provide assistance to the racist
Smith clique in Southern Rhodesia, secretly or openly
refusing to carry out United Nations decisions,
and
require all countries immediately and unconditionally
to carry out previous decisions of the Security Council

103. Le Conseil de securite doit condamner les
colonialistes
portugais et les raoistes sud-africains,
de m6me que tous ceux qui p&tent assistance a la
clique raciste de Smith et qui refusent, de facon
d&our&e
ou ouvertement, d’appliquer les dkcisions
des Nations Unies; le Conseil doit exiger que tous
les pays mettent en oeuvre sans retard et incondi23

and the General Assembly
Rhodesia,

on the question of Southern

tionnellement les d&isions
et par l’Assembl6e
g&&ale
de la Rhodesie du Sud.

adoptees par le Consell
concernant la queslien

104, In this connexion the USSR delegation wouldlike
to observe that, in its view, the draft resolution submitted by Mali, Nigeria and Uganda [S/7285/Add.l]
is
inadequate, since it does not cover all aspects of a
solution to the Southern Rhodesian problem.

104. A ce propos, la delegation de 1Wnion sotietique
tient 3 souligner que le projet de &solution pr6sente
au Conseil de s6curit6 par le Mali, le Nigeriaet
1’0uganda [S/7285/Add.l]
est 2 son avis insuffisant
dans la mesure oil il ne couvre pas tous les aspects
de la solution de la question de la Rhod&ie du Sud,

105. The Soviet Union has declared
itself,
and
declares itself, in favour of the adoption of the most
effective measures
against the Southern Rhodesian
racists , up to the application
of sanctions under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter-in
complete
accordance, of course, with the principles
and provisions of the Charter.

105. L’Union sovietique s’est dBclar6e et se d6clare
pour l’adoption des mesures les plus effioaces centre
les racistes
de la Rhod6sie du Sud, allant jusqu’&
l’application
des sanctions pr&ues au Chapitrc VII
de la Charte des Nations Unies et, cela va sans dire,
en pleine conformit
des principes et des dispositionp
de la Charte.

The meeting

rose at 12.40 pm.

La se’ance est levee d 12 h 40.

24

I

I
HOW
United

TO

Nations

distributors
write

Les

to:

United

SE

publications

des

COMO
Las
dirijase

Naciones

Sales

Section,

Unies

sont

entier.
Unies,

las

en

Section

Naciones

bookstores

and

your

bookstore

or

York

or

Geneva.

DES

NATIONS

dans

les

vente

Informez-vous

PUBLICACIONES
de

from
New

Nations
monde

PUBLICATIONS

Consult

PUBLICATIONS

CONSEGUIR

a:

be obtained

world.

LES

21: Nations

distribuidoras

may
the

Nations,

du

publicaciones

casas

NATIONS

PROCURER

depositaires

ou adresser-vous

UNITED

publications
throughout

COMMENT

agences

OBTAIN

UNIES

librairies

et

les

aupres

de

votre

librairie

York

ou

Geneve.

des

ventes,

New

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Unidas

eston

en venta

en

librerias

y

en todas

partes

del

mundo.

Consulte

a su librero

o

Unidas,

Section

de

Venras,

Nueva

York

o Ginebra.

I

Litho in U.N.

t

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent in orher currencies)

16372~December

1967--2,OOQ
