Resolutions adopted on report■ of the Fourth Committee
562 (VI). Abolition of co,:poral puni■hment in
Trust Territories
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 440 (V) of 2 December 1950
in which it recommended that measures should be taken
immediately to bring about the complete abolition of
corporal punishment in all Trust Territories where it
still existed,
Considering that the said resolution does not establish any distinction between the native and territorial
judicial authorities which are empowered, by law or by
custom, to award such punishment,
Having noted the reports 17 submitted in pursuance of
the said resolution by the Administering Authorities
concerned,
l. Notes that measures have been taken to reduce
the number of offences in respect of which the penalty
is applied;
2. Notes the arguments presented by the Administering Authorities concerned to explain why this penalty has not yet completely disappeared;
3. Is of the opinion nevertheless that these considerations should not prevent the complete abolition
of corporal punishment in the Trust Territories where
it still exists ;
4. Urges that corporal punishment (by whip, cane
or any other means) should be completely abolished as
a disciplinary punishment in all prisons of the Trust
Territories where it still exists;
5. Recommends that Administering Authorities
should enforce immediately legislation with a view to
replacing corporal p_unishment in all cases by methods
of modern penology;
6. Repeats its previous recommendations and urges
the Administering Authorities concerned to comply
with them without delay.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
563 (VI). Administrative unions affecting Trust
Territories
The General Assembly,
Having by resolution 443 (V) of 12 December 1950
decided to carry over the item relating to administrative
unions affecting Trust Territories for consideration at
the sixth session of the General Assembly,
Recalling that by its resolution 224 (III) of 18
November 1948 the General Assembly recommended
that the Trusteeship Council should investigate the
question of administrative unions in all its aspects, and
that by its resolution 326 (IV) of 15 November 1949
it recommended that the Trusteeship Council should
complete its investigation,
Recalling further that by resolution 326 ( IV) the
General Assembly noted that the Trusteeship Agreements do not authorize any form of political association which would involve annexation of the Trust
Territories in any sense, or would have the effect of
extinguishing their status as Trust Territories, and
affirmed the view that measures of customs, fiscal or
"See Official Records of the General Assembly, Si.rth Session,
Supplen;mt No. 4, part II.

59

administrative union must not in any way hampe, ' '
free evolution of each Trust Territory toward5 self·
government or independence,
Having examined the reports 18 of the frusteeship
Council concerning administrative unions and the manner in which the Council has con~inued to observe the
development of such unions;
1. Notes that the Trusteeship Council has not as yet
been able to examine fully all the aspects of administrative unions ;
2. Notes furthe,· that some of the recommendations
of the Council have not yt:t been fully implemented;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council, in order to
enable the General Assemblv to arrive at conclusions
concerning existing adminfstrative unions affecting
Trust Territories, to submit to the General Assembly
at its seventh regular session, a special repor_t ~onta~ning a complete analysis of each of the adm1mstrat1ve
unions to which a Trust Territory is a party, and of the
status of the Cameroons and Tog,')land under French
administration arising out of their membership in the
French Union, with special reference to:
(a) The considerations enumerated in paragraph 1
of resolution 326 ( IV) of the General Assembly ;
( b) The compatibility of the arrangements alre:idy
made with the provisions of the Charter of the Uruted
Nations and the Trusteeship Agreement;
4. Establishes a Committee on Administrative
Unions, which shall meet three weeks before the next
regular session of the General Assembly, composed of
Belgium, Brazil, India. and the UJ?ite~ States of Am~rica, to make a preliminary exammat1on of the special
report prepared by the Trusteeship Council and to present its observations thereon to the General Assembly
at its seventh regular session.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

564 (VI). Economic conditions and problem■ of
economic development in Non-Self-Goveming
Territories
The General Assembly,
Noting the report 19 prepared by the Special Committee on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter on economic conditions and problems of
economic development in Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Approves the report of the Special Committee
as a brief but considered indication of economic conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories and the
problems of economic development;
2. Invites the Secretary--General to communicate
this report for their consideration to the Members of
the United Nations responsible for the administration
of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the Economic
and Social Council, to the Trusteeship Council and to
the specialized agencies concerned.
361st plenary meetiftg,
18 I anuary 1952.
,. Ibid., Fifth Sesrion, Supplement No. 4, p. 180-183, 185-215.
Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement Nu. 4, p. 22.
'"Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplenunt No. 14, part three.
