S/PV.9336

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9336th meeting

Friday, 2 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh/Mr. Abushahab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Abudu-Birresborn
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-15698 (E)
*2315698*

S/PV.9336

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

such technology and to swiftly resume dialogue to
achieve the goal of sustainable peace and the complete
and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

02/06/2023

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

The last time the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea conducted a similar launch was on 7 February
2016. In its resolution 2270 (2016), the Security Council
condemned that launch, in which ballistic missile
technology was used, in violation of relevant resolutions.
On 29 May, the Vice-Chairman of the Central
Military Commission of the Workers’ Party of Korea
justified the need for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to launch a military reconnaissance satellite
as a response to ongoing military exercises in the
region. It should be recalled that developing a military
reconnaissance satellite was part of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s five-year military
development plan. That plan was unveiled during the
eighth Party Congress, in January 2021, well before the
resumption of military exercises in the region.

Ms. DiCarlo: At 6.37 a.m. local time on 31 May,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched
what it described as a military reconnaissance satellite
from the Sohae Satellite Launching Station. The rocket
crashed off the Korean peninsula’s western coast after
losing thrust following the separation of its first and
second stages. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea attributed the failure of the launch to the low
reliability of an unspecified new type of engine system
and fuel. Official media said the country would conduct
a second launch as soon as possible.

In line with its five-year plan, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea greatly increased its missile
launch activities in 2022 and 2023, including more
than 80 launches using ballistic missile technology.
Pyongyang characterized those launches as involving
systems with nuclear weapon roles, including so-called
tactical nuclear weapons.

On 30 May, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea sent a prelaunch notification to the International
Maritime
Organization.
Other
international
organizations, including the International Civil Aviation
Organization and the International Telecommunication
Union were not notified.

Separately, we have been following reports that
illicit cyberactivities attributed to actors affiliated with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continue.
According to the final report of the Panel of Experts
submitted pursuant to resolution 2627 (2022), actors
affiliated with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea stole more in cryptocurrency in 2022 than
ever before.

As the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
affirms, it is the right of a sovereign State to launch a
satellite and to benefit from space activities. However,
Council resolutions expressly prohibit the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea from conducting any
launches using ballistic missile technology.
On 30 May, the Secretary-General strongly
condemned the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
satellite launch using ballistic missile technology. He
called on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
refrain from conducting further satellite launches using
2/15

Further, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has continued to make references to the possible use
of nuclear weapons since our most recent briefing (see
S/PV.9305).

Key peace and security issues, such as the
situation on the Korean peninsula, must be an area
for cooperation. We welcomed the Security Council’s
commitment, as expressed in resolution 2397 (2017),
to a peaceful, comprehensive, diplomatic and political
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula.
Diplomacy, not isolation, is the only way forward.
However, the lack of unity and action in the Security
Council is doing little to slow the negative trajectory
23-15698

02/06/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

on the Korean peninsula. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is unconstrained, and other parties
are compelled to focus on military deterrence.
I would like to highlight once again our concerns
regarding the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The United Nations is
ready to assist the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in addressing the basic needs of its vulnerable
populations. We welcomed the return of diplomats
from one Member State to Pyongyang on 27 March. We
reiterate our call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to allow the unimpeded entry of international
staff, including the Resident Coordinator, and of
humanitarian supplies, in order to enable a timely and
effective response.
Let me close by stressing that the SecretaryGeneral remains firmly committed to achieving the
goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. He welcomes
the recent reaffirmation by the Republic of Korea of its
commitment to its obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
It is with considerable frustration that we find
ourselves back in the Security Council to discuss
yet another provocation by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The United States condemns in
the strongest possible terms the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s reconnaissance satellite launch
on 31 May. The launch may have failed, but it was
done in brazen violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions, raising tensions and risking destabilizing
the already sensitive security situation in the region and
beyond. The Council cannot ignore the failed launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as they
enable the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
learn about its capability gaps and determine how to
advance its unlawful programmes for weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and ballistic missiles accordingly.
Its intent, borne out by action and statement, is clear — to
pose a threat to international peace and security. The
launch not only disrupted maritime and air traffic in the
region, but it also alarmed its neighbours in Japan and
the Republic of Korea.

S/PV.9336

The Council has a mandate to act in response to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated and
aggressive pattern of violations of multiple Security
Council resolutions. And we have done so specifically
in response to satellite launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. In both resolutions 2087
(2013) and 2270 (2016), the Council condemned the
country’s tests of space launch vehicles because
they use ballistic-missile technology and therefore
violate those resolutions. The Council reaffirmed the
freedom of all States to explore and use outer space
in accordance with international law. The launch we
saw this week, however, is undeniably in violation of
international law. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is now threatening to conduct another launch “as
soon as possible”.
With the support of its two staunch defenders on
the Council, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is trying to normalize its unlawful launches and assert
that they are justified. There is nothing that provoked
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to conduct
this week’s launch or threaten another one, except
for its desire to perfect the technology that failed this
week. We must not allow the unprecedented volume
of the regime’s ballistic-missile launches over the past
year and a half to wear us down. The United States
remains committed to diplomacy, and we continue to
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
come to the table for meaningful negotiations without
preconditions. But as long as the silence of the Council
emboldens Pyongyang to disobey Security Council
resolution obligations and seek to undermine the global
non-proliferation regime, it will continue to choose
ammunition over nutrition.
Meanwhile, as Russia and China reaffirm their
commitment to a diplomatic solution, they argue that a
Council product, or even holding a Council meeting, are
provocative actions. I would like to remind them that
what we do here in the Security Council, at least when
their obstructionism does not prevail, is diplomacy.
China and Russia will likely once again attempt to
draw false equivalences between unlawful ballisticmissile launches by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and lawful defensive and pre-announced joint
military exercises by the United States and the Republic
of Korea. Such false equivalences simply do not hold
up under international scrutiny. Our lawful efforts to
defend against the repeated escalatory actions by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea do not in any

23-156983/15

S/PV.9336

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

way justify its unlawful behaviour. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is simply using that as an
excuse to enable it to advance its unlawful WMD and
ballistic-missile programmes.
In the face of the growing WMD and ballisticmissile threat from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Council’s silence, it is unbelievable that
two members of the Council expect the United States
and its allies to stand idly by. Our commitments to our
alliances are ironclad, and we will take all necessary
measures to ensure our security. We call on all Council
members to uphold the credibility of the Council, join
us in condemning the unlawful behaviour and urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to refrain from
following through on its stated plan to conduct another
launch that will pose a further threat to international
peace and security.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for the update. I will make a few
quick points.
First, Albania strongly and unreservedly condemns
the launch of a military reconnaissance satellite by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime two days
ago, the sixth of such attempts and the first since 2016.
Secondly, while the launch failed, it is just another
escalatory step by Pyongyang and a brazen violation
of numerous Security Council resolutions. I will not
enumerate them all, because there are simply too many.
Thirdly, with its egregious and reckless behaviour,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues
to openly defy the United Nations, the Security
Council, the international community as a whole and
the established norms and rules. It is only seeking
provocation, destabilization and escalation, including
by announcing that it will soon proceed to another
satellite launch.
Fourthly, every time the Council is prevented
from taking action, the regime feels more empowered
to continue on the same path. As we have seen in the
course of the past two years, the recipe is working.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea shows
only increasing disregard and contempt for the
Security Council and its decisions because it feels
protected — and because it is indeed protected. That
is utterly wrong, and it goes against what the Council
stands for. We regret that the voice of a majority of the
members of the Council calling for a clear and strong
4/15

02/06/2023

reaction to the illegal, unprovoked and reckless actions
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues
to be ignored. If the Council continues to tolerate the
indefensible actions of North Korea now, it will be even
harder to react and act later. Unless that is our real goal,
we should break this deafening silence.
We reiterate that by its inaction, the Security
Council has conveyed to the warmongers in North
Korea that for them actions have no consequences. We
should not wait for the worst to happen to do something
that may prove to be too little, too late. Through its
inaction on the matter, the Council is failing to make
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s regime
understand the limits of its unacceptable policies
and behaviour. It is failing to help open an avenue of
negotiations, which is the only way to properly address
and contribute to resolving the crisis. It is failing to
reassure neighbouring countries, including the people
of Japan and the Republic of Korea. And it is failing to
fulfil its core duty and responsibility. It is eroding its
own credibility. Finally, it is failing to explain to the
wider United Nations membership how the continued,
open and defiant disregard of multiple Security Council
resolutions by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is contributing in any way to peace and security.
It is therefore time to speak up and unite around
“enough is enough”. The people of North Korea do
not need more weapons, the region does not need
more provocations and the world does not need more
dangerous escalations. What is needed are talks, through
good-faith diplomacy, to ensure a full, transparent,
comprehensive and irreversible end to weapons of mass
destruction, ballistic and nuclear programmes. That
is the only way to help North Korea become a normal
country and start developing and progressing. The
Security Council can help in that respect but only if it
decides to speak with one voice and deliver a united and
clear response.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her informative
briefing on the complicated situation currently
confronting the world.
Ecuador strongly condemns the attempt by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to launch
a military reconnaissance satellite on 31 May. The
technologies used for space launch capabilities and
ballistic-missile systems are essentially the same in
many respects. That is why that act is further evidence
23-15698

02/06/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of the flagrant violation by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of Security Council resolutions that
prohibit launches using ballistic-missile technology.
We urge it to refrain from further attempts to launch
military reconnaissance satellites and to abandon its
nuclear and ballistic-missile programme.
Ecuador would like to remind the Council of
the importance of the basic principles related to the
peaceful use of outer space, as set out in the Treaty
on Principles Governing the Activities of States in
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. We also want
to highlight resolution 77/250, adopted by the General
Assembly at its current session, which proclaims that it
is a historical responsibility of all States to ensure that
the exploration of outer space is carried out exclusively
for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind. That
resolution was sponsored by major world Powers.
The resolutions of the Security Council are a basis
for the re-establishment of peace and stability in the
region, and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
should fully comply with them. My delegation therefore
reiterates that through resolution 2397 (2017), which
was adopted unanimously, the Council expressed its
determination to take further meaningful steps in
response to any new launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Security Council must take
action and speak with one voice in response to the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security conferred on it by the Charter of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, Ecuador urges for refraining from
all provocations and warmongering rhetoric. We
encourage the deepening of cooperation and dialogue,
based on good faith and international legality, with
the aim of reducing and ending the tensions on the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom condemns the reckless failed satellite
launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on 31 May. Let me be clear. The launch had nothing
to do with the peaceful uses of outer space. It was a
military reconnaissance satellite and it used ballisticmissile technology to launch. As such, it was a further
violation of the Council’s resolutions. It follows nine
other sets of ballistic-missile tests since the start of
2023, including a solid-fuel intercontinental ballisticmissile test in April — all part of the Democratic

S/PV.9336

People’s Republic of Korea’s reckless pursuit of the
advanced nuclear and ballistic-missile capabilities with
which it seeks to threaten its neighbours. While the
launch failed, it caused alarm for the people of Japan
and the Republic of Korea. But it is the North Korean
people who bear the highest costs of those launches, as
their Government diverts resources away from people’s
basic economic needs.
That behaviour is unacceptable. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continues to flout the
international non-proliferation architecture and poses a
great threat to global peace and security. We understand
that it intends to repeat the failed launch as soon as
it can. The United Kingdom is ready to work urgently
with all Council members to send a united message
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We
continue to urge all Member States to fully implement
the existing resolutions and to counter the continued
development of the illegal weapons programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Once again,
we urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to cease those launches, return to dialogue and take
credible steps towards denuclearization and peace on
the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I too thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing.
North Korea’s series of actions, including the
most recent launch using ballistic-missile technology,
threaten the peace and security of Japan, the region
and the entire international community. All of these
are flagrant violations of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Japan joins the Secretary-General in
strongly condemning North Korea for the launch,
against the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Let us be clear. This is not about whether it was
a satellite or not or if the launch failed or not. This is
about yet another violation of the resolutions of the
Council. The launch uses ballistic-missile technology,
which the Council has prohibited in order to stop North
Korea’s unlawful development of nuclear weapons
and their means of delivery. Space launch vehicles
use technology identical to that used for ballistic
missiles, which can mount nuclear warheads. We
are not discussing the peaceful use of outer space or
legitimate security concerns. Regardless of whether
it is a missile or a military satellite, and regardless
of whether it succeeds or fails, it is a violation of the
Council’s resolutions. What we should not overlook

23-156985/15

S/PV.9336

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

is that North Korea has clearly stated its intention to
violate the resolutions once again. It has announced
that it will soon launch another military reconnaissance
satellite after the failure. I urge all Council members
to join the call of the Secretary-General to cease such
acts. It is disrespectful to the Council and the Charter
of the United Nations.
The last time we gathered in the Chamber to discuss
the North Korean non-proliferation file, I reminded
fellow colleagues of North Korea’s five-year military
plan (see S/PV.9305). The plan includes the launch of
military reconnaissance satellites. Here is what we have
been witnessing. First, we have seen North Korea’s
steady implementation of its long-pursued nuclear and
missile programmes, and military satellite launches are
part of them. Secondly, we have seen continued silence
and inaction on the part of the Council in the face of
North Korea’s repeated violations. Thirdly, we have
seen North Korea taking full advantage of the Council’s
silence and inaction.
Some argue that the Council should not meet. They
contend that the Council should not provoke North
Korea and should instead seek to ease tensions, or that
silence and self-restraint will contribute to calming the
situation. That is simply wrong. As I have repeatedly
said, our silence has only encouraged — and will
continue to encourage — rulebreakers to write the
playbook as they like. What all of us here are entrusted
to do by all the States Members of the United Nations
is to fulfil our heavy responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, and not turn our eyes
away from violations of the Council’s own resolutions.
Last but not least, it is also a source of great regret
that we see the North Korean regime continue to spend
huge resources on its unlawful nuclear and missile
programmes while sacrificing the welfare of people
in North Korea. If the money spent on launching the
military satellite had been spent on the people instead,
how many of them would have been fed?

02/06/2023

Wednesday, 31 May. Those latest developments
show that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to develop and improve its ballistic missile
capabilities in open defiance of Security Council
resolutions. Those activities must stop at once.
Although the test conveyed last Wednesday failed,
it is important to underline the fact that Security Council
resolutions do not distinguish between successful
launches and failed attempts. Such actions remain a
flagrant violation and show a concerning pattern of
reckless behaviour by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, undermining global non-proliferation efforts
and advancing its programmes. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s constant and complete
disregard for its obligations under Security Council
resolutions undermines international peace and
security. It is crucial that the entire United Nations
membership, especially members of the Security
Council, speak out and demonstrate that such actions
will never be accepted.
Malta calls upon Pyongyang to completely,
verifiably and irreversibly abandon its nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes and to return to full
compliance with its obligations under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a
non-nuclear-weapon State. We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cooperate promptly
with the International Atomic Energy Agency in the
full and effective implementation of the Agency’s
comprehensive safeguards, including all necessary
safeguards activities provided for in the safeguards
agreement. We also urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to sign and ratify the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

Again, Japan urges North Korea not to conduct
further launches and once again urges North Korea
to immediately and fully comply with all relevant
resolutions and to engage in diplomacy and accept
the repeated offers of dialogue. I also urge all Council
members and Member States to join that call.

Malta regrets that the Council stands frozen
regarding the responses to any of the intercontinental
ballistic missile launches witnessed over the past year.
In that regard, Malta recalls resolution 2397 (2017)
as a reminder that we have the duty to take action to
maintain regional and international peace and security.
Doing nothing or not reacting to those unlawful actions
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would
mean normalizing violations in the face of the Council.
It would mean accepting that we are powerless to react
to proliferation crises around the globe.

Ms. Gatt (Malta): Malta strongly condemns the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s attempted
launch of a military satellite that occurred on

Malta’s concern for the humanitarian situation
faced by the population of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues. The Democratic People’s

6/15

23-15698

02/06/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Republic of Korea’s blatant violations of international
law divert resources from its people, prevent its
economic development and undermine the welfare of
its population. Malta calls on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to faithfully engage with the United
Nations and the international humanitarian system, as
well as to enable and facilitate humanitarian assistance
to reach those in greatest need across the country.
In conclusion, I reiterate that everyone at this table
has a shared objective: peace and the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. Divisions and inaction among
members of the Security Council will only push us
away from fulfilling our duty. At the same time, Malta
calls on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
cease all actions that raise tensions and instead choose
the path of dialogue.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
On 31 May this year, a North Korean military
satellite crashed into the sea off the coast of South
Korea, along with its space launcher. That attempted
launch is yet another flagrant violation of international
law and Council resolutions. France strongly condemns
that new provocation.
The Council has called on North Korea on numerous
occasions since 2009 to refrain from activities
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons, including launches of
ballistic missiles and space launchers. Given the close
similarity of the technologies used in space launches
and ballistic missile launches, the most recent launch
is clear evidence of the continuation of North Korea’s
programme in defiance of Security Council decisions.
It demonstrates the determination to continue the
escalation of recent months, which has included an
increase in the number of launches and irresponsible
statements by Pyongyang.
The Council cannot remain inactive and must
respond in unison to that new violation of its own
resolutions. We cannot accept North Korea becoming
a nuclear State. France will not accept the trivialization
of such a threat to regional and international peace and
security. We underscore our determination to pursue
the objective of the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of North Korea.
We urge North Korea to comply with its obligations
without delay and to return to the negotiating table by

S/PV.9336

following up on the offers of dialogue extended to it
on several occasions. Together with its European and
international partners, France is fully mobilized to
ensure the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and to combat, in particular the
circumvention of sanctions.
Mr. Abudu-Birresborn (Ghana): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
to the Council and welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea in
this meeting.
Ghana is gravely concerned by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s launch of a military
satellite on 31 May, in contravention of multiple
Security Council resolutions. We deplore the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s latest actions
and call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to fully comply with its international obligations
under all relevant Security Council resolutions and to
take immediate and concrete steps to de-escalate the
tensions on the Korean peninsula by refraining from
further launches with ballistic missile technology.
The launch of a military satellite is yet another
disturbing confirmation of the dramatic acceleration of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s weapons
programme. It is also a worrisome reflection of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s resolve to
accomplish its 2023 strategic goals set out at the sixth
plenary meeting of the eighth Central Committee of the
Workers’ Party of Korea, held in January this year.
With its latest launch, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has now attempted to accomplish
two of those key strategic goals — that is, the
launch of a military satellite and the test of a solidfuel intercontinental ballistic missile. The 2023
final report of the Panel of Experts of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) (see S/2023/171) makes it clear that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is working
assiduously to accomplish its third key strategic goal,
which is to exponentially increase the production of
nuclear weapons, particularly the mass production of
smaller tactical nuclear weapons.
We therefore regret that, in the midst of all of
those rapidly changing developments that threaten
international peace and security, the Council has not
been unified in its response, despite the numerous
meetings held on the Democratic People’s Republic of

23-156987/15

S/PV.9336

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Korea this year and last year. We encourage all members
of the Council to embrace a unified and different
approach in order to obtain different results with our
engagement on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea file in our common objective to achieve concrete
progress in furtherance of peace and security on the
Korean peninsula.
We believe that a principled and pragmatic approach
based on diplomacy, dialogue and trust-building is
needed to incrementally foster conditions that allow
for constructive engagement between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and major stakeholders on
its weapons programme. While different stakeholders
may have different interests on the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, it must be
obvious that a nuclearized Korean peninsula is in no
one’s interest. We must therefore work collaboratively
to strengthen the unity of the Council on this matter and
act faithfully on behalf of all Member States who have
entrusted us with the powerful mandate to maintain
international peace and security.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.
The Security Council is meeting once again this
afternoon, following another launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of a military device, which
crashed off the coast of the Korean Sea. The launch
of a reconnaissance satellite confirms the escalation of
tensions on the Korean peninsula. And the trajectory
of that launch proves that we are by no means safe
from a risk that could lead to irreparable damage. My
country condemns that launch of a military satellite,
which poses a threat to the security of neighbouring
countries, and calls for de-escalation to put an end to
this terrifying cycle for the people of, and merchant
shipping around, the Korean peninsula, as well as for
strict respect for the relevant resolutions of the Council.
As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, my country is against the
development, use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
And we observe with great concern the dangerous
trend towards the trivialization and acceptance of
nuclear risk in conflicts between Powers. Indeed, the
current context, which is marked by a hardening and
radicalization of positions, is likely to lead certain
States to reconsider their positions of neutrality in
terms of military defence or nuclear equipment. Such
8/15

02/06/2023

an outcome would be highly damaging to all the efforts
already made in the field of non-proliferation and could
generate renewed interest in those weapons of mass
destruction. It would run counter to the will expressed
by a large majority of States Members of the United
Nations to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones.
It is important for the Council take a more serious
look at the untenable security situation on the Korean
peninsula. Above all, it is fundamental and urgent for
all the parties to engage in good-faith dialogue to find
a definitive solution that can guarantee security and
peaceful coexistence in the region.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing and welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea at
today’s meeting.
The sirens that went off a few days ago in Seoul
and Okinawa remind us of the potentially grave impact
that an accident linked to the numerous missile tests
could have on the civilian population. Those sirens are
a warning signal, given the tense security situation
that is exacerbated by each missile launch. Switzerland
notes with great concern the high frequency of those
launches and welcomes the convening of this meeting.
The Council must not remain passive in the face of those
tests which, together with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme, constitute
a threat to the international community. Allow me to
emphasize three points.
First, any launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea using ballistic missile technology
is a violation of the resolutions of the Council. The
fact that the most recent rocket was intended to put a
military observation satellite into orbit rather than to
carry a weapon of mass destruction, and that there
was advance notification of the trajectory whereas the
launches of recent years were unannounced, does not
change the fact that it is a violation of international
law. In these circumstances, it is our collective duty
as members of the Council to condemn this most
recent launch and to respond to it. We also call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to renounce any
future launch attempts.
Secondly, while the obligations arising from the
relevant resolutions apply primarily to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, they also apply to all
Member States, which are required to effectively
23-15698

02/06/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9336

implement the sanctions of the Security Council. As
members of the Council, and in the context of our
commitments as States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, we all have
an obligation to combat the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and must commit ourselves to disarmament
and to maintaining the nuclear taboo.

beings and not to aggravate crises and instability.
The launch of yet another satellite by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, although unsuccessful,
confirms the persistence of tensions in the Korean
peninsula, which could lead to miscalculation and
confrontation, as well as to the erosion of compliance
with non-proliferation regimes in the region.

Thirdly, we must not forget the plight of the people
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
heavy restrictions put in place by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in connection with the
pandemic are still seriously hampering international
humanitarian aid. Following the announcement by
the World Health Organization declaring that the
coronavirus disease pandemic no longer constitutes
a public health emergency of international concern,
we hope that the borders of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will be opened up to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian aid. We therefore welcome the
fact that the Council, through its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), has agreed to update
the note detailing the implementation of resolution
2664 (2022) in the context of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

As we have repeatedly stated in the Chamber,
including during the previous briefing on the issue
in April (see S/PV.9305), Mozambique reiterates its
call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
abide by the resolutions of the Security Council and to
cooperate in de-escalating an already tense situation.
We also remain concerned about the lack of progress
and changes in the status quo despite repeated meetings
of the Council.

The Council plays a vital role in encouraging
dialogue, de-escalation and the search for diplomatic
solutions. Those are instruments that are essential
to facilitating the implementation of a peaceful and
comprehensive solution to the situation on the Korean
peninsula. We have a shared responsibility and a
common goal in that regard and remain committed
to the Council being able to speak with one voice on
this issue.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): Let me start by
wishing you, Sir, and the United Arab Emirates team a
very successful month ahead at the helm of the Security
Council. Rest assured of Mozambique’s support and
collaboration whenever needed. Let me also reiterate
our congratulations to Switzerland for its accomplished
stewardship of the Council during the month of May.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her update. I also acknowledge the presence
in this meeting of the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Over the years, the situation in the Korean peninsula
has become very sensitive and a serious cause for
concern. Mozambique reiterates the importance of new
technologies to improve the quality of life of human

We call on the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities by engaging in efforts towards the
resumption of dialogue. Diplomatic engagement and
the window of opportunity to persuade the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to desist from provocative
acts and to return to the negotiating table should be
considered. Given the heightened tensions on the
Korean peninsula and the fact that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is continuing to show
resolve in continuing to develop its technical and
technological capabilities, avenues for dialogue must
be pursued and preserved.
In conclusion, we call on the Council to use its
primary role and mandate in the maintenance of
international peace and security to encourage dialogue,
de-escalation and the search for diplomatic solutions.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): At the outset,
allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her informative briefing. I welcome the
Republic of Korea to this meeting.
Brazil deplores the use of ballistic missile
technology in the latest launch of a rocket by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on 31 May.
While recognizing the right of all countries to
pursue peaceful space programmes, Brazil also stresses
the need for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to fully comply with all of its obligations under
Security Council resolutions and under international
law more broadly.
According to several reports, the Chollima-1 rocket
used similar engines to those used in the liquid-fuelled

23-156989/15

S/PV.9336

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

intercontinental ballistic missile Hwasong-15, which
represents a clear violation of operative paragraph 2 of
resolution 2094 (2013), which prohibits the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea from conducting any further
launches that use ballistic missile technology.
We welcome the fact that this time a pre-launch
notice was issued to the International Maritime
Organization, as a means to mitigate risk to civilian
populations in the Republic of Korea and in Japan,
as well as to maritime and air traffic in the region.
However, such notification does not set aside the
illegality of the latest launch.
The alarm raised by this launch is yet another
illustration of the dangerous state of this file, where
miscalculation by any party could have drastic
consequences. The latest mobilization of military
assets for possible missile intercepts, even if defensive
in nature, shows how the region is on a hair trigger.
Tensions must be dialled down.
Brazil will continue to make all efforts to promote
engagement that can contribute to lowering tensions
and reducing the risks of escalation. As we have said
before, dialogue is important among friends, but it is
essential among rivals. We continue to be convinced
that engagement, not isolation, remains our best path
towards a Korean peninsula that is peaceful, stable and
free of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At present, the Korean peninsula is experiencing
increasing tensions and confrontation, about which
China expresses its concern.
The situation on the peninsula, as of today, is not
without a cause. All parties should look at not only its
symptoms, but also the heart of the matter; not only
what is happening today, but also what happened
yesterday; not only the actions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, but also the words and
actions of all parties.
The Korean peninsula issue, as a remnant of the
Cold War, has been protracted for decades, and its crux
and context are crystal clear. For decades, the peace
mechanism has been missing on the peninsula. The
legitimate security concerns of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea have long remained unresolved.
Mutual trust between the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the United States has been seriously
lacking, and the two sides have repeatedly fallen into
10/15

02/06/2023

a bizarre cycle of dialogue, de-escalation, stalemate,
confrontation and escalation of tensions.
There were moments of hope on the issue, including
the 1994 Agreed Framework, the 19 September joint
statement by six parties in 2005 and the 2018 Singapore
Declaration. At those times, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea actively engaged in dialogue with
the United States and generally complied with the
agreements. In contrast, the United States failed to abide
by the principle of commitment for commitment and
action for action and returned to its old path of sanctions
and pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, which led to a reversal and deterioration of the
situation and a missed opportunity to resolve the issue.
In recent years, by incorporating the peninsula
into its Indo-Pacific strategy, the United States has
continued its military activities and significantly
increased its military presence, both on the peninsula
and in its surrounding areas, seriously undermining
the strategic security interests of the peninsula and
its neighbouring countries. Just over a month ago, the
United States and the Republic of Korea issued the
Washington Declaration, expressing their intention to
strengthen extended deterrence and even planning to
send strategic nuclear submarines to the peninsula. The
United States’ approach represents a disregard for the
concerns of other countries and is totally driven by its
geopolitical self-interest through which it is bent on
exploiting the issue to create tension on the peninsula.
Such practices by the United States reflect a Cold War
mentality, serve only to provoke bloc confrontation
and undermine the strategic security interests of other
countries and run counter to the goal of maintaining
peace and stability and promoting the denuclearization
of the peninsula.
The current situation on the peninsula is fraught
with tension, fragility, complexity and sensitivity. The
more that is the case, the more important it is for all
parties to maintain calm and restraint, avoid mutual
provocation and prevent the situation from escalating or
even getting out of control. The more that is the case, the
more important it is for all parties to stay committed to
diplomatic efforts and achieving a political settlement
and strive to address their legitimate concerns through
a resumption of meaningful dialogue. The more that is
the case, the more important it is for all parties to focus
on the big picture and the long term and promote the
denuclearization of the peninsula and the establishment
23-15698

02/06/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9336

of a peace mechanism on the peninsula in a synchronized
manner based on a dual-track approach.

accusations concerning the cyberactivity of Pyongyang
were mentioned in the briefing.

Some countries have repeatedly indicated that
the Security Council must not remain indifferent
to the status quo of the peninsula, but should play a
constructive role. China shares that view. How can
the Security Council play a constructive role? Is it
constructive to point a finger at one party and to put all
the blame on one party? Obviously, it is not, as that will
only exacerbate conflicts and provocations and inject
new uncertainties into the already tense situation on
the peninsula. The Council’s constructive role should
be demonstrated by its efforts to promote de-escalation,
mutual trust and unity.

The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
a comprehensive consideration of the situation on the
Korean peninsula in the Security Council and ensuring
that all factors impacting the situation be considered in a
balanced manner. Attempts to paint a one-sided picture
of events, as we saw today on the part of some of the
delegations, are, in our view, very counterproductive
and at variance with the goals with which the Security
Council members are entrusted, namely, to be impartial
and objective when reacting to threats to international
peace and security. They only take us further away from
resolving all of the issues on the Korean peninsula.

The starting point for the draft resolution on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, co-sponsored
by China and Russia, is to resolve difficulties in the
livelihoods of the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, demonstrate goodwill and positive
signs, create conditions for resuming dialogue and
turning the situation around and promote a political
solution to the peninsula issue, which we hope all
parties will consider positively.

Recently, the situation in the subregion has
deteriorated significantly. We have repeatedly
pointed out the root cause of the current spiralling
tensions — the desire of the United States and its
allies to increase pressure on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea within the framework of the concept
of the so-called “extended deterrence”. The extremely
negative consequences of continued military exercises
in the subregion should already be obvious to everyone,
but Washington has no intention of slowing down there.

Finally, I must point out that, on one hand, the
United States calls for denuclearization of the peninsula
on the pretext of non-proliferation. On the other hand,
it is upgrading its nuclear umbrella, cooperating with
some other countries on nuclear submarines and
transferring tons of weapons-grade enriched uranium to
non-nuclear-weapon States, which is a typical example
of double standards. Such cooperation does nothing but
undermine the global non-proliferation regime, stoke
an arms race, threaten regional peace and security and
adversely affect the denuclearization process of the
peninsula and thus must be stopped.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened to the statement by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, and we are surprised that neither today nor in
the statement made by the Secretary-General related
to the launch did we hear a single word about the
fact that the growing military activity by the United
States, the Republic of Korea and Japan in North-East
Asia is having a destructive influence on the region.
That is obvious, yet, at the same time, that important
circumstance is fully ignored by the Secretariat. The
Secretariat should adopt an impartial and objective
stance. Other unrelated topics, such as, for example, the

On 25 May, the United States and South Korea
conducted live-fire drills not far from the border with
North Korea, in which, according to media reports,
2,500 troops and about 610 weapons systems, including
fighter jets, attack helicopters, drones, tanks and
artillery, took part. Moreover, those exercises are only
the first of a series planned to be completed before
mid-June. They are called “combined annihilation
firepower drills”. And, as was also the case in spring and
earlier United States-South Korea military exercises,
they were unprecedented in scale. It is evident that
such actions do not contribute to the de-escalation
of tensions in the subregion, and the situation, as we
have stated time and time again, continues to follow a
vicious circle.
Such actions are destabilizing — not only for the
situation in North-East Asia and the Asia-Pacific region
as a whole. Its continued militarization and undisguised
attempts to create new demarcation lines there have a
negative impact on global stability. Another example
of that is the recent United States-South Korean
agreements on the use of nuclear weapons, which will
only further escalate tensions and provoke an arms race.

23-1569811/15

S/PV.9336

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

02/06/2023

Russia has consistently spoken out against any
military activity that threatens the security of the
Korean peninsula and that of the countries of Northeast
Asia. Similarly, we also oppose the dead-end and
inhumane policy of increasing sanctions pressure.
Separately, we note that unilateral restrictions not only
trample on the sovereignty and legitimate interests of
Member States and run counter to the norms and rules
of international trade, but they also undermine the
integrity of restrictions agreed by the Security Council.

satellite launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. These events are of great concern. Though the
satellite launch rocket failed on 31 May, officials from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have vowed
to undertake a second launch as soon as possible. We
reiterate that any launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea using ballistic missile technology
is prohibited by the Security Council, and we strongly
urge them to desist from their unlawful, dangerous and
provocative activities.

I once again recall that the Security Council
resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea seek to find ways to resolve the situation on
the Korean peninsula through political and diplomatic
means. As we can see, there is no acceptable alternative.

The United Arab Emirates would like to emphasize
the following points regarding this latest launch.

In that regard, we again draw the Council’s
attention to the Russian-Chinese action plan for a
comprehensive settlement of the situation on the Korean
peninsula. That plan includes concrete steps by the
States involved in various areas. Obviously, it would
require a mutually respectful dialogue that takes into
account the legitimate concerns and rights of all States
involved, including, obviously, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We note the readiness for dialogue
pointed out by the United States representative, but we
are not certain that Washington is genuinely ready to
have a constructive discussion with Pyongyang. That
can be seen in the history of American diplomacy in the
Korean dossier over the past decades, as well as through
the practical steps undertaken by the United States. We
call on Washington to undertake specific steps to lower
tensions and resume dialogue instead of trying to shift
responsibility to other countries.
We remain convinced that the Security Council
can also play a positive role if its discussions are
constructive and comprehensive and the proposed
products seek genuinely positive results. In that regard,
we note the Russian-Chinese draft of a political and
humanitarian resolution, which remains on the table.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
informative briefing and we welcome the participation
of the Republic of Korea in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates joins the SecretaryGeneral in his strong condemnation of the military
12/15

First, civilians cannot continue to be at the mercy
of the ongoing threats. We note that some advance
warning of the intended satellite launch was provided
on this most recent occasion. That may have reduced
risks to neighbouring countries to some degree, but such
warnings neither legitimize nor minimize the illegality
of the launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The fear and danger imposed on the people of
the Republic of Korea and Japan as a result of those
actions is unacceptable and unjustifiable. We stand
in solidarity with the Governments and the people of
those countries and the wider region.
Secondly, we reiterate our call for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to comply with Security
Council resolutions and international law. The United
Arab Emirates recognizes that satellites can be used
by States for peaceful purposes. However, due to past
actions, the Council prohibited the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from any launches using ballistic
missile technology, regardless of the goal, because such
launches may help accelerate its illegal programme of
weapons of mass destruction.
Reporting suggests that the objective of this most
recent launch was to put the country’s first military
reconnaissance satellite into orbit. We are reminded of
the pledge the country’s leader has made to accelerate
its so-called five-year military plan to, in the words of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, “fight a
war at the highest level”.
This is of great concern considering the nuclear
weapons and intercontinental capabilities that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has been
developing at pace. We call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to return to diplomacy and dialogue
for talks in any format. Enacting a complete, verifiable
and irreversible path to denuclearization, including a
23-15698

02/06/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, without delay, must be the way forward for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
international community.
The role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in verifying those objectives is critical. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should adhere
to the IAEA’s safeguards and allow for the Agency’s
inspectors to return to the country.
Thirdly, the United Arab Emirates remains deeply
troubled by the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Reports of a worsening
food shortage, coupled with severe weather conditions
and the country’s decision to keep its borders closed
to humanitarian organizations, is estimated to put as
much as 60 per cent of the country’s population at grave
risk of malnutrition. That has purportedly increased by
20 per cent in the past three years.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
acknowledged the need for humanitarian assistance,
but has not created an enabling environment for aid
delivery, including by not allowing United Nations
personnel to return to the country. Ultimately, it is the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
who are suffering, and we urge the Government to
invite humanitarian organizations back to the country
to provide life-saving humanitarian assistance. It is the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
who require the Council’s support at this time.
In conclusion, we recall that when the Council
was united on this issue in the past, it was capable of
curbing the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
unlawful pursuit of nuclear weapons. The United Arab
Emirates urges the Council to find such unity again and
speak with one voice to address this situation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United States of America
has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I apologize
for taking the floor, and I promise not to be very long
in responding to a few of these charges.
First, I would like to note that I found interesting that
the representative of the Chinese delegation did not, at
any point, condemn the space launch of the Democratic

S/PV.9336

People’s Republic of Korea. I reiterate that this launch
is in violation of multiple Security Council resolutions.
There was a reference about the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea adhering to agreements, particularly
the Agreed Framework between the United States
of America and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea dating from the early 1990s. What was interesting
about that time period was that, while the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea was supposedly adhering to
that agreement, it was also in the process of developing
a clandestine uranium enrichment programme — so
much for adherence to that agreement.
There was a reference to the Washington
Declaration. And just to be very clear: the Washington
Declaration is a response to the destabilizing activities
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
regard to its ballistic missile and nuclear weapons
programmes. It is not the other way around — just
to be clear. This is not an issue of two sides here in
the Security Council. There is one party that has been
sanctioned by the Security Council, and that is the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
There was a reference to the Chinese and Russian
draft resolution that would ease sanctions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It is hard to
imagine that we should ease sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea while it continues its
destabilizing behaviour. And we must think about the
message that sends out to the world — that countries
can go ahead and just wilfully violate Security Council
resolutions and they will be rewarded. We must
think very seriously about that. I would also like to
emphasize that in our deterrence cooperation with the
Republic of Korea, neither the United States nor the
Republic of Korea is in violation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I just want to be
very clear about that.
My last point is that, in terms of the willingness of
the United States to seriously engage the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, we have said on many
occasions that we are prepared to have an unconditional
dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to try to deal with our differences. As members
all know, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has rejected our interventions on many occasions.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make further statement.

23-1569813/15

S/PV.9336

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

02/06/2023

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
understand that you, Madam President, do not want me
to make a further statement, but as the representative of
the United States has already made a further statement,
I must respond. I will try to be brief.

Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Madam President, for convening
today’s important meeting of the Security Council.
My gratitude also goes to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.

First, as I mentioned in my statement earlier, there
are reasons for the current situation on the Korean
peninsula. It is not as simple as the representative of
the United States said: all the mistakes were made by
one side, and all the responsibility was attributed to
one side. In order to effectively and comprehensively
resolve the issues on the peninsula, we must focus
on the essence of the problem — namely, the peace
mechanism is missing, the legitimate security concerns
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have
not been resolved, and there is long-standing mistrust
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States.

The Republic of Korea condemns, in the strongest
possible terms, the launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of a so-called military
reconnaissance satellite on 31 May, local time. The
regime of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has been completely obsessed with launching a military
reconnaissance satellite ever since it unveiled its
five-year military development plan in 2021. The leader
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea visited
its National Aerospace Development Administration,
which is on the sanctions list of the Security Council, in
April and May, and personally approved its launch. That
palpably demonstrates that the claim of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and its few supporters that
its provocations were triggered by Republic of KoreaUnited States military exercises or moves to strengthen
that alliance, in the face of the growing threat from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, is not
consistent with the facts. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is doing what it wants, according to
its own playbook.

Secondly, I also mentioned in my statement that
there had been some more promising developments
in the past, thanks to a demonstration of political
commitment by all sides, commitment to diplomacy and
the concrete actions taken. The United States has said
that the door of diplomacy remains open, but at the same
time it has engaged in conducting military activities on
the peninsula and in the surrounding areas. How does
that demonstrate the goodwill to resolve the problem?
Thirdly, with regard to the Washington Declaration,
the United States provides extended deterrence to
its allies, especially the planned visit of a strategic
nuclear submarine to the peninsula after 42 years,
which has seriously reinforced the sense of insecurity
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has also made
its position clear on that issue. We all clearly understand
that, if the United States continues on the current path,
it will inevitably provoke the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea even further and increase tensions
on the peninsula.
In conclusion, I again remind the representative of
the United States that he must carry out a comprehensive,
calm and accurate assessment of the current situation,
display political will, demonstrate the necessary
flexibility, take genuine action to relaunch dialogue,
advocate for a political solution and make every effort
to create the right conditions to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
14/15

After the launch, the Foreign Ministry of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea mocked and
condemned the Secretary-General for the statement on
the issue yesterday. Moreover, Kim Yo-jong, the sister
of the leader of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, issued a statement to justify its unlawful action
by claiming its sovereign right to use outer space, totally
disregarding the Council. While reaffirming their plan
to launch another one until it succeeds, she even said,
“The far-fetched logic that only the DPRK should
not be allowed to [launch a satellite] according to
the ‘resolution’ … is clearly ... gangster-like and
wrong …”.
I came across a fitting analogy the other day as a
counter-argument — that a knife is just a kitchen
utensil for ordinary people, but it is a lethal weapon
for criminals.
Any launch using ballistic-missile technology by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is explicitly
prohibited by multiple Security Council resolutions.
The reason is simple. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is the first and only case that has abused the
23-15698

02/06/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and then openly developed nuclear weapons
and their delivery systems. In that regard, I do not need
to remind members that the Security Council, without
any objection or abstention, unanimously adopted
resolution 2087 (2013) in January 2013 to respond to
the so-called Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 satellite launch by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Regardless of whether or not it succeeded and
whatever term Pyongyang is using to describe it,
there is no doubt that the launch constitutes a flagrant
violation of Security Council resolutions. It does not
fall into the category of the peaceful use of outer space.
Space launch vehicles incorporate almost identical
technologies to those used in ballistic missiles, such as
multistage rockets and guidance, navigation and control
systems. Place a nuclear warhead, instead of a satellite,
on a space launch vehicle and you end up with a nuclear
weapon. Resolution 2270 (2016), which was adopted
unanimously after the so-called Kwangmyŏngsŏng-4
satellite launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in February 2016, also made it abundantly clear
that that launch used ballistic-missile technology and
was therefore prohibited.
The Council must act with one strong voice. The
Security Council should not remain silent on the
failed launch by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. In the past, the Council refrained from
adopting substantial measures on failed launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
However, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
learns and advances its weapons of mass destruction
programme, based on those failed launches. The
Council’s inaction not only emboldens Pyongyang
but also misguides the international community into
accepting that the Council will stand idly by and wait
for a successful launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea before it seriously responds. Even
as we speak today, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is buying time to further advance its unlawful
nuclear and missile programmes according to its own
plan, taking full advantage of the paralysed Security
Council and the weakened implementation of Security
Council sanctions.

S/PV.9336

In that light, I would like to underline the need to
strengthen our cooperation to cut off the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s revenue sources for its
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programmes.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea profits
massively from its malicious cyber activities and
overseas information technology workers with forged
identities based all around the world, which have a
seriously destabilizing effect on international peace
and security. The Security Council should do more to
prevent and counter that pressing matter.
Some argue that sanctions are ineffective in
addressing the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s WMD programmes. However, the sanctions
have been curbing the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s illicit revenue streams to some degree thus
far. Sanctions must be thoroughly implemented by all,
including all members of the Council, in order to be
more effective.
It is simply appalling to witness the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea regime obsessively spending
enormous amounts of money and resources on its WMD
programme, while its own people persistently suffer
from deteriorating food shortages, as well as gross
and systematic human rights abuses. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s reckless pursuit of a
growing nuclear arsenal, in total disregard of its
international obligations, and its totalitarian control of
its own people are indeed two sides of the same coin.
My delegation urges all Council members to support
the revival of public Security Council meetings on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, of which the Council remains seized.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea would like
to reiterate that the door for dialogue and negotiation
remains wide open, despite the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s intensifying provocations and
threats. We strongly urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea once again to cease further escalatory
actions, to fulfil its international obligations and to
return to diplomacy.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

23-1569815/15
