UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

NEW

COUNCIL
RECORDS
UN LIBRAR”

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

...........................
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2163)
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .
The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letters dated 13 March 1979and 27 June 1979from the Chairman of the Committee
on the Exerciseof the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressedto the
President of the Security Council (S/13164 and S/13418) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

1

/WPV.2163

-.

Symbols of U%‘?& $atioz &cuments are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document. ,.. -.., ; .L
. . ,- +
.,,,> , ., t :
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2163rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 24 August 1979, at 3 p.m.
&rael). Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Southichak (Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. FiiaZi (Morocco), Mr. Fernando (Sri Lanka), Mr. El-Choufi (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Mestin’ (Tunisia), Mr. Era/p (Turkey) and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) ‘took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Coun?il chamber; Mr. Fall (Senegal), Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, took a place at the Council table:
Mr. Tern’ (Palestine Liberation Organisation) took a place at
the Council table.

President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG
(United States of America).

Present:-The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2163)

2. Mr. BISHARA
(Kuwait):
Today, the feast of Eid
Al-Fitar, is a religious holiday throughout the Moslem
world. I congratulate all members of the Moslem community on this occasion, one that combines spirituality
with dedication.
j

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979
from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13164 and S/13418)

3. At the outset, I have three apologies to make. I
drafted a speech on the rights of the Palestinians but in
the light of what I have heard here from members of the
Council, I feel that the statement I drafted two nights ago
is redundant. I therefore apologize to the interpreters and
to the press and to others because I am not going to
follow my text. It has been distributed to members of the
Council. The crux of that statement was the rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
and there is no
need for an advocate to elaborate on that question. It is a
glaring fact.

The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
llte questi& of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights
Letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979 from
the (;hairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressedto the President of the Security Comcil
(S/l3164 and S/13418)

4. My second apology is that I do not know when I am
going to stop speaking. I have told my colleague to hand
me a note when I have exceeded half an hour.
5. My third apology is directed to the United States
Mission. I should like to apologize to the United States
Mission in advance, because the thrust of what I have to
say here is to inform public opinion about United States
policy in the Middle East. I may irritate some, I may
irritate many. But they know that I always speak in good
faith. I have had strong, constructive,
healthy and, I
would say, amicable relations with the United States
Mission. They acknowledge that and they know that I am
a messenger of moderation and not an advocate of violence. They know that when it comes to the pinch, they
will find me on the side of reason.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance
the decisions
__-- . ..-with
---. -__
- ___
taken at the previous meetings [2255th and2ZdOth to 2262nd
meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Cuba,
Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Morocco,
Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber; I invite the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People to take a place at the Council table; I
invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take a place at the Council table.

6. Before going. further, I must announce publicly that I
am sad. I congratulate the President on the assumption of
his duties in the Council this month, but such congratulations are a ritual; they are banal and almost meaningless.
Yet I am sad, Mr. President, that you are leaving. The
press asked me what I thought of your departure, and I

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tabibi(Afghanistan),
Mr. Roa K&t& (Cuba), Mr; Abdel iUeguid(Egypt), Mr. Fi’orin
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. AI-Ali (Iraq), Mr. BIum
1

told them-1 am relying on memory-that
never m the
history of the Atlantic Ocean had the shores of that body
of water been closer. together politically. Thanks to your
efforts, the-shores on the African side of the Atlantic and
those of the American side have come closer, through your
own personal endeavour.
7. I was asked my thoughts with regard to your successor. I said that it would be easy for him, because you had
already laid the groundwork for successful progress with
regard to African issues. What you have accomplished
with regard to African rights to selfdetern$nation
and
on other issues is irreversible on this continent. You have
implanted feelings of goodwill towards America in the
hearts of the African leaders. In the United States, you
have awakened and alerted politicians and public opinion to the importance of becoming more closely involved
in the primordial right of the African peoples to justice
and self-determination and equity, and in that sense I say
that through your endeavours you have brought the
shores of the Atlantic closer together politically than ever
before.
8. Throughout the history of mankind, there have
always been pioneers. There have been mountaineers
who have set out to conquer the mountain peaks of Nepal
and other places; some of them have died, some have
suffered, some have returned intact, safe and unscathed.
Such men are pioneers and pioneers have a sense of the
sacrifice of pioneers. You, too, are a pioneer for the cause
of justice, and-I must say-you are also a casualty in
thatcause. But you have been a distinguished participant,
you have marched for the noble cause of justice. I shall
not elaborate further, for you know my feelings. You
know that my name has been associated with recent
events. But I must in all fairness say to you, Mr. President, Ambassador Andrew Young, that we are not only
indebted to you. We take off our hats to you. I speak not
only on behalf of Kuwait, not only on behalf of the
Kuwaiti people; I speak on behalf of the Arabs, and on
behalf of the.miserabIe and aggrieved people of Palestine.
9. Having said that, I come now to the essence of what I
am going to say. What is the aim of this debate? Is it to
embarrass the United States? Is the aim to isolate the
United States or to exert the pressure of the barrel of oil?
Is the aim to show that the United States Dolicv on the
Middle East is bankrupt? My answer is that the aim is
none of those; we have never had that in mind. We have
been thinking of one thing, we want just one simple
phrase from the Security Council: “recognition of the
right of the people of Palestine to self-determination”.
Is
that a big order? Is that something enormous in this rn&%
of human conflict over the right to self-determination all
-over the world? It is not much to ask. The people of
Palestine have been suffering for 30 years-suffering
aggravation, isolation, displacement, neglect and insult,
not to mention Israel’s daily campaign of genocide, which
we have forgotten about because we have been taken over
by publicity over what I would call a storm in a teacup.
10. But that is not important. My battle here, as I said to
the press, is not with Israel: in the Security Council my
battle is with the United States over the rights of the
Palestinians, because Israel does not hold the veto-the
United States holds it. My battle with Israel is there, in the

Middle Fast; it is an ongoing battle. But here the battle is
with the United States on the recognition of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and over the fact
that the United States holds the power of the veto. I say that
neither out of resentment nor out of bitterness.
Il. When I, aSa member of the Arab community, innocuously, harmlessly, suggested that a diplomat from the United States might have a general conversation with a
Palestinian, I thought that nobody would be violating any
document. What is this document, which was written by
Kissinger in 1975, that we have been talking about? It states
that no recognition should be given to the PLO, t&t there
should be no negotiations with the PLO, unless it doessuch
and such.
12. Well, the question is imbalanced; it is illogical. But
that is not the point. The point is that you cannot have any
serious search for a comprehensive peace unless you talk to
the parties concerned. You do not have to negotiate or to
recognise. But you should have a general type of conversation. And that is what happened. Is that a big deal? Is that
really taboo? Is that really a violation of the essenceof the
American spirit and Constitution? What is its esserjce?I am
an historian; I know the history of the United States. It is
based on dialogue; it is not based on hostility or on alienation. It is based on dialogue, on give and take. And that is
what there was.
13. Yet, look where we are now. I personally have been
receiving hate mail; I have even curtailed my public appearances in New York: I do not go out of my house unless I am
escorted or go incognito. I sometimes wonder what we have
come to and what valley of darkness we have arrived in. I
have been receiving mail accusing me of communicating
and associating with so-and-so, and trying to intimidate me.
Well, I am not a man who can mince’his words. I do not
care. But when we come to such a point, I must question‘the
type of world we live in. We have reached the deepest valley
of darkness if that is what is going on.
14. Now, I just want to comment briefly on the memorandum issued by Mr. Kissinger to Israel to the effect that there
should be no recognition of or negotiation with the PLO.
And I am talking to the American people now. Otherwise, I
would have used my academic text about selfdetermination for the Palestinians. The fact of that memoranduti
disqualifies-and I want to underlie the word “disqualifies” -the United States from any constructive role concerning the right of the Palestinians to the achievement of a
comprehensive peace, simply because you cannot achieve
peace without talking to the Palestinians. And there are no
Palestinians without the PLO-not
because I Say so academically but because it is a fact.
15. I have been amazed by the attachment of the Palestinians to their leadership, so much so that I think they are
perhaps the most monolithic people in the world. When
Mr. Terzi speaks for the PLO & the representative Of fhe
people of Palestine, we do not take him seriously, but it is a
fact. I come from the area. We cannot know the plight of the
Palestinians mitil we take the Security Council to a refugee
camp and meet there, at either Beirut or Damascus. Then
you will see the plight of the Palestinians. We do not per-

ceive their plight here at the East River, talking academically, metaphysically and abstractly. One must see their
plight, as I have seen it-I, who am not even a Palestinian. I
have seen the democratization and the democratic spirit of
the PLO, the way it commands voluntarily the allegiance of
the Palestinian people. I am amazed-so much so that I will
challenge 99 per cent of the members of the Council and the
Members of the United Nations, to show that their systems
are as democratic.

country we hold President Carter in great respect. He is a
man of unmatchable integrity, a man who radiates honesty.
On “Good Morning America**-and
please note that I
woke up at 6 a.m., unprecedented for me-President Carter
was quoted as having said that the Palestinians want everything or nothing. I say that this is not true. The Palestinians
want “something”; not everything, not all. Of course, they
refuse “nothing”.
21. What does it say in the draft resolution [S/Z3514 so
ably and eloquently introduced by the representative of
Senegal, the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People? I take my
hat off to him. Like you, Mr. President, he is a veteran, a
champion of the right of peoples to self-determination. That
draft resolution refers to the Palestinians’ right to selfdetermination. I do not want to spill all the beans, but I was
instrumental in prevailing on my friend Mr. Terzi to delete
the word “statehood” just to make’the text palatable to our
friends in the United States. That word has become
anathema to the United States, although in 1947 that country not only voted for but was instrumental in the elaboration of the partition plan. But that is past history and we do
not wish to return to it.

16. The PLO is more representative than the Government
of any member of the Security Council or Member of the
United Nations, in terms of democracy. I do not mince my
words; I speak the truth, on the basis of what I have seen,
And here we deride them. Ambassador Blum yesterday
called them “international criminals”. I am not going to
answer him, because he is not my concern. My concern here
is American diplomacy on the Middle East, and I am going
to expose it; I am going to expose the bankruptcy of the
United States policy.
17. You cannot send Ambassador Strauss or anybody
else in an endeavour to achieve a comprehensive peace
without talking to the PLO-period.
You cannot talk to the
Israelis, Egyptians or Jordanians or to the inhabitants of
anywhere else about achieving peace in the Middle East
unless you talk to the Palestinians. And you cannot talk to
the Palestinians unless you talk to their representative, the
PLO, and to its representative here.

22. Again, the President of the United States was quoted
as saying that the Palestinians want everything or nothing.
Mr. President, you are Mr. Carter’s close friend-please
convey to him that this is not true. The Palestinians are
willing to settle for half a loaf. We cannot go back into
history to a time when all Palestine was their country. What
do they want now? The West Bank and Gaza: less than half
a loaf. I am sorry to say it, but President Carter-for
whom
I and all our countries in the Arab world have unmatchable
respect-once said that the Palestinians are against a Palestinian State. That is not true. I do not know how many
Palestinians President Carter has consulted or how many
Arabs.

18. As I said last night on television, Ambassador Strauss’
undertakings are trips of futility. It is amazing that a great
country like the United States should have been a captive of
semantics. How can you undertake the achievement of a
comprehensive peace, such a colossal burden of unprecedented magnitude, in the interest of the United States, in the
interest of the United Nations and in our interest as people
of the region, without talking to the Palestinians? And how
can you talk to the Palestinians without talking to the PLO?
Ambassador Strauss has been hunting for what I am sorry
to refer to asUncle Toms-for
Quislings-among
the Palestinians. But, to the credit of the Palestinians, so far-and, I
am sure, even in the future-no
Uncle Tom has emerged
from among them, because on tbis issue they have risen to a
man in defence of their primordial, sacrosanct right to
self-determination.

23. The press has, been talking of “unauthorized meetings”. I was tempted to take a helicopter and land on the
White House grounds for an “unauthorized meeting*’ with
President Carter to tell him that the Palestinians do want a
State of their own-that
they want half a loaf. They mean
no harm to anyone; they want to coexist; they want to have
a sense of identity; they want to have an identity card of
their own.

19. So my message, through the Security Council, to
Ambassador Strauss, whom I have never met, is that his
trips are trips of futility unless he talks to the PLO, unless he
talks to the real, genuine representative and the essence of
the Palestinian people, the PLO. The memorandum of
understanding is outdated and is unprecedented in diplomacy; it belongs to the Victorian age. The United States is
not a bystander, it is an involved party, according to the
Camp David accords, or agreements-which
I never
liked-which
stated that the United States was a full partner
for the achievement of peace. How can you be a full partner
if you do not talk to the party concerned? That is my first
point.

24. I have been asked by the press during these three
months of fanfare-by the way, because of you, Mr. President, I have become a celebrity-whether
the Palestinians
in my country really want to go back to the West Bank. But
that is not the point. The point is that they want to bear
papers: a sense of identity, a sense of belonging. If I should
be tired from my job, I know that I have a country, I know
that I have a house. I know where I can go-1 do not need a
visa to return to my country. But these poor Palestinians
need a visa; they are not allowed even to return to their
country. Yesterday, the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr. Terzi, said that he cannot return
to his birthplace, Jerusalem. He is barred, while American
Zionists, any Jew in the United States or anywhere else, can
land in Israel and claim citizenship, can claim Mr. Terzi’s
house as his own-Mr.
Terzi, who was not only born there, .

20. My second point is that I have heard amazing remarks
from the State Department-even
from the White House,
from President Carter himself. In the Arab world and in my
3

ident-landed
on our shores and established a hospital. I
have not forgotten that in 1949 I took my ailing father to
that hospital, which has been a landmark of American
goodwill and which still retains the same name, the American Hospital, financed and managed by American money.
In all fairness, we are not an ungrateful people. I took my
ailing father in 1949 to the American Hospital because at
that time we had no money. We were poor.

but is the uroduct of a three-centuriesold
Palestinian
family. The iepresentative of Jordan, Ambassador Nuseibeh, comes from one of the most distinguished families of
Jerusalem. For many centuries-how
long exactly I do not
know, for I am not an expert in Palestinian history-his
family held the keys to the city of Jerusalem. And this man,
Ambassador Nuseibeh, cannot go back to Jerusalem.
25. Where are we now? Are we in the valley of darkness? I
think that we are. The Palestinians are punched in the teeth
by everybody. Self-determination is our yardstick; extermination is the Israelis’ yardstick.

31. But, after all; what are we going to do? When I look at
Mr. Terzi, I not only feel ashamed, I feel that there is
something wrong with this world when we can talk about
the right of everybody, even of rocks in the ocean, to
self-determination regardless of their numbers or origin,
but when it comes to the Palestinians, they hedge. The
United States is not forthcoming. What is wrong? There
must be something wrong. The United States has become
captive of the Camp David accords, and the language of the
Camp David accords not only falls short of what the
Palestinians require, it falls short of the norms of decency,
which require self-determination, without which there will
be no peace.

26. We have really lost track of what is going on in
Southern Lebanon. About 70 or 80 Palestinian innocents
are killed every day-gunned
down. Here in your great
country, Mr. President, we find. people defending whales,
we find people defending birds, but we do not find people
defending Palestinians. Again, are we in the valley of
darkness?
27. The Vice-President of the United States, Mr.Mondale, went to Geneva last month when a conference was
convened on the question of refugees. He was in the forefront; we admire his spirit. We admired what he said about
human rights, his genuine concern for equality, for the
elimination of the sufferings of man. What did he say at the
conference? He said that history will not forgive us if we do
not act; that history will forget us if we do not act. Does this
not apply to the Palestinians? Do we have doublethink? Do
we apply a double standard7

32. The two major protagonists in the Middle Past are the
Israelis and the Palestinians. American policy is to support
Israel up to the hilt at the expense of the Palestinian people.
If the United States wants to be an honest broker, a mediator and a go-between, it has to be fair. Nobody is questioning the right of the United States to support the survival of
Israel, but we do question its total indifference to the rights
of the Palestinians. How can peace in the Middle East be
achieved without talking to the Palestinians and recognizing their right to self-determination? The United States
recognizes the right of Israel, not only to self-determination
but even to retain the territories occupied by force. I tell you
this in all honesty. I am not a man to mince words and I
make no bones about what I think.

28. You, Mr. President, have been instrumental in bringing about American understanding of the rights of the
people of Zimbabwe. You beleaguered Muzorewa and
other tictitious creatures of no self-determination and
insisted that without the Zimbabwe people’s right to selfdetermination there would be no peace; and the United
States accordingly accepted that as its policy. That great
achievement of the United States was due to you. That is
why I say that you have drawn the shores of the Atlantic
closer together politically. But what about the Palestinians?
What are the merits of applying a norm or a set of rules to
Zimbabwe and others and not applying it to the Palestinians? What have the Palestinians done to the United States?
I wonder.

33. Last month we were irritated by an abstention by the
United States. There is no doubt about that. We were also
irritated by a remark that the United States was going to
veto a draft resolution that never got to see the light of day.
We never formulated that draft resolution; it never emerged. But the United States formulates policy without regard
to the merits of the question.
34. The President of the United States said that the Palestinians do not want a State. I mentioned that earlier. He said
that the Palestinians want everything or nothing. I answered
that. What the United States has to comply with is its moral
commitment to self-determination for everybody. That is
the very essence of the Constitution of the United States.
That is the essence of the tradition of the United States. I
have been lecturing for eight years in the United States, and
there is an irresistible sense of fairness among Americans,
regardless of their ethnic origin. They have a sense of fairness if they understand the question. So they have to
address themselves to that fact-self-determination.

29. I have been asked by the television people: “Is it true
that you told Ambassador Young that if the United States
does not abstain or vote in favour of the draft resolution
you will invoke the ‘power of the barrel of oil’?” I said no, I
cannot be so ndive as to do that. No Arab leader or diplomat or politician would think of doing that.
30. I am worried about one thing, and you may quote me
for I am talking to the people of the United States here and
that is why I did not use my text: I do not want to indulge in
academic discussions of self-determination. I am worried
about the pychological alienation between Arabs and the
United States. I shall never forget what happened in my
country. In 1908 a group of American doctors landed on the
shores of Kuwait. Who wanted Kuwait in 1908? We were in
the depths of poverty. Deprivation was our lot. But a group
of enlightened Americans-missionaries
like you, Mr. Pres-

35. We have not come to debate here to embarrass anybody. We have come here to get one sentence from the
Security Council: self-determination is the right of the Palestinians, a primary right, a right that emanates from the
Charter, a right that emanates from every international
4

declaration to which the signature of the &ited States is
afliied. The United States La party by moral commitment
to the Charter and to the Umversal DeclEZiZo~uman
Rights. The United States is morally bound to acknowledge
the right of the people of &lestine to sell-determination.

with Israel regarding the advantages that Israel stood to
gain concerning the territories it had seized as a’result of
aggression and from which it should rightfully depart. But is
Israel entitled to propose to the inhabitants of the occupied
Arab ter@tories any sort of autonomy or “selfdetermination” in a territory that is not actually a part of
Israeli State territory? The attempts that have been made to
present those people with some sort of truncated selfdetermination are suflicient by themselves to prove Israel’s
intention to annex those territories. The so-called framework for the West Bank and Gaza represents a sly attempt
to circumvent the relevant decisions of the United Nations
on the Middle East problem and, in particular, to avoid the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all occupied Arab
territories.

36. Now what benefit can be derived from this debate
again? For the first time in the history of Palestine, the
American people have started to question the merits or the
futility or utility of their policy on the Middle East. They
have .realized that without talking to the Palestine Liberation Organization there will be no peace. They have realized
that without recognition of the rights of the Palestinian
people there will be no peace. They have realiid that they
have to act in accordance with their moral commitments as
well as with their interests.

43. The lack of realism in the Camp David deals can be
seen in the very fact that those who are responsible for them
have attempted to consolidate the flouting of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, ignoring the United
Nations resolutions on the Middle East problem and the
question of Palestine. The point of the so-called autonomy
for the Palestinians envisaged in the Camp David deals is
precisely virtually to inhibit the Palestinian Arab people’s
enjoyment of their right to self-determination and sovereignty in Palestine and to perpetuate Israel’s colonization of
the occupied Arab territories. It is therefore not surprising
that the Arab countries have so resolutely rejected those
attempts.

37. This is an historic occasion for the people of Palestine,
and for the Americans, to understand the crux of the matter. The Palestinians do not want to push anybody into the
sea. They want to coexist. They do not want to deprive
anybody, but they want to live in decency and dignity.
Thirty years have passed. It is a legend, an epic of suffering,
deprivation and torture. But I must say that I take off my
hat to the Palestinians for their patience, for their hope.
Their expectations as to the future are unmatchable. They
show pure magnanimity in the most indescribable circumstances of torture, misery and grievance.
38. I could continue, but this is not the right time to do so.
I shall stop now in the hope that I ma) speak later.
39. Mr. HULINSKP (Czechoslovakia) (intetprerati@%n
Russian): Mr. President, it is with a feeling of profound
respect that I congratulate you on occupying the responsible post of President of the Security Council for this month.
Your political farsightedness, diplomatic skill and humanity have lent you authority among your colleagues in the
United Nations. I-should also like to take this opportunity
to thank your predecessor in the post, Mr. Richard, for the
way in which he conducted the work of the Council in July.
His presence among us will be sorely missed.

44. At the recent meeting of the Central Council of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the Chairman of its
Executive Committee, Yasser Arafat, once again rejected
the policy of those who participated in the Camp David
talks, which has led to an increase in repression against the
Palestinian patriots in the occupied Arab territories and to
intensified Israeli aggression against independent Lebanon.
The Central Council of the Palestine Liberation Organization unanimously and resolutely opposed the sort of solution to the Palestinian question that would overlook or
infringe the national rights of the Arab people of Palestine.

.40. There is hardly anyone who could today seriously
deny the fact that the crux of any political solution of the
Middle East problem is the Palestinian question and the
exercise by the Palestinian people of the right to selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignty in
Palestine. Can any right-thinking politician deny or challenge the fact that the Arab people of Palestine is one of the
principal parties in the establishment of a just and durable
peace in the Middle East or that the Palestine Liberation
Organization should ,participate on an equal footing with
other parties in all international efforts, discussions or conferences on the Middle East held under the aegis of the
United Nations, in accordance with its earlier decisions?

45. The Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic supports the vital demands that have been made
by the Arab people of Palestine. The position of Czechoslovakia was confirmed, onceagain, in the joint CzechoslovakSyrian communiquC of 24 May of this year, which was
adopted during an official visit by the President of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Gust&v H&k,
to the
Syrian Arab Republic. That communiquC condemned the
ongoing Israeli occupation of the Arab territories and the
denial of the rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right to return to their homeland, their right to
self-determination and their right to create their own independent State on their own soil.

41. Again and again the world has seen proof of the fact
that attempts of any kind to settle accounts in the absence of
the payee, such as the attempts of those who have initiated
various kinds of separate deals to be concluded behind the
back of the Arab peoples, are doomed to failure.

46. There is no just and durable peace in the Middle East
region, nor can there be unless there is a comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East question, unless Israeli troops
are withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied in
1967, unless the Arab peoples of Palestine are able to exercise their national rights, including the right to create their
own State, and unless the independent existence and secur.ity of all the States of that area are guaranteed. Such a

42. Let us take the example of the Camp David transactions. Those who participated in them, interaiia, negotiated
5

settlement can be achieved only in accordance with resolutions of the United Nations and only with the participation
of all the interested parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole representative of the entire Arab
people of Palestine.

5 1. After a quarter of a century of diffused and piecemeal
deliberations on the problem of Palestine, the General
Assembly, in 1974, finally dealt with the question in its
totality encompassing all aspects, historical, political and
juridical. Thus the Assembly by its resolution 3236 (XXIX)
unambiguously spelt out the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty and to return to
their homes and property from which they had been forcibly dispersed. The resolution overwhelmingly endorsed the
right of the Palestinian people to present their own caseand
participate in any peace negotiations through their legitimate representatives, the Palestine Liberation Organization, which had already secured such specific recognition as
full membership in the 86member non-aligned Conference,
the Islamic Conference, the League of Arab States and,
through General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX), the
status of permanent observer at the United Nations.

47. The Czechoslovak delegation is ready to support the
draft resolution [S/Z3514J that has been introduced by the
representative of Senegal, the Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which confirms the rights of the Arab people of
Palestine to self-determination, to national independence
and to sovereignty in Palestine. The creation of their own
State would fulfil the aspirations of the Palestinians, a thiid
generation of whom are still without a homeland, Historical
justice stands on the side of the Arab people of Palestine.
48. Mr. RAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, please
accept our warmest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. I take the opportunity to pay
you a tribute for your personal attributes of courage, compassion and justice, which have so greatly contributed to the
cause of larger understanding particularly of third world
concerns. We are confident that under your leadership the
Council will be able to discharge its responsibilities effectively. Your departure from our midst will be deeply felt,
but your presence and contribution will not be forgotten.

52. In 1975, the General Assembly by resolution 3376
(XXX), established the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. In subsequent
years, through its resolutions 31120, 32/40 and 33128
respectively, the Assembly endorsed and adopted asits own
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s report
and repeatedly extended the Committee’s mandate to promote the implementation of those recommendations. The
role assigned to the Security Council waspreponderant. It is
primarily in pursuance of the mandate entrusted to the
Palestine Committee that the Council is meeting today.
However, above and beyond this is the pressure of a burgeoning global consensus that the Council must face fairly
and squarely the issue of Palestinian rights. Over the past
few years, there has been a crystallization of views by the
world community on the content and direction-the essential parameters-of an equitable settlement in the Middle
East.

49. I wish to take this opportunity also to reiterate our
grateful thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Ivor
Richard, who so efficiently and ably presided over our
affairs in the month of July. His presence too will be missed,
not only because of hi exemplary capabilities but also
because of his companionship and humour. We wish him
all successfor the future.
50. We are meeting at a critical time. when the attention of
the world is directedas never before to the outcome of our
deliberations. The heart of the matter is simple. A people
deprived of their birthright, dispossessed of their lands,
forcibly uprooted by aliens, demand the correction of a
grave injustice. In essence, it is a political problem-the
struggle of a people for their right to self-determination and
the achievement of their inalienable national rights. That
reality, however, has been deliberately obscured by the
treatment of the problem, not on a political but on a humanitarian plane. For 25 years, that fictive approach was
pursued despite two important resolutions of the General
Assembly-resolution
181 (II) of 29 November 1947, which
contained the partition plan for Palestine and resolution
194 (III) of 11 December 1948, which established the Conciliation Commission for Palestine and recognized the right
of the Palestinian refugees wishing to return to their homes
and live in peace with their neighbours to do so or to be
justly compensated if they chose not to return. Since then,
the rights of the Palestinians have been ignored, their existence as an entity denied, their status as a people obliterated.
They were instead, in disregard of all norms of human
rights, treated with indignity like hapless refugees. Those
who remained behind in the territory or became victims of
further illegal occupation were reduced to secondclass citizens and live under the glare of permanent hostility resulting from an armed occupation.

53. My delegation wishes to pay a tribme to Ambassador
Fall and the members of the Committee who have contributed so greatly in that process. We have consistently held
that the Committee’s recommendations do indeed represent a balanced prescription for peace whose fundamental
substance must find reflection in a unanimous Security
Council pronouncement. We are particularly struck by the
guiding motivation of the members of the Committee that
the implementation of their recommendations should constitute a contribution within the framework of the United
Nations and should complement efforts towards the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region.
54. The Council cannot continue to impede and ignore
the wishes of the international community without imperilling peace and compounding injustice. It has now become
obvious that an equitable solution cannot remain confined
within the hidebound perimeter of resolution 242 (1967).
There has been substantial forward progression in the
dozen years that have intervened. There have been qualitative changes universally recognized by our global society.
Four million Palestinians cannot be simply wished away as
non-people. They are a reality recognized by the great
majority of mankind. Nor can resolution 242 (1967) itself be
stretched to justify illegality and expansionism or cloud
through sophistry the cardinal principles of the Charter6

principles which stipulate that no country can be permitted
to embark on a policy of conquest and aggrandizement,
that no country can be allowed to enjoy the fruits of its
aggression and that no people can be denied their inalienable right to a homeland.

chart a realistic path to a durable and just peace through
timely and concerted action or, by failing to do so, to open
the door to further conflict and global conflagration. Bangladesh is confident that the choice for peace can and must
prevail.

55. Independent moves towards a so-called comprehensive settlement which circumvent the central issue of the
Middle East conflict-the implementation of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people-are tantamount to inviting violence and condoning illegality.

60. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretationfrom Chinese):
Mr. President, first of all, on behalf of the Chinese deiegation, I would like to extend our warm congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month. At the same time, we deeply regret
your imminent departure and wish you happiness and success in your future work.

56. Bangladesh particularly notes that, notwithstanding
the pursuit of its own independent prescription for peace,
Israel follows a policy which is the very antithesis of peace.
In violation of the Charter and the decisions of the United
Nations, Israel continues illegally to occupy the Arab lands
and engage in repeated and wanton acts of aggression in
Lebanon. It has continued to build new settlements on land
which clearly belongs to the Palestinian people. It has continued to engage in flagrant violation of the fundamental
human rights of the Palestinian people and to deny them
their inalienable right to statehood. Israel has embarked on
a deliberate programme to alter the Islamic and Arab character of Jerusalem. We cannot but denounce Israel for its
actions. We note that both Egypt and the United States
have voiced their disapproval of Israeli actions on all those
questions. It is evident that Israel’s aim is not a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Its aim is clearly to pursue a
policy outside the ambit of the United Nations and thereby
to render United Nations resolutions and decisions on the
Middle East problem infructuous.

61. The situation in the ‘Middle East has been a question
of universal concern, and the question of Palestine is an
important and integral part of the whole Middle East question. Since the Israeli Zionists unleashed their first war of
aggression against Arab countries in 1948, they have stubbornly persisted in their policies of aggression and expansion, illegally occupied the whole of Palestine and large
tracts of Arab territories and driven more than a million
Palestinian people from their homelands. Thousands upon
thousands of Arab and Palestinian people have been
deprived of their means of livelihood. Homeless and destitute, they are in dire misery. These criminal acts committed
by the Israeli authorities have been severely condemned by
the people of the whole world. However, instead of showing
the slighest repentance, the Israeli authorities have obstinately clung to their course of hostility to the Palestinian
people and the Arab people as a whole.
62. In the furtherance of their policies of aggression,
expansion and annexation, the Israeli authorities have in
recent years tried by hook or by crook to stamp out the
national liberation cause of the Palestinian people. They
have repeatedly invaded Southern Lebanon on a massive
scale, attacked the camps of the Palestinian armed forces
and brutally slaughtered innocent civilians, thus inflicting
heavy losses upon the lives and property of the Palestinians
and the people in Southern Lebanon. At the same time, the
Israeli authorities have gone ahead with the establishment
of more settlements on the Arab territories they forcibly
occupy, trying by every means to change the legal status,
geographical nature and demographic composition of the
whole occupied area and thus legalize their occupation of
those territories. The above facts only testify to the dogged
persistence of the Israeli authorities in their reactionary
position of continued occupation of Arab territories and
opposition to the restoration of the national rights of the
Palestinian people. This reveals the hollowness of their
high-sounding call for a “lasting peace in the Middle East”.

57. Bangladesh’s position on what constitutes a just,
equitable and durable solution of the Middle Fast problem
has been repeatedly enunciated in the Security Council and
the General Assembly. Bangladesh is firmly convinced that
a fair and lasting solution demands a complete and immediate withdrawal of Israel from all occupied territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem, the restoration of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to their own independent State and the acceptance of the Palestine Liberation Organization as the sole,
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
58. We have heard in the Council the statements of the
PLO representative and his impassioned cry for justice. It is
our expectation that the Council will act to reverse the trend
that is being reinforced to deny the people of Palestine their
inalienable rights to self-determination and national sovereignty. It is our belief that the Council will meet the challenge of the occasion, respond to the pleas of a dispossessed
people, help them regain their legitimate rights and thus
contribute to a just and comprehensive peace settlement in
the Middle East. The Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
once pointed out:

63: The Israeli aggressors have become so truculent and
bold because they have the overt or covert backing of the
super-Powers. In their rivalry for spheres of influence in the
Middle East and for global hegemony, the two superPowers, each using its own means, either openly shield
Israel or actually connive at its evils and concentrate on
sowing discord among the Arab States, in an attempt to
obstruct a comprehensive solution of the Middle East question. Obviously, to achieve a real solution of the Middle
East question, it is imperative, on the one hand, firmly to
oppose and exclude superpower meddling and sabotage

“Never in the history of nations have the actions of an
international organization had such a decisive effect on
the destiny of a people as those of the United Nations on
that of the Palestinian people.”
59. The actions of the Security Council are all the more
potent. We are now presented with a crucial opportunity to
7

and, on the other, to strengthen the unity of the Arab world
in a common struggle.

certain situations, you have generously applied the resources .of your intelligence, your heart, your character. That
will not be forgotten.

64. Over a long period, the Arab and Palestinian peoples
have waged an unremitting struggle against Israel’s aggression and expansion and for the restoration of the national
rights of the Palestinian people and the recovery of the lost
Arab territories. Their struggle has won the broad sympathy
and firm support of the Chinese people and of people all
over the world. Since 1965, the Palestinian people under the
leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization have
waged armed struggle under the most complex and arduous
conditions. Fearing no sacrifice and fighting valiantly, they
have kept dealing heavy blows at the Israeli aggressors.
General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376
(XXX). rectified the erroneous approach in earlier resolutions which called the question of regaining the national
rights of the Palestinian people a refugee question. The two
resolutions reaffirmed the Palestinian people’s right to selfdetermination without external interference and to national
independence and sovereignty, recognized their right to
regain their inalienable rights by all means and appealed to
all States to extend their support to the struggle of the
Palestinian people. Such a change reflects the just demand
of the Palestinian and Arab peoples and has been brought
about as a result of their unity and persistent struggle. The
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Bights of the
Palestinian People which has been established pursuant to
resolution 3376 (XXX) presented its report and we are in
favour of those elements in it that reaffirm or conform to
the aforesaid two General Assembly resolutions. In our
view, the Security Council should now unhesitatingly adopt
a resolution to confirm the correct principles embodied in
the aforementioned two resolutions and reaffirmed in the
report of the Committee, so as to facilitate a just solution of
the question of, Palestine and the whole Middle East
question.

68. As the representative of a great country to which we
are bound by close and age-old ties, you have. added lustre
to your activities here. Allow me to express my best wishes
for your personal future and for the successof the missions
that will be entrusted to you.
69. I should like to add a personal word of tribute to last
month’s President, Ambassador Ivor Richard. For five
years he brought to his duties not only the authority and
eloquence acquired from hi parliamentary experience and
the precision inspired by his legal training but also a senseof
humour, sometimes dry but always smiliig, which so often
refreshingly broke the monotony of our debates. May I
request the charge d’affaires of the United Kingdom to
convey to him my best wishes and my friendship.
70. In meeting to consider the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Bights of the Palestinian
People, the Security Council is resuming a debate already
taken up several times but interrupted in October 1977. I
shall not repeat my Government’s reservations regarding
the work of the Committee which, in our opinion, did not
always take sufficiently into account all the facts pertaining
to a particularly complex situation. However; I listened
with great interest to this morning’s statement by Ambassador Fall.
71. The fact is that the Security Council, the principal
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, today is called upon to debate the
question of Palestinian rights. No doubt, it would have been
desirable to have an over-all discussion of the entire question of the Middle East, but we understand the impatience
of the Palestinians with the situation that has been created
for them, and our debate at least has the merit of drawing
attention to an essential element of this problem.

65. The Chinese Government and people have always
unswervingly supported the just struggle of the Arab and
Palestinian peoples. We have steadfastly stood for the recovery of the occupied Arab territories and the realization of
the Palestinian people’s national rights, including the right
to return to their homeland and establish their own State. A
real solution of the Middle East question depends on the
great strength of the unity of the Arab people. We sincerely
hope that the various quarters in the Arab world will show
mutual understanding and unite against -the common
enemy so as to hasten the achievement of their victory.
66. Mr. LEPBETTE (France) (inrerprerutionfrom French):
Mr. President, you are going to leave us. This gives the
duties you are performing for the iast time as President of
the Security Council a particular and special meaning,
importance and, I would even say, gravity.

72. The French delegation, for its part, has repeatedly
stated its position before the Council, notably in January
and in June 1976, on the conditions to be met for the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
In our view-and I should like to recall it here clearly-the
various components of a genuine settlement cannot be dissociated from one another and must all be taken into
account. At issue for the Arab States is the right to recover
their territorial integrity, which requires the evacuation of
the territories occupied by Israel since the 1967 conflict.
Also at issue is the right of each of theStates of the region,
including Israel, to live in peace within secure, recognized
and guaranteed boundaries. At issue, similarly, is the right
of the Palestinian people to a homeland.

67. For nearly three years, you have given such proof of
your devotion to the United Nations and to the cause of
peace that my delegation feels a great and sincere regret at
seeing you leave us. We will cherish the memory of the
personal contribution you have made to the greater part of
the major issues that have been brought to the attention of
our Organization. To the solution of these questions, to the
lessening of many tensions and to the improvement of

73. The Council is in duty bound to seek to reconcile these
elements, if it is to live up to the hopes placed in it. It has
already adopted fundamental texts on two of themnamely resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)-which are
still fully valid. By contrast, the third element-the right of
the Palestinians to a homeland-has not yet found a generally accepted definition or expression. True, it is not up to us
to decide for those concerned the nature and status of such a
8

. ..

their belief that they are a separate people with political
rights which go well beyond their status as refugees-a
status that was recognized in resolution 242 (1967)-a people distinct from the peoples of the countries where they
now live. It takes no account of the need for the Palestinian
people to be given the opportunity to express their national
identity and to have a proper place in the international
community. The international community has increasingly
come to recognize the validity of their claim and to acknowledge their legitimate rights.

Palestinian homeland. But it is quite clear, nevertheless, that
any settlement must take that element into consideration
equally with the others.
74. Finally, as to the return of the Palestinian refugees, I
wish to reaffnm the position of France as stated very clearly
before the.Council in 1976 by my predecessor: namely that,
in our view, that return is of a secondary nature in comparison with the three essential elements of the settlement, from
which it cannot be dissociated, any more than the elements
can be dissociated one from the other. It seems to us,
indeed, that the modalities for the exercise of all of the
acknowledged rights of the Palestinian people must be
decided within the framework of a negotiated peace
settlement.

80. My Government is convinced that the Palestinians are
a central issue in the Middle East contlict. They must be able
to see a future for themselves in the area. They must be fully
involved in any settlement and be able to participate in its
negotiation. A settlement which does not command the
broad assent of the Palestinians will not last. In sum, my
Government believes that a settlement must satisfy the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to a land of their own. This is not only a political fact.
My Government fully sympathizes with the plight of the
Palestinians, particularly those who continue to live under
foreign occupation and those who have lived as refugees, in
some casesfor 30 years. This humanitarian problem cannot
be left untackled indefinitely.

,75. May I recall, as prior speakers have done, that the
responsibility and duty of the Council, which for more than
30 years has been grappling with the conflict in the Middle
East, is to bend every effort to facilitate the quest for a
comprehensive settlement which alone can bring a just a$
lasting peace to the region. It will be up to the international ~.
community which we represent to take the necessarymeasures in due course to guarantee the implementation of that
settlement and to contribute to the creation of the atmosphere of confidence necessary for the security of all the
parties involved. I confirm that my country, as a permanent
member of the Council, remains willing to participate in the
provision of such guarantees.

81. We should not lose sight of the fact that a serious
effort is currently being made to tackle the problem. The
current negotiations of the future of the occupied West
Bank and Gaza Strip are concerned with the Palestinian
issue. We wish the negotiations well and hope that they will
succeed. My Government believes that if the result is
genuine autonomy for the occupied areas as a transitional
stage towards the final determination of their status, that
would not only help to alleviate the position of the inhabitants but could also be a further step on the road to a
comprehensive settlement.

76. Mr. MANSFIELD (United Kingdom): First, Mr. President, thank you for the kind words you addressed yesterday to Mr. Ivor Richard. I have already conveyed them to
him, and I will do the same with those addressed to him by
the representative .of France.
77. Secondly, my delegation is indeed glad that you are
presiding over the Council this month, and in particular
over the important deliberations on the Middle East situation. You are exceptionally well qualified for this task; we
are therefore sorry that this will be the last month that you
do so, But you will leave behind you a great reputation, and
there will be many in the United Nations who will miss your
sincerity, your good humour and your courage. We wish
you every successin your future activities.

82. The Security Council has long played a role in Middle
East affairs which gives it a capacity to influence the course
of events. It is therefore right that the Council should
attempt to refine the principles on which a settlement must
be based. But what has been achieved in the past must not
be wrecked now. We must be sure that the Council’s influence is used positively and helpfully. A principal concern of
my Government throughout -has been that resolution 242
(1967) should be supplemented, not replaced, amended or
distorted. Its principles must remain a starting point for
peace negotiations, together with the need to meet Palestinian aspirations.

78. The aim of the British Government in the Middle East
is to promote just and lasting peace. Our concern is to avoid
all actions and decisions which might make the search for
peace more diicult. We continue to believe that the basis
for the attainment of a just and lasting comprehensive
settlement is the full implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), as called for in resolution 338 (1973).
Resolution 242 (1967) sets out the requirements for peace, It
C&S for the withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces and
reaffirms that Israel, like all States in the area, is entitled to
live in peace with its neighbours within secure and recognized borders. Those principles represent a balance which
must not be impaired. Our commitment to their implementation remains total.

83. We are also aware that resolution Z&t2(1967) and the
principles it embodies have not been accepted by all those
who wish-to be regarded as parties to the dispute with a right
to be involved in negotiations. This has constantly bedevilled the search for peace and for a means of involving the
Palestinians in the determination of their own future. As1
have said, my Government accepts that resolution 242
(1967) on its own is not suflicient for the Palestinians. But
we believe the Palestinians and those who claim to speak for
them should accept unequivocally the principles contained
in that resolution, in particular the right of all States in the
area, and thismust include Israel, to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries.

79. Resolution 242 (1967) is concerned with how the Arab
States and Israel can live in peace together. It does not deal
with the question of the Palestinians. It takes no account of
9

(1967) and 338 (1973): And thus, with respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of each State
in the region, after Israel withdraws from the territories
occupied during the 1967 conflict-for that occupation is
unacceptable and illegal-it will be possible for everyone to
live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries.

84. If the Palestinians are to exercise self-determination,
this must be clearly in the context of a peace settlement in
which Israel’s right to peaceful and permanent existence is
confirmed, and if necessary guaranteed. That is why my
Government hoped that those who have not yet done so
would have indicated that they accept without qualification
that Israel has the right to exist and that they are committed
to a negotiated settlement on this basis. My Government
would like to urge the Palestine Liberation Organization
once again to take that step. We believe it is fundamentally
wrong to seethis as a bargaining card. It is an essential step
if peace negotiations are to be successful. And no step could
do more to establish the credentials of those wishing to
represent the Palestinian people.

91. The right of the Palestinian people to a land of their
own goes hand in hand-as far as my Government is
concerned-with the defence of the existence of the State of
Israel, and we wish to affirm without ambiguity that this
should be accepted unequivocally by all the parties concerned, in the inten& of peace, for which no effort should
be spared.
92. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

85. By the same token, my Government would urge on
the Government of Israel whole-hearted recognition of the
fact that the legitimate rights of the Palestinians must be
satisfied if a lasting settlement is to be achieved. I do not
,believe it is in the interests of peace for the Government of
Israel to refuse to face this. Palestinian rights cannot and
will not be ignored. Ultimately, the Paiestiniins and Israelis
will have to sit down together to negotiate. The longer that
is delayed, the more difficult such a negotiation is likely to
be and the higher the casuality list from continuing violence
will become.

9;* Mr. SOUTHICHAK
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (interpretation porn French): Mr. President, the
delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic would
like first of all to convey to you its sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of August. Your experience and your skill will help
the Council, in a spirit of reason and justice, to find a
solution to the problem which it now has before it. My
delegation would also like to express its thanks to you and
through you to all the members of the Council who have
allowed my delegation to participate in the debate.

86. An important step forward is in our grasp. Our efforts
should continue to be devoted to making such a step
possible.
87. Mr.

MATHIAS

(Portugal)

(inrerprerulion

porn

94. I should also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador Ivor
Richard, representative of the United Kingdom, for the very
skilful way in which he conducted the debates in the Council during the month of July.

French): Mr. President, we now know that your presence as

President of the Council is more fleeting than that of any of
us who occupy that chair for a month. All the more, therefore, do we wish to expressto you our esteem and respect on
the eve of your departure and to say to you how much we
have appreciated your warm human qualities and your
great professional skills. Your battle for your ideas and your
convictions and the devotion with which you uphold them
are an example which we shall long remember.

95. The question of Palestine is one that has been a constant source of concern. In fact, it is of particular importance because it has been recognized by our Organization as
being at the very heart of the problem of the Middle East
and we cannot conceive of any solution of the problem
without taking into account the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.

88. I also wish once more to express my appreciation to
your predecessor, Ambassador Ivor Richard, who presided
over our work in an exemplary way during the month of
July with the brilliance and intelligence which we all know
him to have.

96. The delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic is happy that these sessions of the Council have
been convened. They have been long awaited, in fact, since
the first meetings were held in October 1977 and were
adjourned to permit fresh consultations. Since then, the
international community has constantly reminded the
Security Council of the need to find appropriate measures
to deal with the Palestine question on the basis of the
recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People which were
endorsed by the General Assembly at its thirty-first, thirtyi
second and thirty-third sessions.

89. The position of my country regarding the situation in
the Middle East, and in particular regarding the rights of the
Palestinian people, has already been stated in the United
Nations and before the Security Council. I shall therefore
reaffirm once again that my country supports a just and
lasting peace in the region and that we believe that this can
only be attained by taking into account the legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
self-determination and therefore to a land of their own. We
can well imagine the suffering, the woe, the bitterness of
their exile and we believe that the solution to the problem is
becoming increasingly urgent. The conscience of the international community, which in a way we represent here,
requires it.

97. It should be noted that in the meantime we have
witnessed events which, far from bringing us closer to a just
and equitable solution of the Palestinian question, have
made it more remote, first because of the intransigence of
Israel, which is continuing its illegal occupation of Palestinian territory and, secondly, because of imperialist manceuvres to drag out a solution of the problem of the Middle Past

90. It seems to us an accepted fact ‘that the establishment
of this peace requires the implementation of resolutions 242
10

merit, at reaching a just and lasting solution, should be
based on those principles enunciated in United Nations
resolutions and, in particular, in General Assembly resolution 33128 A which declares in paragraph 4 that

and of Palestine. The Palestinian people themselves who for
decades now have undergone indescribable suffering
because of the expansionist policies practised by Israel have
been forced to abandon their homes and their property,
their historical inheritance and to become refugees.

“the validity of agreements purporting to solve the problem of Palestine requires that they be within the framework of the United Nations and its Charter and its
resolutions on the basis .of the full attainment and exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right of return and the right to national
independence and sovereignty in Palestine, and with the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Grganization”.

98. The Israeli leaders, with unlimited knavery and insatiable expansionist designs, have committed act after act of
indescribable aggression against ‘the Palestinian people
both in the territories that they have occupied and wherever
those people are to be found, thus deliberately violating the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States which gave
them shelter. After four wars of conquest, Israel has more
than quadrupled the area of the lands it controls and quite
recently the Israeli leaders have been brazen enough to
declare that the West Bank of the Jordan and the Gaza
Strip, which Israel has occupied by force since 1967, constitute the very heart of their country and that they claim the
sovereign right to establish settler colonies there. That language resonant with force and defiance has clearly shown
that Israel places its right of conquest above the inalienable
rights of peoples, and in particular of the Palestinian people,
and this represents a serious challenge to the international
community and to the resolutions of the United Nations as
well as a threat to peace and security in that area.

101. The deteriorating situation in the Middle East which
may at any moment explode is a direct consequence of the
attempt to reach a settlement in the Middle East that has
denied the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people.
That attempt has encouraged Israel deliberately to oppose
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. The immoderate declarations made by Israeli leaders to the effect that
Israel will never withdraw to the frontiers existing prior to
1967, that Jerusalem will forever be the capital of the Israeli
State and that there will never be a Palestinian State on the
West Bank of the Jordan or in the Gaza Strip unambiguously confirm the avowed intent of Israel to oppose the
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council and to establish itself once and for all on the
territories that it has -acquired by force.

99. It is profoundly to be regretted that, in the face of such
deliberate defiance, the Security Council has proved, at
least to date, that it is both weak and incapable of taking the
appropriate steps to put an end to Israeli aggression and
repression. The fact that the Council has thus been immobilized has made the international community an implicit
accomplice of the cynical designs of Israel, which, as can be
seen daily, continues to commit ever more acts of aggression and to pursue its intention of denying the Palestinian
people their inalienable rights. The continuous attacks carried out by Israeli forces in ever intensified degree against
the Palestinian refugee camps, causing so much loss of life
and suffering by innocent people, have shown once again
Israel’s arrogant attitude towards the United Nations and its
stubborn intention to pursue to the very end its .policy of
expansionism which merely serves to perpetuate tension in
that part of the world.

102. The Security Council, in which the Palestinian people and the international community have placed their
hopes, after waiting for so long, should this time be in a
position to take appropriate steps in accordance with the
recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. In that connexion, the Council has before it a draft resolution, which was
introduced by the representative of Senegal [S/23524],
whose contents we believe are at least in keeping with the
international consensus reached on the question of Palestine. It is the hope .of my-delegation that the Council will
discharge its responsibilities in accordance with the desires
expressed by the entire international community by adopting this draft resolution.

100. Recently, there have been attempts to settle the Middle East question the motivations behind which do not
respond to tne rights and interests of the Palestinian and
Arab peoples. My delegation has followed those manceuvres aimed at bringing about a so-called peace by separate
agreements with growing concern, and we have regarded
that formula as being one that is essentially in contradiction
to the international consensus reached on the Palestinian
problem, and therefore one that cannot be considered as a
basis for producing a just and lasting settlement of the
Middle East crisis. These agreements have already aroused
violent opposition on the part of the Arab countries, an
opposition that has been expressed in forceful language by
the Council of the League of Arab States, which, during its
Baghdad meeting last March, adopted resolutions calling
on all countries to refrain from supporting a treaty that
constitutes “an aggression against the rights of the Palestinian people and the Arab nation and a threat to peace and
security in the world”. lS/l32ln of 3A~ril 1979, annex,
para. i.] We consider that any attempt at reaching a settle-

103. The Palestinian people, which have for more than 30
years been subjected to humiliation, have suffered greatly
from Israel’s atrocious acts of repression, intimidation and
aggression. In view of that situation, it is perfectly obvious
that the struggle of the Palestinian people to recover their
inalienable rights to self-determination, independence and
national sovereignty is a just struggle that is ceaselessly
gaining ever greater ‘support from forces throughout the
world that prize peace, freedom and justice. The delegation
of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic would like once
again to reaflirm its whole-hearted support for the just and
heroic struggle of that people under the leadership of its sole
authentic representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization; it is our conviction that thii struggle will inevitably be
crowned with a glorious victory.
104. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council.mble and to make a statement.
11

_

105. Mr. EGCHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, I want at the outset to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. The courage you have shown cannot pass without the appreciation of all who are oppressed. Your stand
has indeed shown remarkable courage, understanding and
sensitivity to the plight of the Palestinian people. I feel
moved and sad in anticipating your departure from the
United Nations. I am sure that you will leave the same sad
emotion among all your colleagues in the Organization. We
do wish you all the best.
106. Allow me at the same time to pay due respect to your
predecessor, Ambassador Ivor Richard, of the United Ringdom, for the efficient manner ln which he presided over the
work of the Council last month.
107. Again the question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of their inalienable national rights is on our agenda,
and, while the issue is hardly a question of debate for us, we
appreciate the fact that once more we are faced with a stark
reminder that a grave and long-standing injustice has yet to
be redressed by the international Organization.

I

108. We recognize with appreciation how the United
Nations has accepted, recognized and supported the struggles of other peoples who have desired their freedom from
colonial domination. It has welcomed them to its ranks, as
newly independent States, and by continuing to do so it may
eventually come to be truly representative of the world
community. But, again, it is painful to note that, with
respect to the Middle East, the United Nations has so far
failed to exert its full power and authority in helping the
Palestinian people to acquire their national independence.
This failure casts a gloomy shadow over the cause of world
peace because, should it persist, the possibility of another
major global confrontation looms before all of us. It is
therefore not only a matter of adhering to a noble principle;
it is also a matter.of necessity that the United Nations
should begin to take up its task by extending full and
unconstrained support to the just struggle of the Palestinian
people for freedom and national independence.

not enough to shed a tear for them once in an opportune
while. Sympathy merely assuagesthe pain but does not heal
the wound. It is high time that we commit ourselves to the
task of healing the wound and make our profound expressions of sympathy come alive for the Palestinian people.
112. In doing so, we should not only be rising to meet our
moral obligations to the oppressed Palestinian people, we
should also be fulfilling a responsibility we all share as
States Members of the international Organization. Needless
to say, maintaining the world’s confidence in the viability
and prestige of the international Organization requires concrete and decisive action in ensuring international peace and
security. To perpetuate the denial of the national rights of
the Palestinian people is to abandon our very vision of
international peace based on justice and equality. Such
perpetuation would entail acceptance of the aggressor’s
principle of peace based on “might makes right”. It would
constitute the very desertion of our own norms of justice
based on the Charter and commonly agreed principles as
embodied in what is known as international law.
113. Any people struggling for freedom and independence becomes steeled in the very action of their national
liberation movement. From the throes of that battle emerge
valiant sons and daughters who take up the responsibility of
advancing their people’s progress to final victory. The Palestinian people have produced their leaders in the Palestine
Liberation Organization.

.

114. But, while the United Nations has accorded recognition to many of those national liberation movements,
including the Palestine Liberation Organisation, it is conspicuous that the colonial Powers, old and new, have desisted from according legitimate recognition to the Palestine
Liberation Organization. In particular, the United States of
America has even gone so far as to declare that it will never
recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization unless that
organization accepts certain preconditions. We think that
the imposition of such preconditions is unjust and that,
furthermore, it reveals an irresponsible stand by a great
Power. It is crystal clear that the Palestine Liberation
Organization is indeed the sole representative of the
Palestinian people. Without its participation on an equal
footing, there cannot be any practical progress. We fail to
understand how the United States can seriously justify such
an unjust stand.

109. The Middle East conflict hinges on the most important problem: the denial of the inalienable national rights of
the Palestinian people. It is that simple and fundamental
element that is the crux of the problem. No one among us
seeks any privileged position or special treatment for the
Palestinian people. .All we ask is that the Palestinian people
be accorded their basic national rights, rights that have been
accorded to all other peoples, and that they receive redress
for allthe cruelty and injustice that they have suffered in the
past decades. All that is needed is an elementary sense of
justice, a basic notion of right and wrong.

115. We believe that the Palestinian people are entitled,
under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to their right to selfdetermination, and I shall
unequivocally state here that in that belief we are ready to
accept whatever future direction the Palestinian people
decide upon for themselves. We believe that anyone who
professes any concern on this issue must accept the Palestine
Liberation Organization as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. Consequently, anyone who
speaks of a peaceful settlement must accept negotiations
with the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people,
the Palestine Liberation Organization. That is why we
oppose and shall continue to oppose the shameful treaty
between Egypt and Israel, which was sponsored by the
United States of America. The signatories to the treaty
usurped the rights of the Palestinian people. They made

110. The Palestinian people, who were forcibly expelled
from their homeland-whether in 194&1956 or 1967-have
the right to return to their homes. Yes, we all know‘of the
many resolutions that the United Nations has already
adopted to that effect but, again, they have been seen only
on paper and have yet to be translated into concrete action.
111. The Palestinian people do not need any more sympathy. They are waging a lifeanddeath struggle, and it is
12

i

themselves representatives of the Palestinian people. And to
what effect? They anticipated only permanent subjugation
of the Palestinian people. They assigned the role of managing the sewagesystem in Palestine to the Palestinian people.

120. The history of the people of Palestine has been written in blood since 1948. And the Middle East will know no
peace until the fundamental issue, that is, the acceptance of
the right of self-determination for the Palestinian people, is
resolved. It is clear for all of us that the Security Council has
been paralyzed and it is likely that it will remain so by virtue
of the negative vote of the United States. We believe that the
misuse of the veto power inflicts not only further injury,
bloodshed and suffering on the Palestinian and Arab peoples, but also enormous damage on this very Organization
of the United Nations and the Charter. It is high time for all
Council members to recognize the explosive situation in the
Middle East. It is high time for the international Organization to avert another tragedy in the Middle East which can
hardly be limited to our area. On the contrary, a new
tragedy in the Middle East might very likely threaten the
peace and security of the whole world. From this stand, we
appeal once again to Council members to act in accordance
with their responsibility and with their powers and to undo
the injustice, condemn the aggressor, enforce Israel’s withdrawal from all the occupied Arab and Palestinian territoties and, finally, ensure that the Palestinian people are able
to exercise their inalienable rights, including their right to
self-determination and a sovereign independent State.

116. We regard the Camp David accords and the socalled peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, and any other
agreements that may emerge, as null and void. Furthermore, we regard denying the Palestinian people their inalienable rights as an insult not only to the Palestinian people
but to the Arab nation and to the United Nations. The
signatories at Camp David designed for themselves the role
of arbiters who can shape the history of the Middle East and
who can impose their authority on the United Nations. We
should condemn that design. We shall struggle against it
and we think that the United Nations must do the same. It is
already very clear that the shameful treaty has resulted in
further deterioration of the situation in the Middle East. It
has added more bitterness, hatred and suspicion to the
political scene in the Middle East. It is clear that the treaty
has become the real obstacle to achieving a just, comprehensive and durable peace in the Middle East. It has freed the
criminal from any accountability. It has encouraged that
same criminal, that is Zionist Israel, to carry out its expansionist schemes by persistently colonizing Palestinian and
other Arab territories and by its almost daily murderous
raids against the innocent population in Southern Lebanon.
In fact, while we are speaking here today, Israel is bombarding most of Southern Lebanon.

121. Finally, we feel grateful to Ambassador Fall of Senegal, and indeed to all the members of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
of which he is Chairman. The Committee has once again
acted with admirable responsibility, impartiality and courage. We do hope that the Security Council will act in the
same manner.

117. Let us face it-there can never be a just peace in the
Middle East without the active participation of the Palestine
Liberation Organization in negotiating, arranging and concluding the terms of such a just peace. Furthermore, the
Camp David accords and the separate peace treaty further
endanger the situation in the Middle East. In order to revive
the process for a just, durable and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East, the beginning must be the undoing of the
Camp David accords and their consequences. The United
Nations is, in our opinion, the only proper forum for achieving such a peace.

122. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Morocco. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
123. Mr. FILALI (Morocco) (inrerprefationfrom French):
Mr. President, I should like first to congratulate you, on
behalf of the delegation of Morocco, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. This is a tribute to your country, with which
Morocco has relations of co-operation and friendship
which date back for many years.

118. I realize that some Powers, in particular the United
States of America, have some reservations on that point.
They have put forward certain criteria to justify their hesitation to recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization.
They argue, for example, that the Palestine Liberation
Organization has not been freely elected. Here, I should like
.to pose a challenge to the United States: mcognize the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination, hold free
and internationally supervised elections, and we shall all be
committed to the outcome of such elections. The Palestinian people will decide on who should be their leaders. But
first recognize their right to self-determination.

124. I have had a relationship of trust, with you and I have
thus been able to appreciate your political courage, your
great moral spirit and your outstanding intellect. All of us
have feelings of respect, admiration and esteem for you. The
lucidity of your judgement, the speed and sharpness of your
intelligence, your ‘analysis of international problems and
particularly the problems of the third world lead me to
believe that your forthcoming departure will leave a tremendous gap in our midst. We extend to you our best
wishes for your future activities.

119. The majority of mankind, represented by the majority of the Member States of the United Nations, has condemned Israeli aggression many times. They have already
roundly condemned the threat which zionism poses to
world peace and security. They have rightly identified zionism with racism and apartheid They have seen how Zionist
Israel is .a mere metamorphosis of Nazi Germany. That
international verdict was not achieved easily.

125. I should also like to pay a well deserved tribute to
your predecessor as President of the Council, Ambassador
Richard,’ for the outstanding manner in which he discharged his responsibilities as representative of the United
Kingdom to the United Nations.
126. Finally, I should like to thank all the members of the
Council for allowing me to speak on behalf of Morocco, in
13

its capacity as President of the Islamic Conference, as well
as on behalf of the Jerusalem Committee, the President of
which is His Majesty King Hassan II. There is no doubt that
the problem of the Middle Fast and particularly the question of Palestine represent a principal subject to which the
Islamic Conference attaches the utmost interest. It is
because, in fact, the Palestinian question has reached an
historical turning point of exceptional gravity.

just and global solution to the problem that concerns the
entire Moslem world. We must also reaffirm that the Palestinian quesTion is at the core of the Middle Fast problem,
and that any solution that does not take the Palestinian
cause into account and that does not entail the restitution of
occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem, is of necessity partial and unacceptable to the Moslem world.
131. It is inadmissible that Israel should continue to agitate throughout the world for recognition of the right of all
Jewish citizens in other countries to emigrate from those
countries to Israel, even though such Jews have never seen
Palestine nor trod its soil in the past, while at the same time
it continues to deny to the displaced Palestinians the right to
return to their country and in practice to prevent them from
exercising that right.

127. We have noted with satisfaction the report of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.’ That report has been‘very carefully
drafted and is directed towards future action. Its recommendations have a legal foundation and are based on equity. In
our view, they should serve as a basis for the initiation of
any solution acceptable to all because they bring closer the
possibilities of peace and promote the achievement and
recognition of universally accepted rights.

132. We cannot continue to‘ignore the heroic struggle the
Palestinian people have been waging for more than 30 years
under the leadership of its sole representative, the Palestine
Liberation Organization, in their attempt to regain the
exercise of their inalienable rights. We know that such rights
are not negotiable and cannot be subject to barter. They
have been solemnly recognized in General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX) and Security Council resolution 452
(1979). We reaffirm that the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people to return to their homes and to achieve independence and national sovereignty must be supported and
guaranteed by all. That, in our opinion, is the key to any
solution to the Middle Fast problem.

128. I should like in passing to extend my warm congratulations to the members of the Committee, and in particular
to its Chairman, my friend Ambassador Fall, whose eminence as an experienced diplomat is known to all. We are all
aware that the United Nations archives are filled to overflowing with documents containing the various formulas
the Security Council and the General Assembly have
adopted in the attempt to arrive at a just solution of the
Palestine problem, a solution that has unfortunately
eluded the international community for more than 30 years.
It is truly painful to speak for decades about a perfectly clear
and unassailable question only to realize, in the end, that we
are caught in a vicious circle and locked in a state of chronic
immobility. That is where we find ourselves at the present
time, because the crux of the Middle East problem-the
Palestinian question-has
always been ignored.

133. The Islamic Conference has always vigorously
denounced the expansionist policy of Israel and has
demanded its withdrawal from all Arab territories, as well
as the recognition of the Palestinian people’s right to return
to their homeland and to’ self-determination. It has also
called for the creation of an independent Palestinian State
on its own land and led by that same organization, the sole
and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.

129, And yet, there has been no lack of precedents. In the
past, both the Security Council and the General Assembly
have taken decisions on other, similar cases. Many countries that are Members of the Organization today have been
able to become a part of it by exercising their right to
self-determination and owing to the recognition of that
right by the appropriate United Nations bodies. Why is it
that what was good for a certain number of States in the
past does not hold good for the Palestinian people? We feel
that this is an injustice that must be redressed. We believe
that it must be redressed for two basic reasons, the first of
which is that the Security Council adopted resolutions 242
(1967) and. 338 (1973) on the situation in the Middle East.
We also believe that no definitive solution to the situation in
the Middle East can be found until the Council realizes that,
in order to implement both resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), a third element must be added, one that in our
opinion is essential: the granting to the Palestinian people of
their right to self-determination. How, indeed, can any just
and equitable peaceful solution to the problem be possible
without reference to the Palestinian people and to its legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization?

134. The Moslem nation has also reaffirmed at all Islamic
conferences, and particularly at the meeting held at Fez in
May 1979, its devotion to the Arab character of Jerusalem,
and its determination to liberate that Holy City and to
reestablish Arab sovereignty over it.
135. Through its various spokesmen, Israel reaffhms that
Jerusalem will never be restored to Arab sovereignty and
that it will forever remain the capital of Israel. In so doing,
Israel is simply defying the Islamic nation and conscience,
by rejecting all the General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions that particularly recognize the Arab character
of Jerusalem. That position is all the more incomprehensible in that Israel states that it abides by resolution 242
(1967). That resolution clearly calls for withdrawal from all
occupied territories, including Jerusalem.
136. Is there anv need to remind Israel that above all else,
the Holy City of Jerusalem represents an indestructible
focal point of spiritual values for the entire Moslem nation?
Must we remind it that hundreds of millions of Moslems are
singularly concerned with the future of the religious magnetic pole that Jerusalem has always been for them?

130. On behalf of the entire Islamic nation, I should like to
state here our determination and devotion to the need for a
L ofj’iciai Records
plement No. 35.

of the General

Assembly,

Thirty-third

Session, Sup

14

plight of the people of Palestine has endured and their
resolute efforts to achieve self-determination have continued for more than 30 years. The Palestinian issue, in spite
of the major important developments achieved towards the
international recognition of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, still remains an incessant source of suffering and wrongs. There can certainly be no durable peace
in the Middle East without justice, and justice requires the
recognition and fulfilment of the national rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to selfdetermination
and to establish a State of their own.

137. I should like to refer to resolution No. 2 adopted by
the Jerusalem Committee that met at Fez on 2 and 3 June
1979. The Committee invited the Security Council
“to take practical steps to ensure the realizatiorr of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people and
to put an end to the continued aggression against the
Holy City of Jerusalem and other occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories’*.
138. The Security Council has before it today a draft
resolution prepared by the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People [S/135Zq.
We welcome this draft, although its substance does not fully
respond to the legitimate aspirations of the Moslem nation
regarding the Palestinian cause, and we hope that it can lead
to a process of reconciliation between conflicting views and
that the Council will receive it favourably.

144. After many years during which the issue of Palestine
considered exclusively within the context of a refugee
problem, its basic political dimension has finally been
accepted and defined in various resolutions by the General
Assembly. An overwhelming majority of the international
community supports the legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right to establish an independent State.
ws

139. In conclusion, we believe that Israel must at last
realize that the policy it has persistently advocated and
practised leads but to a deadlock; it cannot refuse to others
what it constantly claims for itself. Realism and wisdom
compel us to affirm once again that a just and comprehensive peace in that region can only be achieved by allowing
the Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable right to
self-determination and independence.

145. General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX) is of historic importance in that regard. That resolution, while confirming the rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to return to their homes, emphasises at the
same time that the Palestinian people is one of the main
parties directly concerned in the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. Later, the Assembly,
further elaborated on the question and in its resolution 3375
(XXX) decided to invite the Palestine Liberation Organization, as the sole representative of the Palestinian people, to
participate in all international efforts relating to the Middle
East on an equal footing with the other concerned parties.
Turkey has supported those resolutions. Our,support in
that regard has been based on the universal recognition,of
the right to selfdetermination and on respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

140. The Middle East, as everybody knows, is going
through a dangerous period of crisis; from one moment to
another that crisis could degenerate into an even more
deadly conflict than those of the past. Accordingly, we
believe that the Security Council, the organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security, today
more than ever has the obligation to come up with guidelines for a satisfactory solution in conformity with the aspirations of the peoples of the region. It is the duty of the
Council to make that effort to render justice to the Palestinian people, ‘who for 30 years have been living in exile; the
Council must do so, if it is to live up to the expectations of
the international community which, today more than ever,
calls for the restoration of the national rights of that
dispersed people. Otherwise, the Council will dash the
hopes of all and the Middle East crisis will only become
more inextricably confused.

146. With a view to translating into action the provisions
of those resolutions and in order to draw up a programme
for the implementation of the Palestinian rights enumerated
in General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX), the General
Assembly established the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, of which Turkey is a constituent member. That Committee has already
recommended a programme which was endorsed by the
Assembly in 1976, 1977 and 1978, during its last three
consecutive sessions.

141. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, whom I invite to take a place at the
Councii table and to make his statement.

147. Some difficulties have been encountered in taking
concrete action in the Security Council with a view to
implementing the recommendations of that Committee
over the past two years. In spite of those difficulties, however, we believe that those recommendations, already
endorsed by the General Assembly, have produced a significant impact in focusing attention on the necessity of a just
solution of the Palestinian issue. We feel it is high time for
the Council, which is in session at present, to address itself
to the issue of Palestine, the very essence of the Middle Fast
question, and to the recognition and realisation of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

142. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to pay a tribute to the efficient and capable
manner in which you have been conducting the proceedings
of the Security Council on this very important and delicate
problem. I should also like to express my regrets that you
have chosen not to remain with us any longer and I would
wish you happiness and success in any new endeavour on
which you may wish to embark.
143. The Palestine problem, which is the core of the Middle East issue, was inherited by our Organization in its first
years of existence through the ‘adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 181 (II) in 1947 which sought the
creation of two States in Palestine. Since then, ‘the tragic

148. As has been stated on several occasions in different
organs of the Organization by my delegation, Turkey firmly
15

believes that a just and lasting solution to the Middle Fast
question can only be found by taking into consideration the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian Arab people, including
their right to decide their own future and to have their own
State. We believe that a constructive conclusion of the
present debate in the Security Council will certainly constitute an important contribution to the search for such a
comprehensive solution to the Middle Fast question.
149. I should like to conclude my remarks on the question
by repeating the principles and fundamentals which we
believe should underlie such a just and lasting solution. A
political settlement in the Middle Fast should be based not
only upon Israel’s withdrawal from all the Arab territories it
occupied in 1967, including Jerusalem, but also upon the
recognition and realimtion of the national legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinians, including their right to
establish a State of their own, as well as on the’principle that
the Palestine Liberation Organization is the sole legitimate
representative of the people of Palestine.
150. Turkey will continue to support and welcome any
peace initiative in the region which conforms to the abovementioned principles.
151. The PRESIDENT: I propose now to make a statcment in my capacity as representative of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

157. Fit. the current stage of the neace nroccss, now
centred on negotiations between Egypt,*Israeland theUnited States, needs a chance to succeed. Secondly, the basis for
making peace is Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)and
338 (1973) in their entirety. Thirdly, the right of Israel and
its neighbouts to live in peace, within secure and recognized
borders, is fundamental. And fourthly, the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, including their right to participate
in determining their future, must be realised..
158. On the basis of that approach, we are now deeply
engaged in the pursuit of peace in the Middle Fast. Negotiations to create full autonomy for the inhabitants of the West
Rank and Gaza are now proceeding between Egypt, Israel
and the United States, We believe that this realistic step can
help to achieve the goal of peace with justice which we all
share. For the first time in more than 30 years, negotiations
are under way which directly address the Palestinian question, and Palestinians are invited to take part in those
negotiations.
159. In addition, there should be-as the Charter
demands-an end to all acts or threats of violence in the
area on all sides, ‘as a step towards negotiations and a
peaceful resolution of disputes. The philosophy and the
practice of non-violence and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts have broad support in the United States and deep
roots in the United Nations system.

152. The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole have debated the Palestinian question for over 30
years. We are all in agreement that resolving the Palestinian
issue is central to settling the Arab-Israel conflict and that
the principles of the Charter are relevant and must be
applied if solutions are to be found. Although there remains
a wide diversity of views on how to resolve the issue, the
debate has confirmed the importance of moving f&ward.

160. We do not counsel inaction. The question cannot be:
should action be liken? Rather it must be: how should we
act, and what course is most effective at a given time? We
are convinced that the dynamic of the current process in the
Middle Fast is a basis for hope. Our position is not a counsel
of despair; we hope it will be seen as a promise that the
course which marks our efforts is one which will lead to .
peace with justice.

153. For too long, too little has been done to move
beyond rhetoric and violence to a process of discussion and
negotiation, which alone can bring about the recognition
and realization of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians.
As a result, the problem of the Palestinians remains
unsolved. That need not be so. For its part, the United
States has committed itself to the search for peace in the
Middle East, including the resolution of the Palestinian
question in all its aspects.

161. Finally, may I say that we appreciate the significance
of the debate, and the statesmanship shown throughout.
162. May I take the liberty of speaking for a few moments
not as the representative of my Government but in my
capacity as a friend and colleague of all of you who are
present. I take this liberty because it was not my design that
I should be leaving the Council at a time when I wasserving
as its President. I hardly anticipated that this would occur,
and yet I have no regrets about what has occurred, in fact, I
see it as a part of the work of the Council with which I intend
to be associated for long after I have left you.

154. That search for peace has reached its first historic
conclusion-the
Egypt-Israel peace treaty-and. we will
--redouble our efforts to achieve further results within the
framework of the Camp David accords.

163. It has indeed been a pleasure-and many of you have
referred to that fact-that we have in many respects reversed our relationships with much of the rest of the world.
That is certainly most obvious with Africa, but it is probably just as true in terms of our relationships in the early days
of my presence on the Council, when the so-called “gang of
five” -or the European and Western members of the
Council-worked together to begin to bring about a peaceful transition to majority rule for the nation of Namibia.

155. The United States attitude here in the Council, and
towards the process of discussion and consultation which
has led to this meeting, reflects our conviction that the
Palestinian people must be brought into the peace process if
in the end it is to succeed. Peace with justice must apply to
- - all peoples in the area.
156. Thus, it is important that the Council understand our
basic approach to securing a comprehensive peace in the
Middle Fast, for that basic approach will guide both our
actions with respect to the countries and peoples of the area
and our response to proposals for action by the Council.

164.’ Our relationships with Latin America have certainly
been improved, not so much as a result of my work, but as a
result of a national policy which began almost immediatety
16

which required a certain level of communication and understanding; I thought that there was no particular risk
involved in that communication, beyond the risk of my
job-and my job has never been particularly important to
me. My responsibilities to my country, my responsibilities
to the ideals and principles in which I believe are important
to me. And so it wasno great decision on my part tovisit the
home of my friend and to meet another friend, and I hope
that in some small way it may have opened up a question to
the American people that will call attention to some of the
tragic history of our nation as a result of the refusal to
communicate.

in this Administration to negotiate an agreement with
Panama on the utilization and the transfer of responsibility
and authority on the question of the Panama Canal. As a
result of that, our relations with Latin America have been
greatly improved, we find ourselves in thii hemisphere with
a kind of respect and partnership in development that we
have long sought and are very pleased to have been a
part of. I should say that even our relationship with the
Soviet Union in the past two and a half years has taken a
very definite step forward, as we have sought to negotiate
strategic arms limitation treaties and to come to a new
understanding of how we might work together in the world
to realize fully the principles which we share and also to
avoid conflicts in areas where we might disagree.

171. It was a result of the refusal to communicate with the
People’s Republic of China and a denial of the existence of
800 million people for almost 20 years that.led us into
escalations of tension and war in Korea. It led us into war
with Viet Nam.. We could not end that war in Viet Nam
until we started talking and communicating with the People’s Republic of China. We are not any weaker nor is the
world any the worse a place because we have opened up a
dialogue and communication with the People’s Republic of
China. And perhaps there would have been 100,000 or more
American men and women whose lives could have been
saved, had we been talking with the People’s Republic of
China in 1951 and 1952.

165. We have seen also an improvement in our relationship with the People’s Republic of China, and our involvement in South-Past Asii has emerged on a new and
improved basis, in spite of the tensions and problems which
still exist there.
166. I think that our relationships with the Arab world
have made this kind of debate and dialogue possible, and
the progress that we are making in the discussions around
the Security Council table is part of a long period of conversations and negotiations which have gone on for many years
and which I think are just beginning to bear fruit.

172. The same might be said of the situation in the Middle
East, and it was because I felt that not talking would
contribute to violence and bloodshed that I believe that the
risks of talking to the PLO were nothing compared to the
risk of bloodshed, violence and the possible destruction and
disruption of the relationships that we enjoy with many,
many people in that region of the Middle Past.

167. Most important, I think, is the fact that we have been
able to maintain our friendships with and our responsibilities towards our allies and the nation of Israel, while
expanding our communication and our involvement with
new friends and partners in the search for peace, security
and development in the world.
168. I think the thing that I am perhaps most proud of in
my association with the Security Council and especially
with my Government over the past two and a half years is
that for the longest time in my lifetime, my nation has gone
about its business in the world, has advanced its interests,
and none of our soldiers has had to kill anyone else; neither
has any of our young people been called upon to die in the
uniform of his country. I think that is a testimony to our
desire to search for peace and to bring about peaceful
solutions to problems, problems that we as nations have
been struggling with for many, many decades.

173. I have said that it is a ridiculous policy not to talk to
the PLO, and I believe that it is a ridiculous policy. But ifit is
ridiculous not to talk to the PLO on the part of the United
States and the nation of Israel, it is also ridiculous for many
States represented here not to have good relations with the
nation of Israel. For ultimately, if we are to have peace in
that region, people have got to approach each other as
friends and as brothers, and not as enemies blood-thirsty for
the destruction of each other. And so there has to be a
renunciation of violence on all sides and a beginning of
communication about the possibilities of peace in the
region. One of our colleagues in the Secretariat who has
been moving back and forth between Israel and the PLO
regarding the situation in Southern Lebanon made the
matter-of-fact remark: “It’s amazing how similar they arethe people around Weizman and the people around Arafat.
If they could ever get together they would be a powerful
combination”. I believe and hope that we will live to seethat
day, the day when people in the Middle Past can recognize
their common heritage of values, whether it be from the
Judaeo-Christian side or from the Christian-Moslem side,
and somehow bring together those values and ideals that we
share across cultures and faiths and that make it possible for
us to exist together in this Organisation.

169. I must say that I have no quarrel with this Administration. In fact, I am quite proud of it. I have no quarrel with
the President or the White House. In spite of petty diierences with the Department of State, there have been no differences with the Secretary of State and, overwhelmingly, I
would say that we basically share a senseof conviction and
direction about the way things should move in today’s
world. I do not think that I was “set up” by my Arab or my
Israeli friends. I think that whatever happened leading to
my resignation was something that I entered into very much
with my eyesopen and came not out of any quarrel with any
person or any institution, but rather out of a fundamental
disagreement with a policy, one that I have sought to run
from for two and a half years, for I never agreed with it.

174. And so I would say that in the experience of my
nation, though many in my nation would not agree with me,
that violence has almost always failed and that I even have
some questions as to who won the Second World War,

170. And yet, when I found myself taking on the presidency of the Security Council and being faced with an issue
17

looking at the present economies of the various nations
involved. But I would say that that is also true in the Middle
East. I would say that the violence of the Arab world has
.failed to destroy Israel, and the attempt to destroy Israel has
been at great cost to the moral basis of the existence of a
Palestinian people. The strength of Israel in its early days
was+in a sense, that it was based on a moral foundation.
And yet Israel now is rapidly spending its moral capital,
wasting it in pursuit of violence and destruction in Lebanon
and in the building of settlements, where perhaps, while
affirming resolution 242 (1967), in the very act it is violating
that resolution.
175. Somehow I think we have created a situation, not
through any doing of mine-1 feel that I am an innocent
bystander being swept along by the forces of history, and I
go gladly-in the course of which we may come to a more
realistic understanding of how the Security Council might
work. I think violence has failed on both sides. Actually, it is
counter-productive. I think isolation of the PLO has certainly failed, and isolation of Israel has failed. Talking has
not yet had a chance to succeed. And yet I think that in the
kind of statesmanlike deliberations that have .gone on
around this table on the question, on the question of Namibia and on questions of our relationships in many parts of
the world we see a faint glimmer of hope that talking might
succeed. And so after these long hours that we have
gathered together, going over the course of the struggles in
the world, I really do not give up, for I think there is an
educational process, a process of calling to the attention of
the court of world opinion the reality of justice and injustice
in the world in which we live.
176. Therefore, I leave the Council with great faith in the
work of its members, knowing that I will continue to be a
part of it in some way, but with no regrets for the fact that
perhaps we broke with comfortable diplomatic channels and
violated some agreements made long ago that are ridiculous. I do so in the hope that the work of the Council will
continue, will progress and that we all may succeed in living
up to the standards that made the Organization possible.
* 177. I should like to thank all of you for the privilege of
working with you. I must say that I have learnt a great deal
from each of you and from those members of the Council
who served in previous series of meetings. I shall always
count you as friends and colleagues and I hope that I will
always be included in your work and in the work of the
Secretariat. Forgive me for taking these liberties with the
Council’s time, but I felt that the situation almost
required it.
178. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, what I am
going to say after your eloquent statement will be an anticlimax, but I want to make a brief statement for the record.

180. No one is “off the hook” because a vote was not
taken this evening. We did not use-as we were accused of
using-the diplomacy of the barrel. But, unfortunately, we
found that United States diplomacy on the Middle East was
over a barrel.
181. Some people may ask how we came to this conclusion without taking a vote. I am not going to disclose what
has happened over the past three days of intensive consultations, but we worked hard with the people concerned who
have a stake in the outcome of the debate not to blemish
your image, Mr. President, with a veto. We were concerned
that Mr. Young, who has served the cause of human rights
in the United Nations and outside it unmatchably and with
an impeccable record, should emerge from his term as
President unblemished and spotless as a fighter for human
rights. Definitely, had the veto been cast, people in Kuwait
would have asked me: “What about your strong advocacy
of Ambassador Young? You told us this, and yet he cast a
veto”. We worked hard to forestall that.
182. During our contacts with members of the United
States Mission and with others, I approached the PLO
representative and sent a message to Chairman Arafat, and
this was his answer: “We cannot let circumstances lead us to
push Ambassador Young, a great man, into a veto”.
183. I should like to say that the Palestinians have been
patient for 30 years. They have been magnanimous in their
co-operation, and they have been unmatchable in their
hope.
184. Mr. President, I bid you farewell and I hope that we
shall be seeing you soon as a fighter for human rights. Last
December, we had a meeting in my home at which Mr. Qaddoumi of the PLO was a participant, as well as a distinguished American citizen, not an official. We were talking,
and Mr. Qaddoumi said sadly, “Brzezinski once said, ‘Byebye, PLO’, but he did not have the courtesy to say, ‘Bye-bye,
PLO. See you later’ ‘*. Mr. President, we shall see you later,
and I hope that you will continue your fight and endeavours
for human dignity.
185. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has expressed a desire to
speak. I now call upon him.
186. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, after your kind words I do not have much to
say. I should just like to have it on record that your talking
to me, even in the line of duty, has cost you your job but you
have kept your honour and your integrity. We do recognize
and respect men of honour, and we know how to reciprocate because we too are men of honour. Andy, au revoir.

179. The benefit of the Council’s debate ,is that it has
alerted public opinion in the United States to the utility, or
futility, of American diplomacy with regard to the rights of
the Palestinians. Americans have started to question the
benefits, advantages and disadvantages and demerits. We
hope that this public debate in the United States will continue, and we will do our best to encourage it.

187. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers.
Accordingly, if no other representative wishes to speak at
this stage, I propose to adjourn the meeting. The date and
time of the next meeting of the Council for further consideration of the item on the agenda will be fixed following
consultations among the members of the Council.
18

188. Befoi adjourning the meeting, I wish to dxaw the
attention of the Council to the many reports we have
received of intense military activity over recent days in
SouthernLebanon. I am informed that the Commanderof
the United Nations Interim Force in I&anon has been
instructed to make every effort to arrange an immediate
cease-firein the area.

The membersof ‘tie-Councilwill nxall the SecretqyGeneral’sown recentappealfor restrainton the pan of all
the parties. In my capacityas Presidentof the Council, I
appealfor restraint on the part of all contimed so that the
hostilitiesmay be brought to an end.

189.

lk

19

meeting rose at 6.30 p.m

I

.

:

.

.

.

.

.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN UMTED

NATIONS

Unite1
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. .Consult
&&ion.
New York or Genea
COMMENT

SE PROCUBEB

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lm publications
des Nations
Unies aont en vente dans les librairias
et les agencea
d6positairer
du moode entier. Informez-vow
aupr& de votre liiraire
ou adressez-vous
L : Naths
Uniea Sectiin
des venter. New York ou Gem&e.
StAXt IIOJIY’IHTb
%TJnSRHS,

H3~AHHSI

oD,-M,HWUWH

OPrAHH3AqHH

06hC,WWeHWblX
BO BMX pfdoHaX

awwax II arenTcmax
mauIem ummoiou
*araJme

nmi nmuwe

Haq~it.

Cex4wt

mxamsR,

COMO

CONSBCUIR

no npo4ame

Unita4

4Us1ions.

New YorL

YoX‘Ho

XYnHTb

II XWHXWblX

nHpa. Hasomre
cnpasKH
no wpecy
: Opram3aum
Hbto-FiopX

WBLICACIONES

mu

DE LAS

Ias publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buiioras
an todas partes de1 mundo.
Cuamulte
Onid+
&ccl&
de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

titb’fo

HAlUSH

OB-bEXHHEHHhIX

Hat‘,,,8

Rim

YaM-

06 w3AaHHrx

B

06aenweHsblx

IKeHess.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en libredas
y casas distria su librero o dirljase
a: Naciones

t4J.s. 2.56

?9-7m2-Msrcll4982-236
