United Nations

A/RES/61/166

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 February 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 67 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2006
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/61/443/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

61/166. Promotion of equitable and mutually respectful dialogue
on human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, 2 the International Covenants on Human Rights 3 and other
relevant human rights instruments,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights globally in
a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis, and that
the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical,
cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind,
Stressing the importance of developing friendly relations among nations based
on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and
achieving international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Emphasizing the responsibilities of all States, in conformity with the Charter,
to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction of any
kind as to race, colour, sex, language or religion, political or other opinion, national
or social origin, property, birth or other status,
Bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006 entitled
“Human Rights Council”, in particular the decision of the Assembly that the Council
should undertake a universal periodic review, in a manner that ensures universality of
coverage and equal treatment with respect to all States, and the decision of the
Council on the establishment of an intersessional open-ended intergovernmental

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2

06-50439

A/RES/61/166

working group to develop the modalities of the universal periodic review mechanism,
based on an interactive dialogue as well as on objective and reliable information, 4
Recalling that the General Assembly shall make recommendations for the
purpose of promoting international cooperation in the economic, social, cultural,
education and health fields, and of assisting in the realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or
religion,
Recognizing that politically motivated and biased country-specific resolutions
on the situation of human rights severely undermine the principles of objectivity and
non-selectivity in the consideration of human rights issues and are
counterproductive to the cause of promoting human rights,
Urges Member States to further strengthen international cooperation in
1.
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights in order to enhance dialogue
and broaden understanding among civilizations, cultures and religions;
Calls upon Member States to base their approaches towards development
2.
of international dialogue on human rights on the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action2 and other relevant international human rights instruments and to refrain
from approaches that are inconsistent with that international framework;
3.
Reaffirms that the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as a legitimate concern of the world community, and the
development of international dialogue on human rights should be guided by the
principles of universality, non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity and should
not be used for political purposes;
Stresses the need to avoid politically motivated and biased country4.
specific resolutions on the situation of human rights, confrontational approaches,
exploitation of human rights for political purposes, selective targeting of individual
countries for extraneous considerations and double standards in the work of the
United Nations on human rights issues;
Affirms that respect for political, economic and cultural diversity for all
5.
contributes to the development of stable and friendly relations among countries and
equitable and mutually respectful international dialogue on human rights;
Stresses the continuing need for unbiased and objective information on
6.
the situation of human rights in all countries and the need to present this
information in an impartial manner, including through the reports of the special
rapporteurs and representatives, independent experts and working groups;
Decides to consider the matter at its sixty-second session under the item
7.
entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
81st plenary meeting
19 December 2006

_______________
4
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/61/53), part one,
chap. II, sect. B, decision 1/103.

2
