United Nations

A/RES/64/195

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 53

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2009
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/64/420)]

64/195. Oil slick on Lebanese shores
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/194 of 20 December 2006, 62/188 of 19 December
2007 and 63/211 of 19 December 2008 on the oil slick on Lebanese shores,
Reaffirming the outcome of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment, especially principle 7 of the Declaration of the Conference, 1 in which
States were requested to take all possible steps to prevent pollution of the seas,
0F

Emphasizing the need to protect and preserve the marine environment in
accordance with international law,
Taking into account the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 2
especially principle 16, in which it was stipulated that the polluter should, in
principle, bear the cost of pollution, and taking into account also chapter 17 of
Agenda 21, 3
1F

2F

Noting again with great concern the environmental disaster caused by the
destruction by the Israeli Air Force on 15 July 2006 of the oil storage tanks in the
direct vicinity of El-Jiyeh electric power plant in Lebanon, resulting in an oil slick
that covered the entirety of the Lebanese coastline and extended to the Syrian
coastline,
Noting again with appreciation the assistance offered by donor countries and
international organizations for the clean-up operations and the early recovery and
reconstruction of Lebanon through bilateral and multilateral channels, including the
Athens Coordination Meeting on the response to the marine pollution incident in the
Eastern Mediterranean, held on 17 August 2006, as well as the Stockholm
Conference for Lebanon’s Early Recovery, held on 31 August 2006,
_______________
1

See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972
(A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1), part one, chap. I.
2
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.

09-47353

*0947353*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/195

Taking note of the fact that the Secretary-General is currently finalizing the
mechanism under which the Eastern Mediterranean Oil Spill Restoration Trust Fund
will operate,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
1.
of General Assembly resolution 63/211 on the oil slick on Lebanese shores; 4
3F

2.
Reiterates the expression of its deep concern about the adverse implications
of the destruction by the Israeli Air Force of the oil storage tanks in the direct
vicinity of the Lebanese El-Jiyeh electric power plant for the achievement of
sustainable development in Lebanon;
Considers that the oil slick has heavily polluted the shores of Lebanon
3.
and partially polluted Syrian shores and consequently has had serious implications
for livelihoods and the economy of Lebanon, owing to the adverse implications for
natural resources, biodiversity, fisheries and tourism, and for human health, in the
country;
Requests the Government of Israel to assume responsibility for prompt
4.
and adequate compensation to the Government of Lebanon and other countries
directly affected by the oil slick, such as the Syrian Arab Republic whose shores
have been partially polluted, for the costs of repairing the environmental damage
caused by the destruction, including the restoration of the marine environment;
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the Government of Lebanon
5.
and those of the Member States, regional and international organizations, regional
and international financial institutions, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector in the initiation of clean-up and rehabilitation operations on the
polluted shores, and encourages the Member States and the above-mentioned
entities to continue their financial and technical support to the Government of
Lebanon towards achieving the completion of clean-up and rehabilitation
operations, with the aim of preserving the ecosystem of Lebanon and that of the
Eastern Mediterranean Basin;
Reaffirms its decision to establish an Eastern Mediterranean Oil Spill
6.
Restoration Trust Fund, 5 based on voluntary contributions, to provide assistance and
support to the States directly adversely affected in their integrated environmentally
sound management, from clean-up to safe disposal of oily waste, of this
environmental disaster resulting from the destruction of the oil storage tanks at
El-Jiyeh electric power plant, and requests the Secretary-General to continue
working towards the hosting and operationalization of the Trust Fund and to
promptly finalize the implementation of that decision before the end of the sixtyfourth session of the General Assembly;
4F

Invites States, intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
7.
organizations and the private sector to make voluntary financial contributions to the
Trust Fund, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to mobilize
international technical and financial assistance in order to finalize the mechanism
under which the Trust Fund will operate;
Recognizes the multidimensionality of the adverse impact of the oil slick,
8.
and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its

_______________
4
5

2

A/64/259.
Resolution 63/211, para. 6.

A/RES/64/195

sixty-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution under the
item entitled “Sustainable development”.
66th plenary meeting
21 December 2009

3
