S/2016/763

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 September 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2275 (2016) and paragraph 44 of Security Council resolution 2297
(2016). It reports on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and any
challenges faced by the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) in
carrying out its mandate. The report covers major developments in Somalia during
the period from 1 May to 31 August 2016.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The reporting period witnessed intensified political activity, relating in
particular to the 2016 political transition. Faced with a protracted parliamentary
stalemate, the President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, issued a decree on 22 May
endorsing the parameters of the electoral process as previously agreed by all federal
and regional leaders. On 7 August, the Federal Indirect Electoral Implementation
Team, an ad hoc body charged with the implementation of the 2016 vote, a nnounced
a timeline in which the election of members of the Upper House of Parliament
would be held on 25 September and that of members of the Lower House of
Parliament from 24 September to 10 October. The President of Somalia will be
elected on 30 October.
3.
On 9 August, the National Leadership Forum, comprising federal and regional
leaders, endorsed the electoral timeline and agreed unanimously on a limited
extension for the federal institutions, including an extension of the President ’s
mandate, which was due to expire on 10 September in accordance with the electoral
timetable. At the same meeting, adjustments were made to the planned composition
of the Upper House in respect of the representation of Banaadir, “Somaliland”, and
Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe.
4.
The Federal Parliament amended the Provisional Federal Constitution on
15 June by extending its validity until 2020 and extending the current Parliament ’s
term in office until the appointment of a new Parliament through the 2016 electoral
process.

16-15189 (E)

090916

*1615189*

S/2016/763

5.
The National Leadership Forum met regularly during the reporting period and
decided on some key issues, including approval of Somalia ’s national security
policy, the appointment of a committee to develop recommendations on the status of
the capital, Mogadishu, and approval of the new policing model developed by
federal and regional stakeholders with facilitation by UNSOM.
6.
Institution-building and reconciliation processes continued in existing and
emerging federal member states. Following the conclusion of a reconciliation
process with the Marehan clan, the President of the Interim Jubba Administration,
Sheikh Ahmed Islam “Madobe”, announced the formation of a 34-member cabinet,
including one female minister, which was approved subsequently by the Jubba
Regional Assembly.
7.
In the Galmudug Interim Administration, Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a renewed its
commitment to negotiations with the Federal Government to facilitate the
implementation of the electoral process in Dhuusamarreeb, the agreed future capital
of the emerging federal member state. However, the negotiations have yet to begin,
and the electoral process is expected to take place in Cadaado, the interim capital.
8.
In the Interim South-West Administration, tensions between the Bimaal and
Habar Gidir clans in Marka, Shabelle Hoose, continued to impede the consolidation
of State authority. The Federal Government engaged in a renewed reconciliation
effort between the two clans; however, prospects for talks were impeded by the
temporary seizure by Al-Shabaab of parts of Marka on 11 July.
9.
In Puntland, the Transitional Puntland Electoral Commission started a review
of the state-level electoral law, which envisages the formation of political
associations and district-level elections in 2018. The process will provide the
foundation for the Puntland state assembly and presidential elections in 2019.
10. The state formation process in Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe, the only regions
yet to form an emerging federal member state, continued to face resistance from
several Hiraan-based clans, in particular the largest clan, the Hawadle. Several
Hawadle elders are in talks with Abgal counterparts from Shabelle Dhexe to agree
on a power-sharing arrangement, which could lay the foundation for state formation.
At the request of the Federal Government, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) is mediating between the clans and has expressed its resolve
to conclude the state formation process prior to the implementation of the electoral
process. However, some see IGAD as forcing a process that may lack inclusiveness
and could lead to confrontation between clans.
11. Talks between the Federal Government and “Somaliland” authorities remained
static. In preparation for parliamentary and presidential elections schedule d for
March 2017, “Somaliland” concluded voter registration exercises in Togdheer,
Sahil, Gebiley, Awdal, Maroodijeex and Sanaag regions, with only Sool region
remaining. In response to the conduct of the voter registration exercise by
“Somaliland” in the disputed Sanaag region, clashes erupted between “Somaliland”
and Puntland forces on 18 July, resulting in five troops being killed. The two sides
subsequently agreed to de-escalate tensions by, among other things, redeploying
their forces.

2/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

B.

Security developments
12. Al-Shabaab continued to strike across central and southern Somalia and is
expected to intensify its activities in the period leading up to the electoral process.
In Mogadishu, the group carried out five complex attacks, on 9 May, 1 and 2 5 June,
31 July and 25 August, targeting police buildings, two city hotels and a restaurant at
the Lido beach. At least 69 people died as a result, including a United Nations
national staff member, two federal parliamentarians and the head of the Banaadir
Regional Court. On 26 July, two vehicles laden with explosives were detonated
outside the area of Mogadishu International Airport protected by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), resulting in 13 fatalities, including of a United
Nations national staff member and 11 private security personnel, and injuries to 12
people. On 30 August, Al-Shabaab detonated a vehicle laden with explosives at the
Somali Youth League hotel after guards had prevented the vehicle from accessing
Villa Somalia. Twenty people were killed and 45 others injured, including three
federal Ministers and five Members of Parliament.
13. Indirect fire attacks continued across southern Somalia, targeting AMISOM,
United Nations offices, airports and civilian targets. On 3 May, two pro jectiles
landed inside the AMISOM-protected area of Mogadishu International Airport,
causing damage to physical structures. On 4 May, mortar rounds hit Kismaayo
Airport, in Juba Hoose, injuring a United Nations-contracted pilot. On 4 June,
mortar bombs were fired at Mogadishu International Airport, injuring a soldier and
damaging United Nations assets. Al-Shabaab launched mortar attacks in Baidoa,
Bay region, on 2 July and 6 August. Two projectiles struck the compound of a
United Nations agency, injuring a security guard and damaging the house of a
national staff member. On 21 August, five mortar rounds landed near the Ministry of
Transport office in Mogadishu, setting a fuel depot on fire. No casualties were
reported.
14. Al-Shabaab and Somali forces fought over the control of a number of towns
and villages. On 11 July, Somali troops vacated their positions in Marka, reportedly
over the non-payment of salaries, enabling Al-Shabaab to regain access to parts of
the town. Interim Jubba Administration forces twice attempted to reclaim Beer
Xaani, Juba Hoose, on 22 and 31 July, but lost each time to Al -Shabaab. On 24 July,
AMISOM and Somali forces vacated Garas Weyne, Bakool region, citing tactical
reasons. Al-Shabaab gained control of the town immediately therea fter. On
2 August, following clashes between Murusade and Ayr clan militias, Al -Shabaab
assumed control of parts of the village of Ximcade, Galguduud region.
15. AMISOM forces repelled an attack by Al-Shabaab against an AMISOM base
at Halgen, Hiraan region, on 9 June. Reported Al-Shabaab casualties ranged from 50
to more than 100, while AMISOM reportedly suffered at least 30 fatalities and 53
injuries. In Juba Hoose, foreign and Somali special forces carried out air and ground
operations on 27 May and 1 June, resulting in the death of a senior Al-Shabaab
member, the suspected mastermind behind the massacre at Garissa University in
Kenya in April 2015. On 28 July and 1 August, attack helicopters fired at suspected
Al-Shabaab bases at Mudulow, Gedo region, and Golool Shinbir, Juba Hoose. On
11 August, Somali special forces raided a suspected Al -Shabaab hideout in Saacow,
Juba Dhexe. Reports indicating that senior Al-Shabaab members were killed in that
operation have not yet been confirmed.

16-15189

3/19

S/2016/763

16. Main supply routes throughout central and southern Somalia remained prone
to Al-Shabaab attacks. Notwithstanding a significant decrease in roadside bombs,
ambushes targeting convoys of AMISOM and Somali forces occurred regularly
along the roads connecting Afgooye, Shabelle Hoose, to Baidoa, Bay region; Waajid
to Rab Dhuure, Ceel Berde to Xuddur and Xuddur to Tayeeglow in Bakool region;
and Beledweyne to Buulobarde in Hiraan.
17. Pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) media outlets claimed that ISIL
had carried out three attacks against Somali security forces, in Afgooye on 5 May,
Baidoa on 25 July and Mogadishu on 27 July. However, the veracity of those claims
is disputed.
18. In Puntland, Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for a twin suicide bombing
targeting the municipality office in Gaalkacyo on 21 August, resulting in
27 fatalities and injuries to over 100 persons. In “Somaliland”, police arrested five
suspected militants in Hargeysa on 15 May and 4 June, one of whom was identified
as a brother of the late Al-Shabaab leader, Ahmed Godane.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

International coordination and political support
19. The Security Council visit to Somalia on 19 May offered a timely opportunity
for Council members to interact with federal and regional leaders, particularly on
the preparations for the electoral process. Meetings between Council members and
UNSOS and AMISOM provided guidance on key security issues, while the
engagement of Council members with representatives of Somali civil society and
women’s groups enhanced United Nations efforts to strengthen the political
participation and representation of women.
20. My Special Representative maintained his efforts to enhance coordination and
coherence between international partners in support of Somalia’s peacebuilding and
State-building processes. In particular, he set out a comprehensive approach to
security in Somalia, encompassing five areas: enhancing AMISOM capability;
strengthening the Somali security forces; community recovery and extending State
authority; countering and preventing violent extremism, including through political
engagement; and ensuring coherent support by the international community in those
areas. With the encouragement of the Federal Government, my Special
Representative established a forum for this purpose, involving the six principal
international investors in Somalia’s security, namely, the European Union, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America and the United Nations. At a special meeting
on 22 July in Nairobi, the investors endorsed the comprehensive strategy and
reflected on options for their collective support for the Somali security architecture.
21. On 29 June, the Federal Government released the first draft of its National
Development Plan for the period 2017-2019, developed with support from UNSOM
and the United Nations country team, in particular the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). The Plan is the first of its kind in Somalia since 1982 and
marks a significant step in pursuing a strategic approach to Somalia ’s development
needs. Drafted through an inclusive process, incorporating the Government, the

4/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

private sector and civil society, it outlines the need for further progress with the
political agenda, a coherent poverty reduction plan and the building blocks for
private sector development.
22. The Federal Government, the United Nations, the World Bank and
international donors established a task force to develop a mutual accountability
framework between Somalia and the international community that would form,
together with the National Development Plan, the post-New Deal Compact
arrangement in Somalia. The Federal Government is continuing to d evelop the
“Tubta Toosan” (right path) initiative, a programme for countering violent
extremism, with support from IGAD and donors.

B.

Inclusive politics
23. Despite a tight timeline as a result of political delays, efforts are under way to
ensure transparent policy and procedure for the 2016 electoral process wherever
possible, also laying the groundwork for universal elections in 2020. Notably, the
National Leadership Forum agreed on key modalities of the electoral process,
including the stipulation that ad hoc bodies charged with its implementation,
namely, the Federal Indirect Electoral Implementation Team and the state -level
indirect electoral implementation teams, should not contain active politicians or
candidates standing for office. UNSOM and UNDP are supporting the Federal
Indirect Electoral Implementation Team, whose mandate includes oversight of the
conduct and uniform implementation of the electoral process, to be undertaken by
the state-level indirect electoral implementation teams in the capitals of the existing
and emerging federal member states. Of the 22 members of the Federal Indirect
Electoral Implementation Team appointed by decree on 28 June, 7 are women.
24. Representation of women is another key area of progress. On 9 August, the
National Leadership Forum agreed to instruct clan elders to ensure that 81 of a total
of 275 seats in the Lower House were reserved for women, comprising 18 seats for
each of the four major clans and 9 seats for the remaining minority clans. The
Forum also decided that at least 30 per cent of the electoral colleges should be
composed of women and that registration fees for female candidates would be half
of those for male candidates. The onus is now on clan elders to ensure that those
targets are met. The United Nations is supporting civil society efforts to this end,
including those of a committee of goodwill ambassadors appointed by the President.
The National Leadership Forum also called for 50 per cent of the candidates for the
Upper House to be female but did not actually call for reserving any seats in that
chamber for women.
25. While Lower House seats are to be allocated along clan lines (using the
4.5 formula) in 2016, on 9 August the National Leadership Forum reiterated the
need for a clear political road map to ensure that universal elections are held by
2020. It established measures for transitioning from clan -based to multiparty
politics by agreeing that Members of Parliament elected in 2016 should declare their
affiliation to a political party no later than 20 October 2018. Any Member of
Parliament who fails to do so would lose their seat.
26. Meanwhile, and with a view to universal elections in 2020, the National
Independent Electoral Commission, with technical support from UNSOM,
developed the first draft of the first ever lexicon of electoral terminology in the

16-15189

5/19

S/2016/763

Somali language. The lexicon will serve as the central tool in the formulation of
voter and civic education programmes and of the terminology to be used during the
drafting of the electoral law. In June, UNSOM held joint training on comparative
electoral systems for members of the Commission and officials from the Ministries
of the Interior and Federal Affairs, of Constitutional Affairs and of Women and
Human Rights Development.
27. The Federal Parliament approved some key pending legislation, considered
essential for advancing the democratic process, including the laws on political
parties and the multiparty system and on the establishment of the human rights
commission of 6 June and the law on the establishment of the constitutional court of
11 June.
28. The Oversight Committee of the Federal Parliament and the Independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission reviewed all of the chapters
of the Provisional Federal Constitution and submitted to Parliament their
recommendations for amendments. While Parliament did not have the time to
review the recommendations, it adopted a resolution to transfer the proposed
revisions for consideration by the next Parliament. Women and youth
representatives from all regions of Somalia identified their priorities in relation to
the review of the Provisional Federal Constitution and conveyed their
recommendations to the Oversight Committee during two workshops held in
Mogadishu, which received financial and technical support from the United Nations.
The National Leadership Forum proposed that all remaining work on the
constitutional review process be completed by the next Federal Parliament.
29. In July, UNSOM and UNDP launched an exercise on lessons learned and the
way forward on the constitutional review process, which involved local and
international actors, who carried out a collective assessment of t he process thus far,
identifying gaps and challenges and making recommendations for the future review
process cycle.

C.

Rule of law and security institutions
30. Although the primary focus of the Somali authorities was on the electoral
process, progress was also made on developing a federal framework for rule -of-law
and security institutions. Pursuant to the approval of the national security policy by
the National Leadership Forum, consultations on the policy were held in the
regional capitals of Cadaado, Baidoa and Kismaayo. The policy will be helpful in
advancing discussions on Somalia’s national security architecture, which will
include a federated governance structure. UNSOM, alongside international partners,
is advising Somali stakeholders on possible models.
31. Following the endorsement of the new policing model by the National
Leadership Forum, technical-level discussions on the implementation of the model
at the federal and state levels are ongoing. The Heegan Plan for the development of
the Somali police is also being revised accordingly. At their meeting of 22 July, the
six principal international investors emphasized the importance of enhanced
financial support and technical assistance for the police sector. A project document
for $2 million to implement the first part of the non-lethal police support package
was agreed between the Government of Germany and the United Nations Office for
Project Services, the implementing partner. A police projects coordination cell was

6/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

established in Mogadishu to improve information-sharing and coordination of
international support for the Somali police.
32. UNSOM continued to support discussions among federal and regional
stakeholders on Somalia’s future justice and corrections model with a view to
adopting a sustainable, harmonized model. The discussions are at an early stage,
even as emerging federal member states take steps to establish their own justice
institutions, which may create complications. In addition, judges are not being paid
owing to insufficient budgeting, which undermines efforts to strengthen justice
institutions. The United Nations is supporting the development of a national policy
for traditional justice dispute resolution mechanisms, as well as mobile courts, as a
means to expand affordable justice services in the emerging federal member states.
33. Integration of regional militias into the Somali National Army made slow
progress in the reporting period. Basic modalities were agreed between the Federal
Government and Puntland on the integration of 3,000 Puntland troops, which would
allow for the provision of non-lethal support by the United Nations Office for Project
Services, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2232 (2015). However, several
political and technical issues have yet to be addressed, in particular with regard to
command and control, and funding for the support has yet to be identified. In the
Interim Jubba Administration, 1,350 militia troops in Kismaayo and 460 militia
elements in Dhooble, Juba Hoose, have so far completed the requisite human rights
training and are receiving the United Nations support package. However, unresolved
issues surrounding command and control and a lack of arms and equipment are
impeding their operational effectiveness as part of the national armed forces.
34. The delay in the regular payment of salaries for security personnel continues
to be a major concern. Salaries are estimated to be between 6 and 13 months in
arrears for the national armed forces and up to 15 months for the police. The Fed eral
Government claims to have made significant progress in closing the arrears gap;
however, there is limited empirical evidence to support this claim.
35. During the reporting period, 10,536 registered soldiers received stipends
funded by the United States and the United Kingdom, totalling $2.4 million. With
support from the European Union and Japan, approximately 6,500 federal police
officers were paid outstanding stipends covering the period from January to
November 2015. All other eligible officers will be paid when payment teams visit
the emerging federal member states. The European Union also intends to cover
stipends for 6,500 federal police officers for nine months of 2016. The United
Kingdom provides stipends in Baidoa and Kismaayo to 592 police o fficers out of an
envisaged 1,200 who have completed a three-month training course conducted by
the AMISOM police. Planned training and stipend support for 600 police officers in
Beledweyne has yet to commence. The United Arab Emirates is also paying
stipends; however, no data is available, which reinforces the need for enhanced
international coordination under a comprehensive approach to security.
36. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations, with funding from the United
Kingdom, provided technical assistance and support to the Federal Government on
compliance with its obligations under the arms embargo. The Service coordinated
with the Somali Explosive Management Authority and the Minister of Internal
Security to advance discussions regarding the Authority’s formal integration into the
Ministry.

16-15189

7/19

S/2016/763

37. UNSOM continued to support the pilot rehabilitation project for high -risk
prisoners in Baidoa. Individual, environmental and risk assessments were developed
to guide individually tailored programme implementation. At the transition centre
for low-risk disengaged combatants in Baidoa, 30 male candidates graduated after
being trained in language, vocational and business skills, and are being reintegrated
into the community. With funding from Germany, construction of the fourth
rehabilitation facility in Somalia for low-risk disengaged combatants started in
Kismaayo and is expected to be operational by October.

D.

Economic foundations
38. The World Bank estimated that Somalia’s annual per capita gross domestic
product (GDP) is $450, and consumption remains its key driver. The economy is
highly dependent on imports, notably food, building materials and fuel, creating a
large trade deficit that is financed mainly by remittances and international aid.
Exports, mostly to the Arab Gulf countries and amounting to 14 per cent of GDP,
tripled over the past six years, reaching $859 million in 2015. Livestock accounts
for about 80 per cent of exports and is the main source of foreign exchange.
39. Preliminary results from a high-frequency survey conducted in Somalia in
2016, undertaken with support from the World Bank, indicate that approximately
69 per cent of Somalia’s population lives below the poverty line (below $1.90 per
day, in terms of 2011 purchasing power parity). Poverty is more pronounced in
camps for internally displaced persons, estimated at 88 per cent, followed by rural
areas, at 75 per cent, and urban areas, at 67 per cent. Chronic poverty is exacerbated
by a lack of economic activity, population displacement and large-scale food
insecurity, caused in part by recurring drought and other adverse weather conditions.
40. More than half of Somalia’s labour force (15 to 64 years of age) is looking for
work; unemployment is highest in settlements for interna lly displaced persons.
Women often fall outside the labour force and work in the household. Somalia has a
predominantly young population; 75 per cent of Somalis are below 29 years of age.
Somali youth, between 15 and 24 years of age, are better educated bu t more likely
to be unemployed.
41. In May, the International Monetary Fund approved a staff-monitored
programme for Somalia that is geared towards re-establishing macroeconomic
stability, building capacity to strengthen macroeconomic management, rebuildin g
institutions and improving governance. Macroeconomic stability and the reforms
required to achieve it are noted as key objectives in the upcoming National
Development Plan.

E.

Revenue and services
42. The Federal Government has presented a fiscal budget for parliamentary
approval for four years in a row. Public expenditures have increased significantly,
from $35.1 million in 2012 to $135.4 million in 2015, driven by marked increases in
revenue. Domestic revenue collection grew by 36 per cent from 2014 to 2015, from
$84.3 million to $114.3 million, driven mainly by trade taxes. However, this
amounts to only 2.8 per cent of GDP; more than 70 per cent of domestic revenues is
generated from international duties. A lack of actualization of donor commitments

8/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

was a hindrance to overall revenue performance in 2015, and only 32 per cent of
budgeted donor funds were realized. Poor collection capacity, a narrow tax base, the
absence of necessary legal and regulatory frameworks, and political disputes
hamper full revenue mobilization. Current revenue levels are inadequate for the
Federal Government to be able to deliver services to its citizens.
43. Across Somalia, funding for education averages less than 5 per cent o f
government budgets, and the Government lacks human and technical capacity to
effectively manage education services. Despite those constraints, an additional
15,713 children (58 per cent of whom are girls) gained access to education between
January and June 2016.
44. Access to basic services in Somalia continues to be severely constrained and is
likely to be further affected by any mass refugee returns from the Dadaab camp in
Kenya.

F.

Cross-cutting issues
Community recovery
45. Community recovery and the extension of State authority is a key dimension of
a comprehensive approach to security in Somalia. Central to efforts in this regard is
support for a Somali-led, whole-of-Government approach to promote good
governance, justice and socioeconomic development to address the underlying
drivers of fragility within communities. The priority plan for Somalia was approved
in May with a funding allocation of $13 million from the Peacebuilding Fund, and
will be utilized by the United Nations to advance this approach together with the
Somali authorities and communities at the district level in southern and central
Somalia.
46. The Interim Jubba Administration held a community planning session in
Baardheere, Gedo region, in May, which identified the re habilitation of the airstrip
and key bridges, the repair of a key road in the town and construction of the district
administration’s office and a community centre as key priorities. The United States
Agency for International Development is collaborating wi th the administration
authorities on responding to those needs. Similarly, the Interim South -West
Administration held a community planning session in Diinsoor, Bay region, in June.
Participants identified the rehabilitation of the airstrip and the construc tion of a key
road, a courthouse and a secondary school as some of the key priorities. A project to
rehabilitate the airstrip in the town of Berdaale, Bay region, was completed in April
by the United States Agency for International Development. Previously, access to
the town had been limited by Al-Shabaab, which had hindered interaction between
the authorities and residents. The project has resulted in improved access and
increased economic opportunities.
47. The Somalia Stability Fund support has been focused on eight districts to date:
Xuddur and Waajid, Bakool region; Berdaale, Bay region; Baraawe, Shabelle Hoose;
Warsheikh, Cadale and Mahadday Weym, Shabelle Dhexe; and Baardheere, Gedo
region. Support in these areas is provided on the basis of community consultations
and typically consists of the rehabilitation of district administration buildings and
community infrastructure and projects to bolster the local economy, including
support for small-scale businesses and employment-intensive work schemes.

16-15189

9/19

S/2016/763

Human rights
48. There was a rise in human rights violations during the reporting period, due
primarily to security operations and Al-Shabaab activity. Reported civilian
casualties totalled 387, including 159 deaths and 228 injuries. Operations by
security forces resulted in 83 civilian casualties, of which 16 deaths and 31 injuries
were attributed to the Somali security forces; 5 deaths and 9 injuries to AMISOM;
and 9 deaths, including of 4 children, and 11 injuries to air strikes by the Kenyan
military operating bilaterally in Gedo region. Local elders denounced reported air
strikes and later engaged the Government of Kenya, resulting in an agreement to
cooperate to prevent civilian casualties. No outcome has been reported so far from
the investigative committee established by the office of the Prime Minister of
Somalia after the air strikes by the Kenyan military in Gedo in January, which
reportedly resulted in 29 deaths and the destruction of livestock, water wells and
houses.
49. Civilian casualties attributed to Al-Shabaab or unidentified persons totalled
98 deaths and 116 injuries. A total of 44 people were abducted by Al -Shabaab, 10 of
whom were later released. The attacks represent an increase of 51 per cent from the
previous period, due largely to 162 Al-Shabaab attacks in June. In addition, eight
civilians were killed in the crossfire between security forces and either militia or
Al-Shabaab.
50. Since January, 64 death sentences have been issued in Somalia, 51 of them in
Puntland, including 48 in June alone. The military court of first instance condemned
43 captured Al-Shabaab fighters to death, including 12 fighters provisionally
identified by the United Nations as being under 18 years of age. A further
63 captured Al-Shabaab fighters, including 52 juveniles, are pending trial.
51. “Somaliland” and Puntland continued a negative trend concerning the
protection of freedom of expression. Nine persons were arrested, including six
journalists, for criticizing the decision by the “Somaliland” government to lease the
port of Berbera. In Puntland, the Minister of Information introduced new regulations
restricting the media from interviewing “terrorist groups” and requiring staffing lists
from media houses. He also suspended a radio station for 12 days followin g its
interview with the former Governor of Bari region. UNSOM and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights are finalizing a public report
on freedom of expression in Somalia, to be issued in September.
52. In June, the Human Rights Council adopted the outcome report of the universal
periodic review of Somalia (A/HRC/32/12), which contained 228 recommendations,
168 of which were accepted and 60 were noted by the Federal Government. The bill
establishing a national human rights commission, which had been pending since
2013, was approved on 6 June and signed into law on 14 August, and is largely in
compliance with the Paris Principles.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
53. In June, the Federal Cabinet approved the national gender policy, formulated
with United Nations support, paving the way for institutionalization in the areas of
gender mainstreaming and women, peace and security. The continued advocacy of
the United Nations and international partners resulted in the appointment of the
committee of goodwill ambassadors to advocate with Somali leaders, traditional

10/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

elders and the wider public for realization of the commitment to reserve 30 per cent
of parliamentary seats for women.
54. On 24 June, two of the three female Federal Cabinet ministers were dismissed
and replaced by male candidates, further contributing to a gender imbalance in
decision-making bodies. On 28 June, an association of religious scholars denounced
the national gender policy and women’s political participation, including the work of
the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development, but later admitted this as a
mistake at a meeting with the Federal Cabinet. Fear and intimidation have
increasingly spread among women leaders and aspiring candidates, increasing the
risk that women’s political participation and representation could be adversely
affected.
Child protection
55. The country task force on monitoring and reporting in Somalia recorded
506 incidents of grave violations against children during the reporting period, of
which 473 incidents affecting 780 children (147 girls and 633 boys) were verified.
The majority of the violations related to recruitment and use (302), followed by
killings and maiming (258), abductions (217), sexual violence (75), attacks on
schools and hospitals (13) and denial of humanitarian access (4). Sixty -six children
were detained in Puntland for their association with Al -Shabaab, 12 of whom were
issued with death sentences.
56. Currently, 78 boys are enrolled in a community-based reintegration
programme supported by the United Nations Children’s Fund in Mogadishu,
including 43 captured in March 2016 during hostilities between Galmudug forces
and Al-Shabaab.
57. From 16 to 21 July, my Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict visited Somalia to assess the impact of the conflict on children and to
follow up on the commitments made by the Federal Government on the
implementation of action plans on ending the recruit ment and use of children and on
the killing and maiming of children. She discussed with relevant authorities
concerns about the detention of children for association with Al -Shabaab and recent
allegations that the National Intelligence and Security Agency of Somalia had used
children in its custody as informants. In Puntland, she called on the authorities not
to execute the 12 children sentenced to death and to facilitate the reintegration and
reunification of all 66 children with their families in their pl aces of origin. She
stressed that federal and regional authorities must resolve existing legal ambiguities
and domesticate Somalia’s international obligations under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
Prevention of sexual violence
58. Protections for the prevention of sexual violence remain weak, with internally
displaced persons and civilians affected by conflict at particular risk.
59. On 7 May, two girls aged 15 and 17 years were allegedly raped by
14 AMISOM soldiers in Galguduud region. AMISOM investigated the case but
stated that it was not possible to corroborate the facts sufficiently to justify
convening a board of inquiry. On 9 May, seven men aged between 19 and 24 years

16-15189

11/19

S/2016/763

were convicted of raping a 14-year-old girl in Shabelle Dhexe on 21 March, and
were sentenced to 20 years of imprisonment each, in addition to heavy fines.
Targeted sanctions
60. On 20 July, the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea briefed the
Council on the latest findings of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea. The
briefing included the assessment that Al-Shabaab remains the main threat to peace
and security in Somalia, with an insurgency in Puntland led by Abdulqadir Mumin ,
who has declared allegiance to ISIL. It also drew attention to, among other items, a
lack of transparency in the management of public contracts, continued delays in the
payment of salaries to national troops, violations against civilians by both national
and international security forces and continued forced recruitment of children.

IV. Humanitarian situation
61. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains precarious. Some 4.7 million
people, or 38 per cent of the population, are in need of assistance. Nearly 1 million
people are unable to meet basic food needs, while 305,000 children under 5 years of
age are acutely malnourished, including 58,300 who require urgent treatment.
El Niño-induced drought hit parts of Puntland and “Somaliland”, where
385,000 people face acute food insecurity and another 1.3 million are at risk of
sliding into acute food insecurity if they do not receive assistance.
62. Gu rains from March to June brought temporary relief in parts of Puntland and
“Somaliland”. However, food security in parts of the country is expected to
deteriorate between July and December owing to erratic rains and a below -average
Gu harvest, particularly in the major cereal-producing areas of Bay and Shabelle
Hoose.
63. An outbreak of acute watery diarrhoea/cholera continued in southern and
central Somalia. More than 12,500 cases, over half of them children under 5 years
of age, have been reported since the start of 2016, an alarming increase from the
5,257 cases reported in 2015. With partner support, the Ministry of Health finalized
the first draft of a five-year (2017-2022) preparedness and response plan of action
against acute watery diarrhoea/cholera.
64. In May, flooding displaced an estimated 70,000 people in Beledweyne, all of
whom were able to return to their homes by mid-July. Partners provided life-saving
assistance and rehabilitated damaged infrastructure to mitigate the impact of future
flooding.
65. Between January and June, humanitarian partners reached 490,500 people with
food assistance and 142,400 people with activities aimed at building livelihoods,
including cash-for-work, food-for-work and training programmes. Some 490,000
people were reached with livelihood seasonal inputs, including seeds, tools, fishing
equipment, irrigation vouchers and livestock vaccination. A total of 125,000 children
under 5 years of age were treated for acute malnutrition. Over 1.6 million people
received basic health-care services and over 1 million were provided with temporary
and sustainable access to safe water. The protection cluster reached nearly 123,000
people, while education partners reached 89,000 learners with temporary learning

12/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

spaces, school supplies and nutrition. Over 81,600 people were assisted with non food items and transitional shelter.
66. To date, the 2016 Somalia Humanitarian Response Plan has received
$319 million, or 36 per cent, of the $885 million requested. Another $84 million is
funded outside the Plan. Education remains underfunded, at only 21 per cent.
67. A meeting on 25 June between the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and Somali and Kenyan authorities reaffirmed the principles of the
tripartite agreement governing the voluntary repatriation of Somali refugees living in
Kenya. Following that, the Office of the High Commissioner launched a
supplementary appeal for $115.4 million to support the return and reintegration of
refugees from the Dadaab camp in Kenya. The Office plans to assist 150,000
voluntary returns from Dadaab to Somalia by the end of 2016. More than 17,000
Somali refugees have returned since December 2014, including 12,000 in 2016
alone.
68. Irregular migration of Somalis continues, driven by instability and the lack of
education and employment opportunities. The Federal Government reported t hat
200 Somali migrants were among the dead in a boat tragedy in April 2016 in which
500 people drowned in the Mediterranean Sea.

V. Support to the African Union Mission in Somalia, the
Somali National Army and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia
69. Logistical support to AMISOM continued, with progress in a number of key
areas. In particular, preparations for the electoral process saw increased
coordination between AMISOM and the United Nations at the strategic and
operational levels to ensure adequate security and logistical support.
70. The AMISOM concept of operations was reviewed in June in Addis Ababa and
Nairobi. The revised concept of operations, approved by the AMISOM troop - and
police-contributing countries’ Military Operations Coordination Committee and by
the African Union Peace and Security Council, underscores the need for AMISOM
to support the political and electoral processes in Somalia and undertake offensive
operations to clear Al-Shabaab safe havens by securing population centres and main
supply routes. It also signals the commencement of a gradual drawdown of
AMISOM by the end of 2018, following the progressive implementation of a plan
for the capacitation of the Somali security forces. UNSOS is reviewing its support
concept in order to continue to effectively support AMISOM in the light of the
revised concept of operations.
71. Technical discussions took place from 25 July to 18 August between the
African Union, the United Nations and troop- and police-contributing countries on
the tripartite memorandum of understanding concerning arrangements for the
reimbursement of eligible contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment items
to the troop- and police-contributing countries, as authorized by the Security
Council in its resolution 2245 (2015). The parties agreed in principle to a draft text
of the memorandum of understanding. An initial review indicated significant gaps in
equipment-related and other capacities of troop- and police-contributing countries,
which may require the support of international partners. UNSOS is also establishing

16-15189

13/19

S/2016/763

a mission enabling unit, to be operated by AMISOM troops, with mentoring
provided by the Mine Action Service, UNSOS and partners, to improve freedom of
movement on the main supply routes. Finalization of the tripartite memorandum of
understanding will also guide operationalization of the mission enabling unit.
72. Discussions between the United Nations, the African Union and Kenya on the
tripartite letter of assist for the deployment of three military helicopters in
AMISOM are at an advanced stage. UNSOS and the Department of Field Support
are working to identify other possible contributors.
73. The Mine Action Service provided technical support and training to AMISOM
in all sectors, including on explosive ordnance disposal and improvised explosive
device defeat. During the review of the concept of operations, the Service provided
a detailed analysis of the threats posed by improvised explosive devices over the
past 12 months and how they affected AMISOM operations, which formed the basis
for a proposed enhancement of AMISOM mobility operations.
74. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to eligible national troops, as
authorized in resolution 2245 (2015). So far, 10,014 of the 10,900 authorized
national troops operating in all AMISOM sectors have been trained on human rights
obligations. As part of the broader effort to improve joint operations by AMISOM
and the national armed forces, UNSOS is participating in an assessment of the
capability of the national armed forces to carry out joint operations with AMISOM,
scheduled to be completed by September. The assessment will also help to ensure
that only individuals trained in line with the United Nations human rights due
diligence policy receive support.
75. The United Kingdom deployed a further 34 military personnel to Somalia in
July, bringing its total number to 42 out of a total of 70 authorized personnel. They
are currently deployed in sector 1 (Mogadishu), sector 3 (Baidoa) and sector 6
(Kismaayo). The personnel contributed expertise and advice in areas including
discussions on the tripartite memorandum of understanding and the enhancement of
protection measures at Mogadishu International Airport.
Human rights due diligence policy
76. On 28 June, the human rights due diligence policy task force endorsed the
general and preliminary risk assessment of the national armed forces. It contains
recommended mitigation measures to be communicated to the army for its
consideration and to other partners, including the diplomatic community, the
European Union training mission and AMISOM, to potentially support
implementation of the proposed measures. Lessons from the Somalia human rights
due diligence policy implementation framework were used i n a workshop to identify
key elements for a human rights framework for African Union peace and security
operations, held in Addis Ababa in June.
77. UNSOM engaged AMISOM within the human rights due diligence policy
framework on reported allegations of violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law during the reporting period. Marked progress was noted on
responses from AMISOM to communications in this regard, but further efforts are
needed on mitigation measures, accountability and remedies t o victims.

14/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

VI. United Nations presence in Somalia
A.

Expansion of the United Nations presence
78. The overall staff ceilings for Somalia, except for “Somaliland”, slightly
decreased from 622 to 606 over the reporting period. The number of United Nations
international personnel in Somalia averaged 470. Mogadishu has the largest
presence, with a staff ceiling of 445 and an average presence of 327. Boosaaso has a
staff ceiling of 29 and an average presence of 20; Garoowe has 42 and 34;
Gaalkacyo has 18 and 11; Beledweyne has 13 and 7; Doolow has 13 and 8; and
Kismaayo has 30 and 10, respectively. Hargeysa has no staff ceiling and averages
around 40 personnel. In Kismaayo, the construction of new minimum operating
security standards-compliant accommodation raised the staff ceiling from 17 to 30,
while in Baidoa a reduction in the staff ceiling meant that the international presence
is now regularly at the maximum level of 16.

B.

Staff safety and security
79. On 24 May, the security risk level for the AMISOM-protected area at
Mogadishu International Airport was increased from medium to high. The United
Nations presence was adjusted accordingly after a programme criticality
assessment. UNSOS implemented risk mitigation measures, including adding
sidewall protection for all soft-wall accommodation and offices and installing
shatter-resistant film on all windows. UNSOS is working to construct sufficient
minimum operating security standards-compliant accommodation to provide
overhead protection to all United Nations personnel within the airport.
80. Following the attack on 26 July near Mogadishu International Airport, my
Special Representative, together with the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, met with the President and senior
Somali security officials to discuss a security upgrade for the airport. Mitigation
measures being considered include a diversion of light and heavy commercial and
unauthorized vehicles from using Airport Road in the vicinity of the airport, a ban
on commercial trucks entering Madina Gate at the airport and the provision of
alternate entrances into the airport for national staff working for the United Nations,
AMISOM and the international community. Additionally, the National Inte lligence
and Security Agency, Somali police and AMISOM troops would be required to
bolster checkpoints on Airport Road approaching Madina Gate.
81. In the light of the increasing number of security incidents in Mogadishu, my
Special Representative is preparing an analysis of additional, unforeseen security
costs that are not reflected in the budgets of United Nations entities in Somalia, to
be submitted in the near future.

VII. Observations
82. Throughout my term as Secretary-General, I have taken great personal interest
in Somalia and have made it one of my top priorities. My Deputy and I, between the
two of us, have travelled four times to the country, which was once a byword for State
failure but today appears a precious, if fragile, testament to the possibilities of

16-15189

15/19

S/2016/763

peacebuilding. Since the Federal Government and Parliament began their terms in
2012, Somalia has made commendable progress, guided by the aspirations and
determination of its people and supported by the international community. This month,
Somalia embarks on a transition of power to a new legislature and executive — a
watershed moment and a milestone on the road to becoming a fully fledged,
inclusive and stable democratic State. Yet progress is still reversible. I underscore
the need for reinvigorated efforts ahead to further advance the State-building
process.
83. The implementation of a credible and transparent electoral process with the
participation of all sectors of Somali society, including women, youth and
minorities, is critical. I welcome the preparations made so far in this regard,
particularly the operationalization of the ad hoc electoral implementation bodies,
and call for the implementation of the electoral process in accordance with the
announced timelines.
84. That process should respect the calls for inclusivity and transparency
articulated by the Somali people in the National Consultative Forum and captured in
the Mogadishu Declaration of December 2015. In particular, the women of Somalia
must have their voices heard in Somali politics. I am concerned that Somalia’s
leaders have yet to agree with clan elders upon a mechanism to implement their
commitment to reserve specific seats for women candidates. I call on all
stakeholders, in particular Somalia’s leaders and the heads of its clans and subclans,
to ensure that the objective of reserving 30 per cent of parliamentary seats for
women is realized. I commend the efforts of the committee of goodwill
ambassadors, women’s rights activists and civil society members in this regard.
85. I am seriously concerned by recent threats and intimidation directed against
candidates, civil society, women’s leaders and activists, and journalists in the
context of the electoral process. I call on all federal and regional authorities to
ensure the protection of human rights, particularly with respect to freedom of
expression and participation in the political process. Security institutions must be
accountable to political leaders responsible for ensuring the rule of law. Any
restriction on fundamental rights risks strengthening the appeal of those opposed to
the Somali State-building enterprise.
86. I welcome the decision of the Federal Indirect Electoral Implementation Team
finalizing the calendar for the 2016 electoral process, and its endorse ment by the
National Leadership Forum. Taking note of the delay on technical grounds in these
dates compared to Somalia’s constitutional timelines, and of the need to avoid an
institutional vacuum while the electoral process is completed, I acknowledge the
decision of the Forum that the executive should remain in office in a caretaker
capacity until the election of a new President. I also take note of the Federal
Parliament’s decision to extend its term until the results of the electoral process are
announced. The United Nations expects that these extraordinary arrangements will
be used responsibly and that no party will take any action that could undermine a
smooth and credible political transition.
87. I commend the role of the National Leadership Forum in recent months to
drive forward the political agenda in Somalia. While of an informal character, it has
emerged as a critical political forum, the nucleus of a genuinely federated approach
to the political process. I urge the Forum to continue its vital an d constructive role
in the aftermath of the political transition and as Somalia continues its work of

16/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

building a federal State, particularly to help to build consensus around further
refinement of the Provisional Federal Constitution. In this regard, I ack nowledge the
review of the Provisional Federal Constitution by the Parliamentary Oversight
Committee and the Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission, and call on all relevant stakeholders to promptly consider the
proposed revisions when the new Federal Parliament is constituted.
88. As its term comes to an end, I commend the Federal Parliament for its
essential role over the past four years, under the leadership of the Speaker,
Mohamed Osman Jawari. I commend the Members of the outgo ing Parliament for
passing key legislation and their commitment to Somalia ’s progress and future in a
deeply challenging environment, which cost 18 Members of Parliament their lives
as a result of acts of terrorism.
89. The lack of meaningful progress on the only remaining state formation
process, in Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe, is of concern. I welcome the continued
efforts of the United Nations, IGAD and other partners to resolve the outstanding
issues in consultation with the various actors in the two regi ons, through an
inclusive process aimed at durable reconciliation.
90. None of this political progress would be possible without security. I pay
tribute to the brave men and women of AMISOM and the Somali security forces for
their efforts and sacrifices. Much work remains to be done, particularly to ensure
that all Somalis feel the benefit of security gains and that these gains are made
sustainable. AMISOM and Somali national army efforts must be embedded in a
comprehensive approach to security that is human rights-compliant and
encompasses the building of a truly federated Somali security sector, community
recovery and extension of State authority, countering and preventing violent
extremism and strengthened coordination among key international partners.
91. The development of Somali security institutions, in particular, is crucial and
needs to be accelerated, especially in the light of the drawdown of AMISOM
envisaged to commence by the end of 2018. I remain concerned about the
non-payment of regular salaries to Somali security personnel. I welcome the
endorsement by the National Leadership Forum of the national security policy and
the new policing model, and urge all stakeholders to build on these national
frameworks to create an effective and efficient security sector capable of providing
security to the Somali people against internal and external threats. Without sustained
and coherent support, determination and speedy progress on a comprehensive
security effort, Somalia will remain vulnerable, and its gains subject to potential
reversal.
92. Our efforts to curb the threat from Al-Shabaab must go beyond the military. I
emphasize the importance of a comprehensive approach to the restoration of
security in Somalia that is grounded in the protection of human rights. This must
include exploring, in a holistic manner, all pathways towards durable peace and
reconciliation in Somalia. I look forward to the launch of the Federal Government ’s
“right path” plan for countering violent extremism as a step towards a mo re
comprehensive approach.
93. I remain deeply concerned about the human rights situation in Somalia,
including the increase in the number of death sentences, and the protection of
women and children. Notwithstanding important commitments made by the Somal i

16-15189

17/19

S/2016/763

authorities in the past few years to protect children, the detention of children for
their association with Al-Shabaab remains an ongoing concern. I urge the Somali
authorities to treat those children primarily as victims, with the best interests of the
child and international protection standards as guiding principles. Death sentences
issued against children in Puntland are unacceptable, and I urge Puntland authorities
to facilitate the reintegration and reunification of all of the children with their
families.
94. I applaud the preparedness efforts by local authorities and humanitarian
partners to reduce the impact of El Niño-related floods. However, the humanitarian
situation remains dire and is expected to be further strained in the coming months
by deteriorating prospects for food security and the return of refugees from Dadaab.
I urge the international community to redouble its support for critical humanitarian
action and durable solutions in Somalia.
95. I welcome the release of the first draft of the National Development Plan by
the Federal Government, a significant first step towards addressing the root causes
of socioeconomic challenges and charting a development path for Somalia.
Somalia’s progress also depends on the State’s ability to generate revenues and
deliver public goods, including security and education. The formation of
partnerships between the public and private sectors and the utilization of benefits
from the remarkable entrepreneurship of Somalis, including a very dynamic
diaspora, must be pursued.
96. I wish to convey my heartfelt thanks to the African Union, AMISOM, IGAD,
the European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations and other
development partners for their sustained support and engagement in the
peacebuilding and State-building process in Somalia.
97. I am deeply saddened by, and condemn, the acts of terrorism that claimed the
lives of 2 United Nations staff members and 11 private security personnel, among
others, in Mogadishu. I pay tribute to my Special Represen tative, Michael Keating,
my two Deputy Special Representatives and the staff of UNSOM, UNSOS and
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Somalia. Their hard work and
unshakeable commitment, under challenging and often dangerous conditions, shows
the best of the United Nations.

18/19

16-15189

S/2016/763

16-15189

19/19
