UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY CO.UNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY’-FIRST

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1882)

. . .... .. .. ... .. ... .. ... .. ... .. .. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11918). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1882

NOTE
Symbois of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally publjshed inquarterly Slrpplenlc~ttts of the Ojj%irrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolrrtims
trnd
DecY.sion.s oJ’ the Security Cor~ncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1882nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 28 January 1976, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Salim A. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1918)
The meeting

..

agenda (S/Agenda/l882)

was culled to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

bers of the delegation
Council table.

took places

at the Security

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like also to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Cuba, India, Jordan and Poland requesting that they be invited, in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional ‘rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. Accordingly, if there is no objection, I propose,
in conformity
with the usual practice and with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
I have just mentioned to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
It was so decided.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representatives of
Cuba, Jordan, India and Poland to take the piaces
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when they address
.
the Council.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11918)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken yesterday [1880th and 1881st meetings],
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Egypt, Guinea,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Liberia, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Nigeria, South Africa and Yugoslavia .to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding
that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
they address the Council. I also invite the President
and members of the delegation of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to take places at the Council
table.
Af the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Camara (Guinea),
‘. Mr. Marpaung
(Indonesia),
Mr. Hall (Jamaica),
Mr. Minikon (Liberia), Mr. El Hassen (Mauritania),
Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius),
Mr. Harriman
{Nigeria),
Mr. Botha (South Africa), and Mr. Petric (Yugoslavia)
took the places, reserved for them at the side of 3he
Council chamber;
Mr. Kamana (President
of the
.United Nations Council for Namibia)
and the mem-

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Jaipul (India), Mr. Sharaf (Jordun) and
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
5. Mr. DATCU
(Romania)
finteroretation
from
French): The Romanian delegation would, from the
very outset, like to.-emphasize the need to conclude
this debate on Namtbta in the Security Council by the
adoption of a resolution whose form and specific provisions would give the Namibian people the support
they are looking for so that they can exercise seifdetermination
and thus achieve complete independence. This is all the more necessary since the Pretoria
regime has left no doubt as to itsintentions,
its arrogance, its defiance and its patent lack of consideration
for the United Nations or the entire international community. The statement made yesterday in the Council
[188fst meeting] by the representative of the Pretoria
regime is convincing evidence of that.
6. Past deliberations
of the Security Council on the
question of Namibia have on every occasion brought
out the existence of the political,
legal and moral
bases necessary for a solution to this problem. This

has enabled
unanimously
lutions.

the Council to adopt without objection,
even, a rather large number of reso-

view of the continued imposition of the colonial yoke
an the negation of its inalienable rights, the Namibian
people has had to resort to the only means left at
its disposal, namely, armed struggle, in order to recover its inalienable right to self-determination,
independence, national sovereignty and territorial integrity.

7. However, all those resolutions have, to our deep
regret, remained dead letters. This situation is quite
rightly a serious cause of concern and dissatisfaction
for the people of Namibia. It is all the more incomprehensible for the international
community,
which
continues to have confidence in the part the United
Nations, and especially the Security Council, must
play in solving major problems of international
life,
including the problem of Namibia.

14. Secondly,
we are faced with the continued
illegal occupation of the Territory
of Namibia
by
South Africa and its obstinate refusal to leave the
Territory.
The arguments used by South Africa to
justify its presence in Namibia are absolutely inconsistent, as was demonstrated. by the advisory opinion
of the International
Court of Justice of 1971* and
Security Council resolutions. The Mandate- entrusted
to South Africa half a century ago by the League of
Nations belongs to past history when peoples were
not consulted as to their own destiny. It is therefore
clear that such a status, which has been rejected by
the Namibian people, can no longer today have any
legal and moral validity. If we add to this the fact
that the Security Council has confirmed the termination
of South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia, while at.the
same time placing this Territory
under the direct
responsibility
of the United Nations, we can see to
what extent South Africa’s presence in Namibia has
become illegal. The illegal presence of South Africa in
Namibia flagrantly disregards the will of the Namibian
people and violates one of the elementary principles
unanimously
recognized in international
life, namely,
the principle of respect for the sacred right of each
people to decide ‘for itself its own path to political
and social development.

8. The resolutions adopted every year by the General
Assembly and the Security Council amply demonstrate the interest which the United Nations has in
enabling the Namibian
people to achieve independence .
9. In addition to its .obligations
under the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to the just cause of
the Namibian
people, the United Nations, in resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, assumed special
and unique responsibilities
and obligations,
which
can be discharged only with the full assistance of the
Council. Such was, for example, the decision taken in
that resolution, by which the General Assembly put
an end to South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and
placed that Territory under the direct responsibility
of the United Nations.
10. One year later, in 1967, the General Assembly
established the United Nations Council for Namibia,’
to which it assigned the task of administering
the
Territory until independence and of making contact
with the South African authorities in order to establish
the procedures for transferring the administration
of
the Territory to the Namibian people.

15. Thirdly,
South Africa continues to defy the
United Nations by obstinately
refusing to comply
with the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, which many times have called for
the withdrawal of the entire illegal administration
of
occupation in Namibia. In our opinion, the Security
Council, in adopting a new resolution on Namibia at
the close of the present debate, should at the same
time decide on practical measures in order to guarantee
the implementation
of its relevant resolutions.

Il.
As a result of those resolutions,
the Security
Council decided that the continued presence of the
racist South African regime in Namibia was illegal
and, consequently, it reiterated South Africa’s obligation to withdraw from that Territory,
which has an
international
status. Similar provisions have been
restated, most recently in resolution 366 (1974) of
17 December 1974, which was unanimously
adopted
by the Council.
12. However, despite these decisions, the Namibian
question has not been settled. Furthermore,
as the
debate shows, new elements have been added which
are such as to heighten tension in the area and jeopardize peace and security on the African continent.

16. Fourthly, I should like to refer to the intensification of steps taken by South Africa to implement its
plan aimed at dividing Namibia into bantustans and
extending its policy of upa&zeid and racial discrimination to this Territory. It can easily be seen that South
Africa, in attempting
to fragment the Territory
of
Namibia and to impose so-called constitutional
development, is merely pursuing one of its old objectives,
which is that of annexing the Territory.

13. In our view, the Security Council should in the
present debate take account of several considerations
and circumstances, of which I should like to mention
the following: First of all, there is the flagrant negation
and suppression by the Pretoria regime of the sacred
right of the Namibian people to make its own decisions in accordance with its national aspirations. In

17, The Organization
of African Unity and the
United Nations have condemned these manoeuvres
by stressing that the sole aim of the so-called constitutional conference is to divide the ethnic groups in
Namibia and to undermine the national unity and territorial integrity of the Territory.
The convening by
South Africa of the so-called constitutional
conference
2

is a flagrant violation of resolution 366 (1974), in
paragraph 4 of which the Council demands the withdrawal of the illegal administration
in the Territory
and the transfer of power to the Namibian people with
the assistance of the United Nations.

is gravely jeopardizing
inte.mational
peace and security. Romania is firmly in favour of the immediate
withdrawal of South African troops from Angola and
for the cessation of all actions by South Africa which
might aggravate the situation in that area.

18. It is the duty of the Council, by giving effect to
resolution 366 (1974), to reaffirm the right of the
United Nations, in consultation with the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the authentic
representative
of the Namibian
people, to proceed
to organize elections in Namibia
and to supervise
them. It goes without saying that such elections cannot
take place so long as South African occupation forces
are present. Only the United Nations, as the legal
authority in the Territory,
can supervise these elections, and it must do so. That is why we consider
that it is necessary to adopt vigorous measures in
order to put an end to South Africa’s actions which
infringe on the territorial integrity of Namibia and itS
national unity. The United Nations has the duty to
guarantee Namibia’s
development
as a unitary and
independent State.

21. In the Romanian delegation’s view, these are the
considerations
that require vigorous action by the
Security Council in order that it may fulfil its responsibilities for the maintenance of peace and security
on the African continent. We consider that the Council
must adopt practical measures to enable the Namibian people to exercise its right to self-determination
and thus achieve complete independence.
To this
end, it is of course. absolutely essential that the South
Africa troops be withdrawn from Namibia and that
any South African presence in the Territory be removed.
22. ,Measures should be taken to see to it that the
Pretoria regime can no longer ignore the demands of
the Namibian people and no longer defy the decisions
of the United Nations and the requests of the international ‘community
with regard to the transfer of
power to the Namibian people. In this connexion the
Romanian delegation highly values the realistic proposals made by SWAPO, which must be taken into
consideration by the Council.

19. Fifthly, there is the South African authorities’
continuing escalation. of repression against the Namibian people. Indeed, recently South Africa has
intensified its acts of repression and terror against
the national liberation struggle, especially after the
United Nations has recognized SWAP0 as the authentic representative of the Namibian people.3 The
police has proceeded to make mass arrests of Namibian
patriots, to imprison them without any trial whatsoever, and to use torture and intimidation.
The brutality with which the Namibian population is deprived
of its legitimate rights and the repressive measures of
the police against SWAPO, which is leading the national liberation struggle, have been mentioned here
by otner speakers as well. This resmgence of repressive actions has given rise to a veritable exodus of
Namibian refugees to the neighbouring friendly countries. Such. practices by South Africa have quite
rightly been unanimously condemned by the General
Assembly as flagrant violations of the fundamental
rights of the Namibian
people and as an affront to
human justice and dignity contrary to the principles
of international
law and moraiity.

23. Romania is on the side of the Namibian people
in its struggle, and it is giving its active multilateral
support to the Namibian
people’s movement of national liberation,
SWAPO, so as to achieve the imprescriptible
right of the Namibian
people to selfdetermination
and independence
and to assure the
national unity and territorial integrity of the Namibian
homeland.
24. This position has been clearly expressed during
the conversations and consultations which were held
between the President of Romania,
Nicolae CeauSescu, and the President of SWAPO, Sam Nujoma,
and likewise in the Romanian-Namibian
communique.
It was reiterated on that occasion that Romania gives
political and material support to the struggle of the
Namibian people to achieve its legitimate aspirations
for the development
of Namibia as a unitary, independent State.

20. Sixthly, as was stressed by the representative
of SWAPO, the South African occupation authorities
are more and more engaged in strengthening
their
military establishment
in Namibia and the militarization of the Territory. What is even more serious, the
Territory of Namibia is now being used as a base for
the military invasion of other countries, which represents a new flagrant violation of the principles of
international
law. The use of the Territory of Namibia
as a base for attacking neighbouring countries confirms
the view that has on many occasions been reiterated
by Romania to the effect that the maintenance
of
vestiges of colonialism and of a racist policy, by being
a constant source of tension, aggression and conflicts,

25. As a member of the United Nations Council
for Namibia,
Romania is firmly in favour of a programme of concrete and’effective measures to enable
that Council to carry out without delay the mandate
entrusted to it by the General Assembly. Romania
will continue to give its support to the Namibian people
and to its liberation movement,
SWAPO, to ensure
full independence so that this people can embark on
the road to development
and economic and social
progress.
26. The Romanian delegation
present debate in the Council
3

is convinced that the
can achieve positive

results, especially since we note that there has been
a broad convergence of views amongst the Council
members with respect to their appreciation
of the
present situation in Namibia. We are convinced that
the Council can unanimously
adopt a resolution in
accordance with the aspirations for freedom and independence of the Namibian people. We hope that there
will be no insurmountable
difficulties in arriving at
such a practical solution. It is quite possible, and even
appropriate, to prove by facts that the United Nations
and the Security Council are in a position to ensure
implementation
of their own decisions on Namibia.
My delegation will do its best to achieve this result.

racist regime. We also strongly condemn that superPower which flaunts the banner of “natural ally” of
the liberation movement for its frenzied intervention
in *Angola. We resolutely stand for the immediate
withdrawal of all the foreign troops, including the
South African troops, from Angola. Moreover,
the
Vorster racist regime has tried hard to resort to deceitful schemes. The so-called “constitutional
conference” held from 1 to 12 September last under the
guise of establishing a “multiracial”
State was a farce
stage-managed by the South African racist r6gime
in active pursuance of its policy of “bantustans”.
From the very beginning this farce met with the strong
opposition of the broad masses of the Namibian and
other African peoples and finally ended in ignominious
failure. This is another great victory achieved by the
Namibian people. We are deeply convinced that the
courageous Namibian
people will certainly use the
revolutionary
dual tactics against the counter-revolutionary dual tactics, strengthen their unity and closely
link their struggle against South African racism with
that of the Angolan people against South African
racism and intervention and aggression by the superPowers, frustrate the super-Power
intrigues
and
schemes and finally achieve the complete liberation
of Namibia.

27. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation
from Chi.. nese): The past year has seen a most inspiring situation in Africa. A number of newly independent countries have emerged one after another. The balance of
forces in southern Africa has undergone a drastic
change. The struggle of the people in areas yet to
achieve independence against racism and colonialism
and neo-colonialism
is developing in depth. There
has been a new development
in the struggle of the
African people against super-Power
interference,
subversion and divisive activities. The practice of
struggle by the African people has proved that the
liberation struggle will eventually triumph. But their
road of advance is by no means smooth. Racism and
old colonialism are not reconciled to their doom and
will put up a last-ditch struggle. The rivalry between
the super-Powers will become more and more intense.
In order to preserve its vested interests, one superPower is supporting the racist regimes and undermining
the national liberation movement. The other superPower is stepping up its frenzied contention with the
former in order to seek strategic areas in southern
Africa, to scramble for Europe and to intensify its
global deployment
for war. The over-all situation of
African unity and the struggle of the people in southern
Africa is in jeopardy because of the rivalry between
the super-Powers. The development
of the situation
in southern Africa has enabled the African people
gradually to realize the danger of “letting the tiger
in through the back door while repulsing the wolf
through the front gate”. Therefore, it is only through
linking the struggle against racism with that against
super-Power interference,
subversion and divisive
activities and for doing away with them that the overall situation of African unity can be preserved, the
continued
victorious
advance of the struggle for
national liberation enhanced and the complete liberation of the whole continent of Africa achieved.

29. The PRESIDENT:
Soviet Union wishes’to
30.

The representative
of the
speak on a point of order.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Reuublics)
Russian):
Mr. President, I dis:
covered in the verbatim record of yesterday’s meeting
[f&l/St meeting] that you explained to the representative of South Africa that the Security Council is
discussing not the question of Angola. but rather the
question of Namibia.
However, the Chinese representative is talking all the time about Angola. If the
Security Council finds it necessary to discuss the
question of Angola, my delegation is ready at any
time day or night to do so, but at present we are disr
cussing the question of Namibia.
For this reason it
would be useful to explain to the representative
of
China that the Security Council is discussing the
question of Namibia and not the question of Angola.

(interpretation

fro-m

31. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call again on the
representative of China I should like to appeal to all
the members of the Council to try as much as possible
not to discuss other aspects of the problem. Obviously,
I cannot restrain any member of the Council from
making his statement and mentioning
anything he
wants to mention, and those of my colleagues who
are more experienced in the Council should know this
better than I, but I can make an appeal to all members
of the Council to exercise maximum
restraint and
moderation.

28. During the past year, the Namibian people have
continued to win new victories on their road of armed
struggle. These victories have thrown the Vorster
racist regime into a panic so that it has been stepping
up its counter-revolutionary
dual tactics. Apart from
energetically
carrying on arms expansion and war
preparations and its repression of the Namibian people,
it has sent troops to invade Angola. We sternly condemn these criminal activities of the South African

32. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China)(trans/ationfium
Chinese):
Before continuing my statement, 1, would advise the
Soviet representative to listen carefully to the statement of the Chinese representative
to see if he can
4

find any sentence that does not concern the Namiblan
question under present consideration.

37. South Africa’s arrangements for the local elections, in the view of my delegation, did not, unfortunately, live up to its promise that any political group
in the Territory
would be allowed to participate
without hindrance “in any peaceable activity, including the election of representatives to the Constitutional Conference”
[see S/1170]. As we all know,
the elections were held under the prevailing racially
discriminatory
laws and practices, without free political campaigning by all political organizations.

33. In the opinion of the Chinese delegation, during
t.he past two decades and more quite a number of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
in support of the Namibian people’s struggle for independence have been adopted, but until now they have
not been implemented.
The basic reason for this lies
in the imperialist active support for the South African
racist regime. We hold that the way’ of solving the
Namibian question should be as follows: the correct
position in the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions previously adopted on Namibia
should be adhered to; the South African authorities
must immediately
end their illegal occupation
of
Namibia, withdraw all their troops and administration
therefrom and let the Namibian people achieve their
independence free from outside interference. Together
with the African countries and people the Chinese
Government
and people will, as always, support the
Namibian
people and give them assistance in their
just struggle until they win complete victory.

38. Thus, the composition of the constitutional
conference was largely determined
by the restrictions
South Africa imposed upon the election of the delegates. My delegation, therefore, feels that it is impossible to accept the claim that its decisions reflected ..
the views, freely expressed, of the entire population
of the Territory on the machinery by which it would
decide its future.
39. In the light of these developments,
my delegation cannot fail to express its growing concern over
the possibility that South Africa one day may in fact
confront the Organization with a fait accompli, which
it would claim to be the result of the free exercise of
self-determination
by the people of the Territory.

34. Mr. SAITO (Japan): The encouraging developments we have seen in southern Africa over the past
two years had inspired us for a time to hope that the
situation in Namibia also would somehow improve.
We were disappointed,
however, by South Africa’s
refusal last May to comply with the terms of Security
Council resolution 366 (1974). This was confirmed
yesterday by the letter of the representative of South
Africa to the Secretary-General
[S//1948 und Add./].
Meanwhile South Africa had organized local elections
on the basis of ethnic groups in which the participation
of all potitical forces, including SWAPO, had not been
obtained. It also convened a constitutional
conference
in September 1975 in Windhoek, at which the “Declaration of Intent”
was adopted. My delegation has
observed these developments with concern.

40. These developments
of recent months lead my
delegation to believe that the Council, while reafa
firming the people’s right of self-determination
and
the territorial
integrity of Namibia,
should call for
free and democratic elections, under United Nations
supervision, ensuring the participation
of all eligible
voters, to decide the future of Namibia.
41. As I stated during our deliberations on the situation in Namibia in June last year, Japan remains convinced that elections to enable the people of Namibia
to determine freely their political future must be held
under the supervision of the United Nations, that all
Namibian
political organizations
must be allowed to
campaign and state their views and engage in political
activities free from fear and intimidation,
and that all
Namibians
in exile for political reasons should be
allowed to return freely without risk of arrest or detention and be assu’red of the right to participate in the
process of self-determination,
including
political
campaigns and elections.

35. Before addressing myself to the question before
us, let me remind the Council of my delegation’s
fundamental
position on the question of Namibia.
1 stated it here last June [/8.?7rh mwting],
and I will
summarize it today as follows. Japan maintains the
view that the continued presence of South Africa ‘in
Namibia is illegal and that South Africa is under the
obiigation to withdraw from the Territory. For Japan
two operating principles are paramount: it is necessary to safeguard the free exercise of the right of the
people of Namibia to self-determination
and independence, and the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia must be preserved.

42. My delegation has noted with satisfaction that
the working paper which has been circulated among
members of the Council includes provisions for such
elections under United Nations supervision. In addition detailed arrangements would be necessary in order
to safeguard such free and democratic elections, and
this leads me to suggest that negotiations between a
representative
of the United Nations and the South
African Government
should take place on the date,
the timetable,
and the modalities
of the election,
and supervision by the United Nations. Either the
Security Council could propose that the United Nations
Council for Namibia accept this task or we could

36. The Security Council is again entrusted with the
responsibility
of considering the question of Namibia.
My delegation is of the view that it is imperative for
the Council to find some formula to end the present
stalemate. In order to attain this purpose, we haye to
be realistic and concentrate our efforts on the most
pressing needs.
5

request the Secretary-General
or his personal representative to assume this responsibility.
The statements of other speakers before the Council also have
emphasized the need to hold free elections in the Territory under United Nations supervision. I thus have
reason to hope that a resolution with these provisions
will be adopted by the Council unanimously.

produce some long overdue results which will show to
the world the Council’s concern and determination
to
use its influence in resolving this question. A lot has
been said in the Council about the future of this African
Territory. Our debates have brought no relief to the
gallant people of Namibia.
49. A little over seven months ago, when the Foreign
Minister of Liberia, Mr. C. Cecil Dennis, Jr., addressed
the Security Council on the question of Namibia [see
f824rh meeting] specifically on the question of South
Africa’s compliance
with resolution 366 (1974), he
stressed the fact that racism was a source of grave
danger to world peace and security. He supported an
independent and united Namibia on the basis of majority rule and warned that the responsibility
for
determining
whether that independence
would be
accomplished
peacefully or through more bloodshed
rested on the shoulders of the South African Govemment. Furthermore,
he gave our interpretation
of
paragraph 4 of resolution 366 (1974), saying that it
meant the holding of elections in Namibia
under
United Nations supervision. Mr. Dennis then asked
the Council to affirm and uphold the legal right of the
United Nations to hold such elections. Finally, he
called on the Council, among other things, to impress
upon South Africa that it must desist from any action
designed to impose upon the people of Namibia its
bantustan policy under a constituent assembly chosen
in an atmosphere of coercion and intimidation,
The
Liberian delegation’s appeal to reason for Namibia’s
independence and its proposals for the reasonable
action that is necessary to avert strife and avoid
bloodshed have gone unheeded.

The unanimous adoption of a constructive resolution would demonstrate the Council’s determination
to continue its efforts to induce South Africa to comply with relevant United Nations resolutions.
The
Council would thus consolidate the advances it has
made towards the achievement of the United Nations
objectives for Namibia.

43.

44. I have taken note of the letter and the statement
by the South African representative
in which the
Government
of South Africa repeated its offer to
negotiate with a personal representative of the Secretary-General
acceptable to both sides and also to
discuss progress and developments
with the leaders
of Africa, the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, and the Special Committee of the Organization of African Unity [ibid.]. My delegation wishes
to believe in the sincerity and good faith of those
statements. Bearing them in mind, -1 appeal to the
Government
of South Africa to respond favourably
to the course I am suggesting.
45. My delegation is prepared to support any resolution that contains these measures and further
strengthens the progress the Council has made. Let
us hope that, with the unanimous acceptance of such
a resolution by the Council, we shall find ourselves
on the road to a just and lasting settlement of the
question of Namibia.

50. South Africa, by its constant refusal to abide
by the Council’s resolutions and those of the General
Assembly regarding Namibia,
has shown its total
disregard for the interest of the people of Namibia.
And the situation has deteriorated to such an extent
that it provides a serious challenge to the United
Nations. It is clear that South Africa has no interest
in raising the educational, social and economic status
of the people of Namibia. The insatiable desire for
profit has been made the number one priority of South
Africa. Consequently,
the right of Namibia to be free
and independent has been given no priority at all.

46. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Liberia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.,
47. Mr. MINIKON
(Liberia): Mr. President, allow
me, first of all, to, indicate to you how pleased and
delighted I am to see you, a distinguished son of Africa,
a strong advocate of self-determination
and an eloquent
spokesman for the cause of African liberation,
presiding over the deliberations of the Security Council.
My delegation is indeed hopeful that with you in the
Chair, the Council will once and for all make a positive
contribution
to the solution of this vexing problem.

5 1. The Declaration of Dakar on Namibia and Human
Rights [S/l 1939, annex] strongly emphasized
the
principle of self-determination
for Namibia and the
restoration of its fundamental
national rights. The
Security Council must not adjourn without giving
some hope to Namibia for its future. Those members
of the Council who usually block the passage of a
meaningful
resolution
must consider the wind of
change now blowing around Namibia and decide to
exert some influence on South Africa to undertake
some constructive change in the Territory.

48. I am indeed gratified to have this opportunity of
addressing the Council on the question of Namibia,
a question in which Liberia has manifested great
interest from its very inception. After so many years
of debate and negotiations,
the question of Namibia
is still found on the agenda of the Security Council
and the General Assembly annually, with no prospect
of an acceptable solution in sight. My delegation is,
however, heartened and optimistic
that under your
guidance, Mr. President, the present discussions will

52. Is it so difficult
vince it to declare
6

for South Africa’s allies to conits unequivocal
acceptance of

self-determination
and independence. for, Namibia?
Is it so difficult for them to urge South Africa to accept
the territorial
integrity of Namibia. and prescribe a
solution that will retain the unity of the Territory as a
whole? Is it because reasonable men have become so
lackadaisical that they have failed to take reasonable
action?

60. Secondlv. it is- a matter that directly concerns
the. great continent
of Africa. The South African
military build-up in Namibia and the utilization
of its
territory as a base for aggression against neighbouring
countries constitute a serious threat to the peace and
security of the African continent. Today, it is the
People’s Republic of Angola that the South African
regime has chosen to invade from the illegally occupied
Territory of Namibia; tomorrow it, may be any other
country of the continent. And on top of that, the
representative of the Pretoria regime has the audacity
to put the blame for his Government’s
infamous
actions-as
he did only yesterday-on
those who have
always been in the vanguard of freedom-fighting
and
have lent their genuine support to the oppressed
people. That is but a typical example of a thief who,
having been caught red-handed, tries to run away,
shouting loudly: “Stop, thief!”

53. My delegation believes that a solution to the
question of Namibia lies in South Africa’s acceptance
of Security Council resolution 366 (1974) and the provisions of the Declaration of Dakar. We believe that
the winds of change for independence
which have
been blowing in Africa will definitely reach Namibia
in one form or another.
54. Finally, we should like to urge the Council to
set a definite timetable outlining how and when elections, under United Nations supervision, should take
place in Namibia. In this connexion, it is imperative’
for the Council to urge South Africa, in the strongest
terms, to abide by all the relevant resolutions of both
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

61. It is also not surprising, though very regrettable,
that the representative of a permanent member of the
Security Council, notorious for slanderous attacks
against the Soviet Union, in fact took sidesdnd
this
not for the first time-with
the representative of the
racist regime of South Africa by joining in his calumnies, thus trying to sidetrack the debate in the
Council and to divert its attention from the plight of
the oppressed people of Namibia.

55. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Poland. I invite him to-take a place atthe
Council table and to make his statement.
56. Mr. JAROSZEK
(Poland): Mr. President, this
is the second time this month that I have had the
pleasure of addressing the Council under your presidency. I am grateful both to you, Sir, and to all
Council members for having afforded me an opportunity to present Poland’s position on the situation in
Namibia.

62. Thirdly,
Namibia
represents a grave international problem. It has been amply proved the past
years that its continued illegal occupation by South
Africa poses a serious threat to international
peace
and security. In consistency with its long-standing
and principled
policy, the Polish People’s Republic
has steadfastly supported the legitimate
struggle of
the Namibian people for self-determination
and independence. Today, once again we raise our voice in
condemnation
of the illegal and repressive occupation of the international
Territory of Namibia by the
racist regime of South Africa. The legacy of nazism
-which
sounds so familiar to us in Poland, and which
South Africa seems to have inherited both in theory
and practice from its Hitlerite predecessors-must
no
longer haunt millions of South Africans and Namibians.
For, how else should one view the killings, mass
arrests and detentions of the indigenous population
of Namibia, particularly of members of SWAPO?

57. My delegation has thought it only proper to ask
to be allowed to speak in this debate both because
Poland is a member of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and because solidarity with peoples fighting
for their freedom has been one of the basic principles
of Poland’s foreign policy. Such an attitude derives
from both the ideological and political foundations of
socialism and. from the tradition of struggle “for your
freedom and ours”, so much a part of my country’s
history.
58. The significance of the question of Namibia, now
before the Council, is that it is indeed a unique example
of the remnants of bygone times. It is no more purely
a decolonization
issue. Neither is it a problem that
can any longer be left at the mercy of those who have
created it. In fact, owing to the interdependence
of
world affairs today and the indivisibility
of world peace
and security, the question of Namibia is of a threedimensional nature.

63. In order to mislead world public opinion, South
Africa has organized the so-called constitutional
conference, without the participation
of the true representatives of the Namibian
people, and continues
its racist policy of “bantustanization”,
which constitutes yet another serious threat to the national unity
and territorial integrity of Namibia.

59. In the first place, it is a national problem of a
people. brutally suppressed by South Africa,. which is
persistently violating their human rights in its drive
to destroy the national unity and territorial integrity
of Namibia.

64. I wish to take this opportunity
to pay a tribute
to the brave people of Namibia
which, under the
leadership of its authentic representative,
SWAPO,
despite repressions, continues its struggle against the
illegal occupation of its country.
7

65. The road to a solution as regards the situation in
Namibia
leads through the implementation
of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations. My deiegation is happy to note the growing awareness of that
fact among the membership of the Organization.
But,
at the same time, we find no justification
whatsoever
for the economic and military collaboration of certain
Western countries, members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization
(NATO), with the racist regime
in Pretoria, totally condemned by the world community. We cannot fail to notice again that precisely
this policy of collaboration
was behind the Council’s
failure to act effectively against the South African
regime last June.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.
70. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia. I accordingly invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
71. Mr. MARPAUNG
(Indonesia):
Mr. President,
permit me at the outset to express the deep sense of
satisfaction that it gives my delegation to see you in
the Chair as the Security Council considers the question of Namibia. It is indeed most appropriate that a
distinguished
son of Africa should preside over our
discussion of a subject that so deeply concerns all of
the people of that continent. In addition,- it-&fitting
that one who has been in the forefront of the efforts
of the United Nations to promote the process of
decolonization
should preside over these deliberations. We are confident that, under such distinguished
leadership, the Council will be able to make a significant contribution
to promoting
a solution of the
problem of Namibia.

66. New efforts are necessary to change the existing
situation in Namibia. The sooner they are taken, the
more stable peace there will be on the African continent. On the internal plane, these efforts first of all
call for an immediate and unconditional
withdrawal
of South Africa from Namibia and thus for the restoration, with the assistance of the United Nations, of the
inalienable
right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination
and national independence.
On the
international plane, they require intensified pressure to
be brought to bear upon South Africa to compel it to
effect the withdrawal of its illegal administration
from
Namibia an meet the demands as set forth in this
Council’s resolution 366 (1974).

72. Recent developments
in southern Africa, particularly the attainment of independence by the former
Portuguese
Territories
in that region, concretely
demonstrate that the era of colonialism and racialism
is inevitably drawing to a close. Despite these unmistakable portents, the Government of South Africa
has continued its attempts to impose its illegal rule
upon the Territory of Namibia. While such measures
may succeed for a time in delaying the attainment of
independence by the Namibians,
in the end we are
confident that no efforts can prevent the people of the
Territory
from exercising the right of self-determination.

67. Given good political will from all the members
of the Security Council without exception, those goals
are attainable. They are indeed expected from the
Council by the people of Namibia. I can therefore only
join
the Administrative
Secretary
of SWAPO,
Mr. Moses Garoeb, who addressed the Council
yearterday in these words: “We come to the United
Nations and indeed to tne Security Council because
we believe that they have an obligation to help us...
and it is this obligation,
more than anything else,
that the Council must live up to.” [188&h meeting,
para. 48.1

73. In a series of resolutions the United Nations has
set forth the framework in which the goal of independence can best be achieved. As noted by the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
in his statement,
Security Council resolution
366
(1974) demanded of the South African Government
that it “comply with the resolutions and decisions of
the United Nations and the advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice... in regard to Namibia
and... take the necessary steps to effect the withdrawal... of its illegal administration
maintained
in
Namibia”.

68. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the next
speaker, I should like to inform members of the
Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative
of Saudi Arabia containing a request
that he be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. I
propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussion, in conformity with the usual practice and with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure.

74. My delegation must confess its disappointment
that the South African Government continues to resist
the efforts of the international community to implement
the provisions of resolution
366 (1974) and other
relevant resolutions in Namibia. Regretfully,
we can
only conclude that the Pretoria regime has continued
to display an evident lack of good faith in its dealings
with the United Nations and the people of Namibia
itself. Despite its so-called policy of detente with the
other nations of Africa, and despite the assurance

It ,lyas so decided.
69. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he addresses the Council.
8

given in its letter of 27 May 1975 [s/f 170/l to the
Secretary-General
that the Namibians
would be free
to choose their own constitutional
and political future,
the South African Government
has continued
to
pursue a contrary policy of repression and intensification of its illegal occupation of the Territory.
Such
police-State measures as killings, mass arrests, detentions, torture and floggings were noted in the consensus on Namibia adopted by the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in 19754 and have
been detailed by other speakers before the Council.

80. The United Nations Council for Namibia, ‘on
which Indonesia has the honour to serve, has closely
monitored
developments
in the Territory
since its
inception in 1967, and has made every effort to assist
the people of Namibia in its struggle for freedom and
self-determination,
Two recent actions, the establishment of the United Nations Institute for Namibia”
to train Namibians
for self-government,
and the
promulgation
of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia,6 which establishes
penalties for the illegal exploitation
of the Territory’s
natural resources, are, in the opinion of my delegation, of great importance in promoting the welfare of
the people of the Territory.

75. In addition, the South African Government
has
redoubled ‘its efforts to impose the odious system of
apartheid upon the people of Namibia, and it has also
continued its attempts to implement the Bantustanization’ of the nation. These policies have been condemned time and again by the General Assembly and
the Security Council, most recently in General Assembly resolution 3399 (XXX); yet the Pretoria regime
continues in its efforts to implement them in defiance
of the considered judgment of the international
community.

81. These and subsequent actions by the United
Nations have been reinforced by activities undertaken outside the framework of the Organization.
The most recent of these was the Dakar International
Conference on Namibia
and Human Rights. That
Conference
exposed the serious and continuing
violations of human rights that are taking place in
Namibia,
particularly
as a result of the policies of
opurtheid
and Bantustanization.
By focusing international attention on these violations it is to be hoped
that international opposition to South African policies
will be both deepened and broadened. My delegation
would like to pledge its full co-operation in such efforts.

76. It is clear that these policies are simply designed
to attempt to perpetuate South Africa’s control over
Namibia.
The “homelands”
scheme, for example,
would result in the fragmentation
of the Territory,
with 80 per cent of its African population forced into
reserves in the poorest part of the country, which
constitutes only 40 per cent of its geographical area.
Such homelands, over-populated
and lacking nearly
all resources, could never constitute viable, independent States.

82. Despite all that has been done by the United
Nations and by other interested organizations
and
individuals,
however, South Africa has retained its
illegal control over Namibia.
It behoves us at this
Crucial period in the history of southern Africa to ask
ourselves why the Pretoria regime has been able to
continue its policies in the face of the stern disapproval
expressed time and again by the international
community.
.
83. One of the most important reasons for this successful defiance has surely been the support which
South Africa has received from certain other Member
States, and from multinational
corporations.
In
refusing to implement fully the decisions of the United
Nations and, in particular, in continuing to supply
South Africa with arms by which it can strengthen
its illegal domination
of Namibia
through the construction of huge military bases and can also threaten
neighbouring countries with aggression, these nations
are encouraging the development of an explosive and
highly dangerous situation which not only jeopardizes
the peace and security of southern Africa, but may
well threaten that of the globe. Inthis light, my delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to urge’ once
again most strongly that those nations continuing to
provide moral and material support to South Africa
cease to do so immediately,
in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 3399 (XXX). In doing so,
they would make an extremely significant contribution to the Namibian people’s struggle for freedom.

77. South Africa further seeks to perpetuate its rule
by imposing a system of education which ensures
that almost no members of the indigenous population
will ever be able to obtain higher or technical education. Without the skills necessary to administering
a
modern State, the people of Namibia would remain
forever dependent on the continuation
of foreign
administration
in its native land.
78. South Africa also continues to ‘encourage the
exploitation
of Namibia’s
vast wealth of natural
resources, particularly
by foreign-owned
multinational corporations.
The indigenous people receives
none of the benefits of this exploitation and is in effect
being robbed of its birthright.
79. The United Nations has steadfastly opposed
these efforts by the illegal regime to strengthen and
extend its control over Namibia. In its consideration
of the question since 1946, the Generai,AssembIy
has
taken progressively
sterner measures,
including
revocation of South Africa’s Mandate at its twentyiirst session. The legality of this act was confir.med
by the advisory opinion of the International
Court of
Justice in 1971.

84. While we may hope that these measures will
have a salutary effect, it is clear that the international
9

community
must strengthen its efforts and take even
sterner measures if the illegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa is to be brought to a rapid conclusion.
85. In this connexion, I feel that I must comment
briefly on the statement of the representative of South
Africa before the Council [188fsr meeting],
and on
his Government’s
position as set forth in the letter
dated 27 January from the representative
of South
Africa to the Secretary-General,
which we have
carefully studied. There is little I can add, Mr. President, to your own incisive analysis of South Africa’s
position which you made yesterday. I should like to
note, however, that the Indonesian delegation could
not but feel a certain sense of shock and, indeed,
disbelief that after so many years the Government of
South Africa continues to dismiss as unworthy of its
consideration
the concern that has been expressed
for developments
in Namibia by virtually the entire
international community.
86. Once again we have heard from the South African
representative
that the United Nations has no competence to deal with the question of the Territory,
that the people have no right to decide its own future
in an open and democratic manner and that his Government refuses to pledge its respect for the territorial
integrity of Namibia. Its rejection of even the moderate demands presented by the nine countries of the
European Economic Community
in their dtfmarche
demonstrates
again South Africa’s contempt
for
international opinion. While we had hoped that South
Africa might at last be prepared to moderate its position with regard to Namibia,
unfortunatefy we still
find in these statements the unahoyed arrogance and
self-righteousness
that has previously characterized
its position.
87. In response to South Africa’s position,
the
proposal for the Security Council to call for the holding
of elections in Namibia under United Nations supervision, to permit the people to freely determine its
own future, discussed in detail by the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia in his statement [/88&h meeting], has much to recommend it, in
the view of my delegation.
88. Such elections would have the great virtue of
ensuring that peaceful change could take place in the
Territory, for in the face of continuing South African
oppression it cannot be expected that those seeking
the liberation of Namibia will indefinitely
continue
to pursue their policy by moderate means. In this
light, Indonesia supports the plan for free elections
as set forth by the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia.
The representatives
of the
Government of South Africa have frequently asserted
that the freedom fighters of SWAP0 do not enjoy the
support of the majority of Namibians and that they
are ‘attempting to win by coercion what they cannot
obtain from the ballot box. If they truly believe that
this is the case, they should have no objection to per-

mittinn fair, free and open elections. to be held. MY
delegation is confident that free and open elections,
held under United Nations auspices, under conditions
which allow for the effective organization
and full
participation
of all parties, will permit an accurate
gauge of public opinion.
89. In the event of this proposal’s meeting with South
African intransigence,
the Security Council would
have to consider additional
measures, consistent
with the Charter, to secure compliance with the provisions of resolution 366 (1974). Whatever course of
action the Security Council and the international
community as a whole may choose to take, however,
my deiegation is fully in agreement with the representative of SWAP0 who stated yesterday that “the
liberation of Namibia can be brought about only by
the Namibians themselves” [ibid., paru. 481.
90. In conclusion,
my delegation would like once
again to urge that the Council take concrete and effective measures which will convince the Government
of South Africa of the futility of its current policies
in Namibia. By doing so, the Security Council will not
only be making a significant contribution to the struggle
of the Namibian people for its freedom, but also to
peace and security in the world as a whole.
91. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. Accordingly,
I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
92. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): I did not think
the speakers who preceded me would be so laconic.
It seems they are tired of repeating the same thing
with regard to this question of granting independence
to Namibia, which is, indeed, overdue.
93. But I felt that, having considered this question
since we began to talk in the United Nations about
decolonization,
it was my duty not only to repeat what
I have said time and again whenever I took the floor,
whether here or in the General Assembly, but also
perhaps to ginger up Members of the United Nations,
especially those who could still wield influence over
South Africa, to do something radical lest we go in
circles and get dizzy and achieve nothing.‘Then
it
becomes very evident th.at .we should not be able to
spare some nations from adverse criticism, which we
should avoid-but,
after all, our patience has been
tried on this subject year in and year out.
94. I remember that in the mid-1960s we had a special
session of the General Assembly about this question
of South West Africa, as it was called then, before
it was christened Namibia.
I think there was some
willingness at that time on the part of the Member
States that supported South Africa to do something
more or less radical to contribute towards the emancipation of that Mandated Territory-at
least it appeared to us to be so-but later we found that there

io,

be under the yoke of the foreigner? They are indigenous
people. The South Africans came from Europe
originally. The others are the people of the land, the
indigenous people.

were considerations
that militated against the liberation of the Mandated Territory.
Needless to say,
there was no Mandated Territory except South West
Africa that had not been liberated. We are all proud
that even British Crown Colonies and other colonies,
such as the French and lately the Portuguese colonies,
ail have been liberated, have gained their freedom.
What is wrong with Namibia?
Do representatives
remember how jubilant we were when Australia and
New Zealand advised us of completing their mission
in Papua New Guinea and the other Territories which
were entrusted to their care in the Pacific? I do not
think the people of South West Africa are subhuman.
They should have gained their freedom a long time
ago.

98. Let us take up the strategic factor. It has become
very evident that some Powers are trying to gain not
only favour but power in the continent of Africa
-major
Powers, They know themselves who they are.
Angola has been mentioned 10 or 20 times. Why should
the people of Namibia pay for the conflicting interests
of the major Powers? Have the major Powers not
learnt a lesson from what happened in what was known
as the Congo? It seems only yesterday that Lumumba
was shot. I am not going to mention what happened
there, as I have said, lest I exacerbate the whole issue.
But what happened finally? Those Powers that had
interests there had to get out of the Congo, but 1 believe
that many of them are trading with the Congo.

95. Needless to say, many of us, including myself,
rebelled against Mandates in the early 1920s. I was
a youth, but we knew that the Mandates were colonies
in disguise, and I remember that we were told by the
High Commissioners
of those Mandated Territories
that in time we would gain our independence in those
Territories.
I am talking specifically about the Mandated Territories
of the countries of the Turkish
Crescent, like Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Palestine.
And had it not been for the Second World War it is
very likely that many Mandated Territories
would
still be under colonial rule. Do we have to have a third
world war to have Namibia liberated? It means there
is a lack of will-not
only a lack of political will, a
lack of goodwill.
Let us be frank with one another.
I do not want to exacerbate matters in the Council
by naming names or mentioning
why certain States
Members of the Organization
are acting in an arbitrary manner, rationalizing
their stand, saying that
they are doing one thing and surreptitiously
still supporting South Africa in so far as delaying the liberation of Namibia is concerned.

99. Why should not South Africa be told, “All right,
you can have interests in Namibia, but the Namibians
do not want you to be their lords. They should provide
their rulers from their own people.” Therefore, have
not those major Powers that are pulling the strings
-and not so surreptitiously;
it is in the newspapers
day-in and day-out; we constantly read about Angola;
this is a test case-learned
anything from what happened in the Congo? We lost one of our SecretariesGeneral-may
God rest his soul in peace-none
other
than Mr. Hammarskjiild,
who was going to the Congo
to try to see what could be done.
100. And their economic
interests have not diminished. I think they served their interests by pulling
out, because war and the preparation
for war and
conflict cost a lot of money. If it is only a colonialism
for the sake of a clique or a circle of people in the
erstwhile metropolitan
countries, then this is unjust.
Even the people of empires were as much the victims
are were the- colonized. They were serving the interests of cliques in those metropolitan
Powers.

96. What is the alternative, if we do not hit the nail
on the head, if we do not call a spade a spade? Let
us be frank. The deterrents are three in number at
least. They are economic, they are strategic and they
are racial. Let us handle each factor separately.

101. Let us reason here. The people in the capitals
of the major Powers should know that economically
speaking it does not pay to lord it over others, because
the balance sheet will show a deficit in the long run,
as was evident before 1914 and after 1914.

97. Let us take the economic factor. I have heard
from many sources that Namibia is very rich in natural
resources. Time and again I have been told that,
although it looks deserted, it contains many minerals.
Well and good. Why not let the Republic of South
Africa have a stake in the wealth? I do not think the
indigenous
population
would would want South
African mining engineers and merchants to be out of
the picture. They are clamouring for their freedom.
1 venture to say that they would welcome co-operating
economically
with South Africa and the friends of
South Africa. By “Friends” I mean those who support
South Africa and have interests in South Africa. This
economic question can be solved. Why does South
Africa, from.the strictly economic point of view, balk
at liberating the people who have been clamouring for
their independence?
Is half a century not enough to

102. The strategic consideration
strikes us in the
eye. So let Baroody talk; let every one of us here talk.
Is that a sane approach ‘to international
affairs? Had
it not been for the deterrent of fear I think we would
have had a third world war. Therefore, thank God for
fear. But remember that fear may cause some of the
leaders to become tense, and if the leaders become
thense and are under pressure, they might miscalculate. The danger is not altogether eliminated.
That
is why we are having what the Secretary-General
exhorted us to have, that is, an rrd hoc Committee on
Disarmament.
It is meeting to see how we can avoid
a future conflict that may engulf us all.
11

103. Then we come to the racial question. Now it
is not apartheid like the upnrth~id in the Republic of
South Africa proper. But all the same the white settlers
there seem to be paramount--economically
para, mount--economically
paramount and also politically
paramount. They want to run the show. I suspect that
in conniving with South Africa, those white settlers in
Namibia want to gain time to make sure that if sooner
or later the rule in Namibia should be transferred, it
should be transferred to stooges, the stooges of South
Africa. They may be black in colour, but they will still
be stooges. We had stooges in my part of the world
who served the interests of the Mandatory Powers.
They were at their beck and call, whether in Palestine,
Syria, Iraq or Lebanon, when those Mandates were
established in the early 1920s.

--I was born an Ottoman-handed
the authorities 1,000
Turkish gold sovereigns and received paper money for
it. I was a youth at the time. Those Ottoman lire became worthless because Turkey lost the war with
Germany. Every ,100 or 120 became worth one. That
has been happening in stages. I was in France during
the 1920s. One hundred francs became one franc.
Then, again, since the days of the illustrious General
de Gaulle-may
God rest his soul in peace-100 francs
have again become one franc, but I do not know what
the future holds.
106. From a practical point of view, those Member
States whose representatives are seated here, why do
they not tell their representatives that they will become bankrupt, or rather not they, because politicians
can always manage to have posts, but the people will
become bankrupt. I include myself. I have a little
saved, but I find out that I still have to work now that
I am 70 because the savings are eroding. It is nothing
to laugh at. You are still young, but wait: you will
either have to work in order to eat or, ‘if you do not
work, you will go on relief and you will “half eat”.

104. But all those policies will backfire. How? Why?
We have seen how and we have seen why. And should
the Council persist in paying lip service to the liberation of people, expatiating on the necessity of the
Namibians getting free as soon as possible-and
who
is going to define the term “as soon as possible”the Namibians would not believe them. This question
of step-by-step progress that the Middle East has been
promised time and again. There should be step-by-step
progress for solving the question. Good Lord, step-bystep-28 years. If in 28 years you have taken two
steps, what steps have been taken with respect to the
question of Namibia in about 50 years now? We shall
not be around to see the results. Maybe even our
grandchildren
would not be around. Step-by-step.
Between this table and the door there are 20 steps
and each step takes 28 years. If we multiply 20 by 30
we arrive at the figure of 600 years. Whom are we
fooling here?-not
we, but those who say, “Well,
give the South Africans time”.

107. What will jolt them into consciousness, those
erstwhile colonial Powers which are supporting South
Africa, and make them liberate the Namibians? How
can white settlers live under the indigenous Govemment of Namibia? Well, South Africa is across the
border; let them move to South Africa-and
then we
will handle the question of apartheid, because I do not
want to confuse the issues.
108. I have told my brothers from Africa time and
again not to mix the issue of apartheid with that of the
liberation of Namibia. We will handle each question
separately. The white settlers are conniving with South
Africa to help them to remain there because they
cannot live under the rule of Africans. All right, I will
talk to our African brothers to compensate them. Let
them go across the border and live in upurth~id until
when we handle that question of upurtheid when we
come to it; and we will come to it time and again.
No white man can have his way unless he adjusts to
the situation in South Africa. I feel sorry for the white
men. They have no future if they persist in their obdurate stand. And I will not be surprised if one day so
as to exist they will have to put charcoal on their
faces-unless
they change their attitude and then they
will be accepted like every other human being.

105. I spoke to Mr. Muller in the mid-1960s. Mr. Muller is the Foreign Minister of South Africa. I said,
“You have no place there unless you adjust yourselves
to the people of Africa”. I think the people of Africa
have been very patient. I am not for violence, but
I would not be surprised if one day they become
militant,
and what would prevent all our African
brothers from marching not only on Namibia but on
South Africa? What will the South Africans do? Kill
them from planes? The white man will kill them from
the skies? I think that the conscience of the white
people of Europe has awakened. They would lynch
those who would kill the people of Africa from planes.
That is finished. That is why the intelligence agencies
are so active these days. The young men do not want
to go and kill others and get killed. What for? So that
they may enrich the cliques in their own countries?
What for? Prestige? What kind of prestige? Victory?
What empty victory. The victors in two world wars
were economically defeated. They are bankrupt now.
Look at their currency. It is eroding. I have seen it
year-in and year-out. This applies whether it is dollar,
or sterling. In fairness I must say that I remember
my father who made a gesture, as an Ottoman citizen

109. I want to take issue with my brothers from
Africa. Every time this question of Namibia comes
under consideration
they have a voluminous
resolution. The last one had six or seven sections. They
incorporate everything. I want to tell them in public
-because
I do not work behind the scenes-to concentrate on the liberation of the people of Namibia,
and let us set aside the racial question for the time
being. We will handle it in due time when we come
to apartheid in the Republic of South Africa. And,
no doubt, we will consider the question of Rhodesia,
12

where I think the black population is 4 million and
the white population is 250,000 or so. We have ample
time.
110. I want to conclude by reading the fourth or fifth
draft resolution submitted by me during the last 10
years. I think this is the last one I did and then I gave
up. But I was worked up today. They are still working
on working papers. I went to the documents counter
and asked for a resolution and was told that there was
nothing as yet. I want to read this draft resolution
before I conclude. I do not want to take credit for it,
but it was not hindsight; I knew what I was doing.
111. Do you remember
day-25 October 1974

115. I can never forget what Gandhi in my youth said
when the British told him: “But the Indians will misgovern themselves”.
He retorted: “It is our privilege
to misgovern ourselves”. You so-called great Powers
-so-called
“great” because only the Creator of the
universe is great-beware
that even your petty interests will dissolve like a pinch of salt in a kettle of
boiling water. Beware. Leave the Africans alone.

that? It seems only yester-

[The speaker read out the text of draft resolution
S/l 1547.1
That was a fourth or fifth concrete
part in the form of a draft resolution.

attempt

States that were. free. Within 53 years I saw with my
own eyes-and
I shall die in peace for having seen it
with my own eyes-20 Arab States free and Members
of the United Nations. What is the Republic of South
Africa? Within. JO years I saw 20 Arab States free,
and now these people are manipulating
Namibia and
getting mischievous with the Angolans. Do not: these
Angolans-whether
leftists, rightists or what have
you-have
mothers, fathers, wives and children?
Some children are being killed. And for what? For
strategic gains? Those of you who wield power, leave
Africa to the Africans.

on my

116. As for you South Africans-I
saw this gentleman
here from South Africa-tell
your Government.
You
are young. Tell the old fogeys of your generation, as
I tell the old fogeys of my generation, that they are
finished. The future is for the indigenous people of
Namibia, and the light is already on the horizon, provided the members do not repeat themselves and
become peddlers of words whether in the General
Assembly or in the Security Council.

112. “Baroody,
please, please, we have something
better” -since
1965. Where is it? Lip service and fat
resolutions, injected with all the epithets that could
be used against South Africa. I can curse too, but
it is not the better part of wisdom to call them names.
To heck with them. That is the least I can say. As
we say in Arabic, we do not want to quarrel with the
guard of the vineyard, we want to eat grapes. Do not
pick a quarrel with the guard. It is still the guard-the
guardian-whether
we like it or not; and by whom is
it supported? You know by whom. They are nice
people representing
them here, diplomats,
a good
bunch. The leaders behind them send them instructions: “Do this, do not do that”. But Baroody tells
the truth.

117. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I have asked
to be allowed to speak in order to exercise the right
of reply. I have carefully read through the statement
made by the representative of China, and the contents
of that statement confirm what I stated. Most of his
statement dealt with the question of Angola.

113. Now I do not want to reap any benefit or any
glory. I can give this text to, anyone who wishes to
co-sponsor it-unless,
of course, he wants to put in
“apartheid”,
“to hell with South Africa” and “they
should have done this and that”. They will not do
anything as long as they still have behind them people
and count “es wielding world power. Let us face the
fact. Shall rI name them? No, one can read about them
in the newspapers, so why name them? And they tell
us: “As long as the caravan is marching, let the dogs
bark”. Of course, it is figuratively that the dogs bark
here in the United Nations-and
the caravan is
marching. But here is a serious warning: the caravan
will get thirsty in the sands of Africa; it will end up
crippled; and if the dogs get hungry, they will feed on
that caravan and there will no longer be a caravan to
march on. And I do not say that with pleasure, but
with sadness. Of course, all that is figuratively
speaking, but there will be no future forthe European
or others in the whole continent of Africa. if they
persist. I give you fair warning.

118. Furthermore,
he mentioned it with his usual
discourtesy and he slandered the Soviet Union as one
of the great. Powers which supposedly intervened’ in
the affairs of Angola. His slanderous statement reminded us of yesterday’s slanderous anti-Soviet statement made by the’ racist representative
of South
Africa, and the ctear coincidence of the spirit and idea
was quite evident. The slanderous attack of the
Chinese representative against the Soviet Union and
the Soviet Union’s selfless assistance to the peoples of
Africa, in particular to the people of Angola and its
People’s Republic of Angola, whtch is struggling for
freedom and independence, was srmply an atteMpt to
divert the attention of the Council from the problem
of liberating Namibia, which is so important in Africa.
119. Putting themselves forward as fighters for the
welfare of oppressed peoples, Peking and its United
Nations representative
here are in fact joining with
the oppressors. This treacherous policy of the Peking
leaders is all the more clear in their attitude towards
the people of Angola. While stating their support for

114. When I was seventeen I said: long live Arab
,union. It was a dream. There were only two Arab
13

the struggle of the peoples for independence
and
freedom from colonial imperialist
forces, Peking is
actually working hand in hand with the South African
racists, is helping them in their armed battle of intervention in Angola, helping the racists and their international mercenary killers against the People’s Republic of Angola. The racist mercenaries, encouraged by
imperialism,
are trying to strangle this young republic.
The Peking leaders are promoting the strengthening of
the South African intervention
in Namibia. In other
words, their policy is a direct betrayal of the interests
of the African peoples, who are the victims of this
imperialist-racist
aggression. They are directly conspiring militarily
with the imperialists
and with the
South African racists. They are giving military and
other assistance to African racists and those proimperialist forces which are fighting to annihilate the
new young African State-the
People’s Republic of
Angola-and
this to favour the interests of world
imperialism,
neo-colonialism
and South African
racism.

123. These are the facts, and however the Chinese.
representative uses tricks he cannot hide these facts
and cannot, by his usual anti-Soviet attacks, camouflage them. As regard the true position of the Soviet
Union concerning Angola, it is clearly and precisely
set forth in the letter of 26 January of this year from
the representative of the Soviet Union to the SecretaryGeneral. The Soviet representative Comrade Kharlamov recalled this letter in his reply yesterday [188/st
mreting]
to the anti-Soviet
statement made by the
South African representative, and I would be grateful
to members of the Security Council if they would
study the document, which reads, infer ah:
“The Soviet Union, in keeping with its fundamental political position, has extended and continues to extend moral and material support to the
national liberation struggle of peoples for freedom
and independence,
which is fully in keeping with
the decisions both of the United Nations and of the
Organization of African Unity with regard to decolonization. This fully applies to the People’s Republic
of Angola, which is, at the present time, repelling
the aggression of racist and imperialist
forces.”
[See S/11947.]

120. The United Nations recalls quite well that
China has directly conspired with South Africa, and
this for a long time. At the twenty-seventh session
of the General Assembly China voted, together with
the South African racist regime and the Portuguese
Fascists of that time, against a draft resolution calling
for the non-use of force in international
relations and
the prohibition
for all time of the nuclear weapon, a
resolution which was adopted by an overwhelming
majority.’
At that time this “troika”
was justly called
the “triple unholy alliance.”
China was one of that
troika favouring the use of force in international relations, and South Africa is now utilizing this. The
present discussion in the Council, and the similar antiSoviet attacks of the representative of China and the
representative of South Africa have shown that this
alliance still exists and is even strengthening
itself.
Both the South African racist and the Chinese Maoist
are using crude anti-Soviet slanders and lies in order
to divert the Council from its discussion of the liberation of Namibia, which is such a timely matter.

Peking sympathizes with and is assisting those forces.
China is trying to drag in the United Nations in order
to give assistance to these forces.
124. The other day, at a meeting of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Chinese
representative officially proposed that under the guise
of humanitarian
assistance, UNDP assistance, financial aid, should be given to both of the pro-racist and
pro-imperialist
groups in Angola which are waging an
armed conflict in Angola against the patriotic forces in
the country, led by MPLA [Movimento
Pop&r
de
Libertqiio
de Angola], that is, against the people and
Government of the People’s Republic of Angola. The
fact that China is helping these groups we know from
an offtcial statement made by the head of the Chinese
delegation during the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly.

121. I will quote an extract from the American
magazine Ne~rslc~eeli of 22 December 1975, page 19.
It states here that recently South African scientists
representing the “Brain Trust” of the Government of
John Vorster openly called for establishing relations
and the need for relations between China and South
Africa. South Africa and China says the article, “support the same forces in the civil war in Angola.”

125. We reiect and brush aside with contempt the
infamous and disgraceful inventions of Mr. Moynihan,
the United States representative,
Mr. Lai Ya-li, the
Chinese representative,
and Mr. Botha, the South
African racist. This “troika”
is circulating
slander
against the Soviet Union to the effect that it supposedly intends to “colonize Africa” and set up its
own domination over the African peoples. It is hard
in our day to conceive of a more monstrous invention.
The Soviet Union does not seek any economic, military, strategic or other kind of advantage in Angola.
Our only concern is to assist the People’s Republic
of Angola to defend its freedom and independence.
We, the Soviet peoples, are proud to give assistance
and support to the Angolan patriots in their heroic
struggle for national freedom and independence.
In
the past we have assisted Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau

122. And this is a report from a well-informed
magazine. Even though it may appear hard to believe,
it says, that the Chinese wanted to discredit their
image in the “third world” by an open alliance with
racist South Africa, Peking can easily co-operate
behind the scenes. This is the advice of an American
magazine to the Chinese. And they are following this
advice.
14

and many other African countries. Have they really
become Soviet colonies? We have only to raise this
question to see and to understand the full depth and
stupidity of the inventions of these three diplomats
with regard to the so-called Soviet colonization
of
Africa. People in the United Nations are laughing at
such inventions and fabrications. Some say: “It would
be better if Moynihan, Lai Ya-li and Botha told these
fairy tales to little children or to big fools. Perhaps
they would believe them”. But I doubt that even they
would believe such fabrications and such fairy tales
as are circulated by this “troika”
of slanderers.
126. The Soviet Union categorically
condemns the
aggression of the South African racists against the
People% Republic of Angola and, together with most
of the African countries, who have recognized that
country, we are firmly in favour of immediate
and
unconditional
withdrawal from Angola of the armed
forces of the racist regime and of the detachments of
Fascist mercenaries,
those international
murderers
who are ready to kill their own fathers if you just
give them a little more money for it.
127. I emphasized that the new young sovereign
State in Africa which was born in the pangs of an
armed struggle for its freedom and national independence has been recognized by most of the African
countries, but who has recognized the groups which
are fighting against it? Who has established relations
with those groups? This is the clearest evidence that
these groups do not represent the Angolan people.
Those who are giving them assistance, or trying to
give them assistance, are placing themselves in a position that is not only awkward but also shameful. The
Angolan people should be given normal conditions
so that it can, independently
and without any outside
intervention,
determine the ways and means of its
own development in conditions of peace, freedom and
independence.
128. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): Every part of the statement made by the Chinese
representative just now is closely related to the question of Namibia which we are now considering. Upon
hearing the mention of the word Angola by the Chinese representative,
Mr. Maiik rudely interrupted the
Chinese representative. This reminds us of a Chinese
saying: “He who does not perform evil deeds does not
fear the knock on the door at night.” The reason why
Mr. Malik is so afraid of the mention of Angola lies in
his guilty conscience because of Soviet expansion
there.

customary practice of a thief crying “Stop thief!” as
well as a clumsy trick to divert attention from the
Soviet Union’s own acts of aggression. We should like
to put the following questions to Mr. Malik: Who
opposes the OAU resolution and supports one of the
three Angolan organizations
against the other two?
Who undermined
the joint transitional
government
of the three Angolan organizations and violated their
agreement of unity and cease-fire reached on five and
eight occasions respectively? Who has sent military
personnel, shipped in large quantities of sophisticated
weapons and single-handedly
provoked the civil war
causing killings among the Angolan people? Who has
taken advantage of the Angolan question to sow
discord and create dissension among the African
countries and undermined African unity? The leaders
of quite a number of African countries as well as
African just public opinion have made unequivocal
replies to these questions. They pointed out penetratingly that the -root cause of the civil war which
divides Angola is Soviet intervention
and that, owing
to its intervention
in Angola, the Soviet Union has
become a monger of death, discord and chaos. The
facts have turned out to be so. Soviet social-imperialism is, the arch-criminal
which has singlehandedly
stirred up the civil war in Angola and undermined
African unity.
130. It must be pointed out that the so-called “Soviet
support for the liberation movement”
chanted by the
Soviet Union is in essence the pseudonym for “neocolonialism”.
Its tactics and the tricks of the colonialists are entirely one and the same thing. One of
their tactics is to undermine unity and to divide and
rule. It undermined the unity among the three Angolan
liberation organizations
and provoked the civil war.
Furthermore,
it is attempting to undermine the unity
of OAU. Another trick is to gain profit from instigating
the Angolan people to fight among themselves by
offering money and guns and sending foreign troops
to fight in the forefront. This is the latest display of
the ugly neo-colonialist
behaviour of Soviet socialimperialism.

131. The crimes committed
by Soviet social-imperialism in Angola cannot in any way be denied. Its
criminal
activities have opened people’s eyes and
enabled more and more people to see clarly the true
features of Soviet social-imperialism,
to see how
despicable
this super-Power
is-this
super-Power
which is always chanting the tune of “supporting
the
national liberation movement”-to
see.how low it has
sunk in tracing the footsteps of the old Czar, in carrying
129. Mr. Malik has slanderously accused China of
on aggression and expansion, and to see what wild
standing together with South African racists and
ambition it has in contending for world hegemony.
imperialist
forces to interfere in Angolan internal
Though it may behave arrogantly for a while, in the
affairs, and has distorted and slandered China’s foreign
final analysis it is merely lifting a rock to drop it on
policy. This is utterly futile. China’s foreign policy
its own feet and will end up in ignominious failure.
is open and above-board; so is China’s position with
\
regard to the South African racist regime. It can in
132. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the repreno way be vilified by Mr. Malik’s fabrications and
sentative of the Soviet Union to exercise his right of
slanders. The statement of Mr. Malik is a typical
reply I must say that, while I understand that a’s Presii
i
15

dent of the Council I cannot confine the limits of
this discussion, I should like to launch a very solemn
appeal, as the representative of m’ Government and
as the representative of an African S1 ate, the UNITED
REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, thatiit is the desire of
the African States in the Council .debate to discuss
the question of Namibia. Throughout the discussion
it is our hope-and we appeal to all the members of
the Council-that members will as far as possible
.confine their remarks to the discussion of Namibia.
If I may quote the most eloquent expression used
yesterday by my brother from SWAPO, he said that
we do not want to have this debate “hijacked” from
the discussion of Namibia into a discussion on Angola.
Therefore, I make this appeal to all the members of
the Council that we should confine the discussion to
the question of Namibia. And now, as PRESIDENT,
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union.

tional liberation, not to make those peoples and countries, colonies of the Soviet Union, but to help them
to become free, independent and sovereign. That can
be confirmed by everyone who is a decent, objective
politician and diplomat. It can be denied and distorted
only by slanderers and liars. But if it has already come
to that, I feel it necessary to point out that we even
helped China with armaments in its just struggle for
national independence and freedom against the proimperialist forces in China, but China certainly did
not become a Soviet colony as a result. On the contrary, China has now, by its ingratitude, declared
itself as “enemy number one” of the Soviet Union.
That is also a Mstorical fact. That is all that I wish
to say.
138. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): In our reply, the Chinese delegation put forward
a number of facts in connexion with the Soviet Union’s
frenzied intervention in Angola, and posed a number
of questions to Mr. Malik. However, Mr. Malik dared
not reply to the questions put by the Chinese delegation at all, and instead resorted once again to slanders
and calumnies. This has served precisely to demonstrate Mr. Malik’s political. degradation ‘and his guilty
thief s conscience.
i39. The PRESIDENT: Before I adjourn the meeting,
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of
Mali containing a request that he be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion on the item on.
the Council’s agenda. AccordingIy, if there is no
objection, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
in conformity with the usual practice and with the
relevant provisions of the Charter, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion withdut
the right to vote.

133. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpret~!icm
from Russian): Mr. President,
I fully agree with you. But I want only to point out
that in this case we are not talking about discussing
the question of Namibia. We finished that at today’s
meeting, since there are no more speakers. We are
talking about my reply to the provocative, slanderous
intervention made by the Chinese delegation against
the Soviet Union. I have nothing to add to what I
already stated in my first reply, but I want to stress,
in connexion with the regular tirade of demagoguery,
hatred and anti-Soviet attitude of the Chinese representative, that the one who is guilty is the one who
co-operates with the Fascists and not the one who
sincerely and whole-heartedly assists the freedom
fighters and those who are fighting for national independence, the patriots of the Angolan people, and
its legitimate Government.
134. The Chinese representative, as usual, raises
questions. There is a Russian proverb that says that
“one strange person can raise so many questions that
100wise men would be unable to answer them”. I am
not compelled to reply to the Chinese representative,
but I shall meet him halfway.

it was so decided.

140. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative
of Mali to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when he addresses the Council.

135. In answer to his first question, I shall say that
we are together with most of the African countries
on the Angolan question. China is acting together with
the racists and the imperialists and the CIA hirelings
on the Angolan question. That is known to the entire
world now.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cisse’ (Mali)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
The mreting

136. To his second: we are giving aid and assistance
to the lawful Government of Angola upon that Government’s request.

rose at 6.30 p.m.
NOlCS

* See General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967.

z Legal Conseqrrences
for States of the Continued
Presence
of
South
Africa
in Namibia
(Soath
West Africa)
notwithstanding
Security
Council
Resolution
276 (l970),
Advisory
Opinion.
I.C.J.
Reports
1971,
16.

137. To his third: we have supported the active idea
of creating a national Government of Angola, but
who undermined that idea? It was not the Soviet Union.
That was the infamous and slanderous assertion of
you, Sir, from China. It was undermined by those who
are in the pay of foreign espionage. We have assisted
many countries and peoples in their struggle for na-

p.

J See General Assembly resolution 3 111 (XVIII).
4 See Oficial
Records
of the General
Assembly,
Thirtieth
Session, Supplement
No. 23, chap. X. para. 13.
s Ibid.. Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement
No. 24A, par&-t3.
c Ibid., para. 84.

7 See General Assembly resolution 2936 (XXVII).

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIT23

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

HOjIYVHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

EIBAAHHR

OPPAHHqAWlH

PUBLICACIONES

OE%EAMHEHHMX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIIHH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00400

83.60801-May

1984-2,200
