United Nations

A/RES/59/194

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.2)]

59/194. Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/190 of 22 December 2003 and Commission on
Human Rights resolution 2004/53 of 20 April 2004, 1
Recalling also its resolution 40/144 of 13 December 1985, by which it adopted
the Declaration on the Human Rights of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the
Country in which They Live,
Reaffirming that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 proclaims that
all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any
kind, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Considering that every State party to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights 3 must ensure to all individuals within its territory and subject to its
jurisdiction the rights recognized in the Covenant,
Bearing in mind that every State party to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights3 has undertaken to guarantee the exercise of
all rights enunciated in that Covenant without discrimination of any kind, including,
in particular, on the basis of national origin,
Reaffirming the provisions concerning migrants adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights, 4 the International Conference on Population and

_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Resolution 217 A (III).
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

04-48790

A/RES/59/194

Development, 5 the World Summit for Social Development 6 and the Fourth World
Conference on Women, 7
Reaffirming also the provisions on the human rights of migrants contained in
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on
8 September 2001, 8 and expressing its satisfaction at the important recommendations
made for the development of international and national strategies for the protection
of migrants and for the design of migration policies that fully respect the human
rights of migrants,
Welcoming the renewed commitment made in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration 9 to take measures to ensure respect for and protection of the human
rights of migrants, migrant workers and their families, to eliminate the increasing
acts of racism and xenophobia in many societies and to promote greater harmony
and tolerance in all societies,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of migrants, 10 especially the
work she has undertaken on the human rights of migrants, and taking note of the
conclusions and recommendations contained therein,
Taking note of advisory opinion OC-16/99, issued by the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights on 1 October 1999, on The Right to Information on Consular
Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due Process of Law,
Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
31 March 2004 in the case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals, 11 and
recalling the obligations of States reaffirmed therein,
Taking note further of advisory opinion OC-18/03, issued by the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights on 17 September 2003, on The Juridical
Condition and Rights of Undocumented Migrants,
Aware of the increasing number of migrants worldwide, and bearing in mind
the situation of vulnerability in which migrants and their families frequently find
themselves, owing, inter alia, to their absence from their States of origin and to the
difficulties they encounter because of differences of language, custom and culture,
as well as the economic and social difficulties and obstacles to the return to their
States of origin of migrants who are non-documented or in an irregular situation,
Recognizing the positive contributions that migrants frequently make,
including through their eventual integration into their host society, and the efforts
that some host countries undertake to integrate migrants and their families,

_______________
5

See Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6
See Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
7
See Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
8
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
9
See resolution 55/2.
10
E/CN.4/2004/76 and Add.1–4.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/59/4), chap. V,
sect. A.23.

2

A/RES/59/194

Underlining the importance of the creation of conditions that foster greater
harmony, tolerance and respect between migrants and the rest of society in the
States in which they reside in order to eliminate manifestations of racism and
xenophobia against migrants,
Encouraged by the increasing interest of the international community in the
effective and full protection of the human rights of all migrants, and underlining the
need to make further efforts to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants,
Bearing in mind the need for a focused and consistent approach towards
migrants as a specific vulnerable group, in particular migrant women and children,
Resolved to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
all migrants,
1.
Strongly condemns the manifestations and acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, and urges States to apply the existing laws when
xenophobic or intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur,
in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit xenophobic and racist acts;
Also strongly condemns all forms of racial discrimination and
2.
xenophobia related to access to employment, vocational training, housing,
schooling, health services and social services, as well as services intended for use
by the public, and welcomes the active role played by governmental and
non-governmental organizations in combating racism and xenophobia and in
assisting individual victims of racist acts, including migrant victims;
Requests all Member States, in conformity with their respective
3.
constitutional systems, effectively to promote and protect the human rights of all
migrants, in conformity with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights2 and the
international instruments to which they are party, which may include the
International Covenants on Human Rights,3 the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 12 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 13 the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, 14 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 15 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 16 and
other relevant international human rights instruments;
4.
Welcomes the increasing number of signatures and ratifications or
accessions to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, and calls upon States that have
not done so to consider urgently signing and ratifying or acceding to the
Convention;
Also welcomes the entry into force of the United Nations Convention
5.
against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and

_______________
12

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
14
Resolution 45/158, annex.
15
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
16
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
13

3

A/RES/59/194

Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 17 and calls
upon States that have not done so to consider urgently signing and ratifying or
acceding to them;
Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect
6.
for and observance of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963, 18 in
particular with regard to the right of all foreign nationals to communicate with a
consular official of the sending State in the case of arrest, imprisonment, custody or
detention, and the obligation of the receiving State to inform without delay the
foreign national of his or her rights under the Convention;
Calls upon States to promote and protect fully the human rights of
7.
migrants, as set out in the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,8 through,
inter alia, the adoption of national plans of action as recommended by the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance;
Also calls upon all States to consider reviewing and, where necessary,
8.
revising immigration policies with a view to eliminating all discriminatory practices
against migrants and their families, and to provide specialized training for
government policy-making, law enforcement, migration and other concerned
officials, including in cooperation with non-governmental organizations and civil
society, thus underlining the importance of effective action to create conditions that
foster greater harmony and tolerance within societies;
Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that
9.
allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious and tolerant environment, and encourages
States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
10. Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable
international legal instruments to which they are party, firmly to prosecute
violations of labour law with regard to the conditions of work of migrant workers,
including those related to, inter alia, their remuneration and the conditions of health
and safety at work;
11. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the safe,
unrestricted and expeditious transfer of earnings, assets and pensions of migrants to
their country of origin or to any other countries, in conformity with applicable
legislation, and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that
may impede such transfers;
12. Urges all States to adopt effective measures to put an end to the arbitrary
arrest and detention of migrants and to take action to prevent and punish any form
of illegal deprivation of liberty of migrants by individuals or groups;
13. Calls upon States to observe national legislation and applicable
international legal instruments to which they are party when enacting national
security measures in order to respect the human rights of migrants;

_______________
17
18

4

Resolution 55/25, annexes I–III.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

A/RES/59/194

14. Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the
human rights of migrants while in transit, including in ports and airports and at
borders and migration checkpoints, to train public officials who work in those
facilities and in border areas to treat migrants and their families respectfully and in
accordance with the law, and to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, any
act of violation of the human rights of migrants and their families, such as arbitrary
detention, torture and violations of the right to life, including extrajudicial
executions, during their transit from their country of origin to the country of
destination and vice versa, including their transit through national borders;
15. Encourages Member States that have not yet done so to enact domestic
legislation and to take further effective measures to combat international trafficking
in and smuggling of migrants, recognizing that these crimes may endanger the lives
of migrants or subject them to harm, servitude or exploitation, which may include
debt bondage, slavery, sexual exploitation or forced labour, and also encourages
Member States to strengthen international cooperation to combat such trafficking
and smuggling;
16. Encourages States, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
to undertake information campaigns aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations
and rights in the event of migration so as to enable everyone, in particular women,
to make informed decisions and to prevent them from becoming victims of
trafficking and utilizing dangerous means of access that put their lives and physical
integrity at risk;
17. Calls upon States to facilitate family reunification in an expeditious and
effective manner, with due regard to applicable laws, as such reunification has a
positive effect on the integration of migrants;
18. Calls upon all States to protect and promote all human rights of migrant
children, in particular unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the best
interests of the children are a primary consideration, underlines the importance of
reuniting them with their parents, when possible, and encourages the relevant
United Nations bodies, within the framework of their respective mandates, to pay
special attention to the conditions of migrant children in all States and, where
necessary, to put forward recommendations for strengthening their protection;
19. Encourages States of origin to promote and protect the human rights of
those families of migrant workers which remain in the countries of origin, paying
particular attention to children and adolescents whose parents have emigrated, and
encourages international organizations to consider supporting States in this regard;
20. Encourages States to consider participating in international and regional
dialogues on migration that include countries of origin and destination, as well as
countries of transit, and invites them to consider negotiating bilateral and regional
agreements on migrant workers within the framework of applicable human rights
law and designing and implementing programmes with States of other regions to
protect the rights of migrants;
21. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
of the Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of migrants in the
performance of the tasks and duties mandated, to furnish all information requested
and to respond appropriately and expeditiously to her urgent appeals and to give
serious consideration to her requests to visit their countries, and welcomes in this
regard the standing invitations extended by some Member States to all special
procedures, including the Special Rapporteur;
5

A/RES/59/194

22. Encourages States to review and examine the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur10 and to consider
their re-implementation;
23. Invites States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to observe, on 18 December of each year, International Migrants Day, proclaimed by
the General Assembly, 19 through, inter alia, the dissemination of information on the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants and on their economic, social
and cultural contributions to their host and home countries, the sharing of
experience and the design of actions to ensure their protection, and to promote
greater harmony between migrants and the societies in which they live;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution under the
sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”, and
requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the Assembly at its sixtieth session an
interim report on the fulfilment of her mandate;
25. Decides to examine the question further at its sixtieth session under the
sub-item.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

_______________
19

6

See resolution 55/93.
