TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 16 SEPTEMBER 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 579) . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . I . . . . . . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...+.....

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 September 197 1 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10313) . . . . . . . . . . . * * . . * . . . . . . . . . . * * . , .. . . . . . . . . . :. . . .

qpv.1579

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of the Official Records

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sectcrity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 16 September 1971, at 11 a.m.
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/103 13);

President: Mr. Toru NAKAGAWA (Japan).
Present; The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

“(b) Reports of the Secretary-General.”

In sub-paragraph (b) the document numbers of the reports
could be enumerated or a foot-note could be added listing
those document numbers.
6. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to support the
proposal made by the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The letter from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan speaks about the action being taken by the Israeli
Government to change the status of East Jerusalem. The
reports from the Secretary-General which were called for
by this Council relate entirely to that particular question, It
would then seem quite appropriate that in listing this item
on our agenda today we should also list all those very
important and valuable reports which have been submitted
by the Secretary-General in accordance with the request of
the Security Council.

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/1579)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10313).
Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT: If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the agenda is adopted.

7. The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection, we shall
amend the agendaas proposed by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

2. I cdl on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

Theagendaasamendedwasadopted.

3. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I wish to speak on
a point of order. The Security Council has adopted three
resolutions on the question of Jerusalem: resolutions
252 (1968), 267 (1969) and 271 (1969). In each of those
three resolutions, the last operative paragraph reads:

The situationin the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 13 September1971 from the Permanent
Representativeof Jordan to the United Nations addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/10313);
(b) Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146,
S/9149 and Add.1, S/9537, S/10124 and Add.1 and 2)

“Requests the .Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution.”
4. Since the adoption of those resolutions and, in fact,
air-me the adoption by the General Assembly of its
resolutions of 4 and 14 July 1967, the Secretary-General
has submitted a total of eight reports, which are contained
in documents S/8052 of 10 July 1967, S/8146 of 12
September 1967, S/9149 of 11 April 1969, S/9149/Add.l
of 30 June 1969, S/9537 of 5 December 1969, S/10124 of
18 February 1971, S/lOl24/Add.l
of 20 April 1971 and
Sf 10124lAdd.2 of 20 August 1971.

8. The PRESIDENT: The representatives of Jordan, Egypt
and Israel have addressed letters to me [S/10314, S/1031 7,
S/10319] in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of this question before the Council,
without the right to vote.
9. In accordance with the provisional rules of procedure
and the usual practice of the Security Council, I propose, if
there is no objection, to invite those three representatives
to take places at the Security Council table to participate in
the Council’s discussion without the right to vote.

5. My proposal is to divide item 2 of the provisional
agenda into two sections as follows:
“The situation in the Middle East:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. Toukan [Jardan), Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat (Egypt) and Mr. Y. Teiconh
(Israel)took placesat the Security Council table.

“(a) Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
1

10. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
proceed with the consideration of the question before it.

new areas around Jerusalem and once again face the world
with another fait accompli and to add to an explosive
situation already replete with dangers.

11, The Permanent Representative of Jordan, in his letter
to me dated 13 September 1971 (S/10323/, asked for an
urgent meeting of the Security Council “to consider Israel’s
illegal measures in Jerusalem in defiance of Security
252 (1968),
267 (1969)
and
Council
resolutions
271 (1969).”

19. I regret to say that the passiveness of the Security
Council in implementing its resolutions only helped whet
Israel’s appetite for further annexation in its systematic and
determined policy of Judaizing the Holy City and its
environs.

12. In the light of the consultations I have had with the
members of the Council, and taking into account the
contents of the letter of the Permanent Representative of
Jordan, I should like to appeal to the members of the
Council, as well as to the representatives of non-members of
the Council who are going to participate in the discussion,
to confine their remarks to the matter raised in the
above-mentioned letter and to the reports of the Secretary
General which have been included in the agenda.

20. Israel is now contemplating new legislation to extend
the borders of Jerusalem to new Arab areas. It envisions the
annexation of 3 more Arab towns and 27 Arab villages,
over and above what were already unilaterally and illegally
annexed in June 1967. This new legislation was submitted
in the form of a bill to the Israeli Knesset on 22 February
1971. According to this bill:
“The area of Eretz-Israel in the supplement attached to
this act, is the area of Jerusalem, the capital of Israel, and
the law, jurisdiction and administration of the state of
Israel will apply to it.”

13. The first name on my list of speakers for this meeting
is that of the representative of Jordan. I now call on him.
14. Mr. TOUKAN (Jordan): Mr. President, on behalf of
my country and my delegation, I should like to express to
you and to the members of the Council our appreciation
for convening this meeting so promptly.

The explanation attached to the bill declares that:
“these new areas, namely the 3 Arab towns and 27
villages and the lands surrounding them, constitute an
integral part of Jerusalem and . . . any attempt to divide
between them and the other parts of Jerusalem will cause
the stifling of the city’s natural growth and development.”

1.5. Once again the Security Council has been summoned
to discuss the situation in Jerusalem and to forestall the
developments there that are fraught with danger. This
situation has been created by the persistent Israeli violations of the ‘General Assembly and the Security Council
resolutions pertaining to Jerusalem and by the adamant
Israeli designs to annex new areas around Jerusalem. The
dangers to peace inherent in the present Israeli policy of
intransigence and oblique expansionism are self-evident,
and they require immediate affirmative action to halt them.

Therefore the bill proposes annulling the order defining the
areas and the supplement attached thereto, issued on 28
June 1967, which, according to the bill, “places United
Jerusalem in narrow and unnatural boundaries.”
21. Incidentally, the sponsor of this bill, Mr. Shamuel
Ta&, a member of the Israeli Knesset, works on behalf of
a political group in Israel called “Free Centre”, which
previously worked to establish an “Israel-South Africa
League”.

16. At the outset I should like to assure the Council that I
shall limit my statement to the question of Jerusalem, the
subject of my Government’s complaint.
17. My delegation and indeed my Government are extremely perturbed by the worsening situation in Jerusalem
as a result of the Israeli persistence in the implementation
of measures that are clearly designed to change the status
and character of the Holy City, in utter disregard of the
repeated General Assembly and Security CounciI resolutions. These new facts that are being daily created in
annexed Jerusalem are designed both to exacerbate the
situation and to prevent the conclusion of a just and
peaceful settlement, in the hope that the cease-fire lines will
ultimately become the new borders of the expanded Zionist
Empire.

22. The Arab cities and villages which the new bill
proposes annexing are the following: Bethlehem, Beit Jala,
Beit Sahur, Umm Tuba, Sawahrah, Izaria, Sur Bahir,
Sharafat, Beit Safafa, Battir El-Khadr, Abu Dis, Bethany,
Ettur, Isawiya, Anata, Sharqa, Shtifat, Hizma, Beit Hanina,
Ar Ram, Bir Nabala, Al Jib, Nabi Samwil, Beit Iksa, Belt
Surik, Beit Anan, Rafat, El Jadirah, Futnah and Al
Qubeibah.

18, Cognizant of the peace efforts of the United Nations,
my Government refrained from coming to the Security
Council for more than two years, in spite of the repeated
Israeli violations in the Holy City. However, our genuine
desire to create an atmosphere conducive to peace was
construed by the Israelis as surrender and default on our
part, whereupon their authorities moved at full speed not
Ody
to consolidate their annexation but to extend it to

24. It is worth noting that all the towns and villages
marked for annexation according to this plan are purely
Arab, with a population numbering over 100,000. I wonder
what the justification for annexation will be this time.
Would it be the introduction of “running water” or the
“planting of trees”? Or “cleaning” the area, as Mrs. Meir
once said in order to justify the annexation of Arab
Jerusalem: “The city was dirty until we cleaned it up”! Or

23. My delegation is ready to provide the members of the
Security Council with copies of the bill and the map
attached to it upon request.

2

to extend the area “for intermingling
Mr. Eban explained in June 1967?

and union”, as

evicted. The Magharbah and other Arab quarters are
examples of this. May I add in this connexion that every
stone and every building in the City conveys a chapter in
our national history and is a symbol of our cultural
heritage.

25. In this connexion I might remind this body that the
Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr. Eban, agreed as early as 1950
that the United Nations resolution for internationalizing
Jerus&m
[General Assembly resolution 303 (IV)], if
implemented, would deprive 110,000 Jews of their right to
beIong to Israel and that therefore such action on the part
of the United Nations would be morally incorrect, politically unwise and a violation of United Nations principles. I
refer to the memorandum on the question of Jerusalem
submitted to the Trusteeship Council of the United
Nations, seventh session, at Lake Success in 1950.1 This
line of argument could be equally applied to the case of
more than 100,000 Arabs of Jerusalem and the surroundings who by Israeli measures and schemes are deprived of
their freedom to belong to the Jordan community.

30. Those illegal acts are in direct violation of article 53 of
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which stipulates
that:
“Any destruction by the Occupying Power of real or
personal property belonging individually or collectively to
private persons, or to the State, or to other public
authorities or to social or cooperative organizations is
prohibited, except where such destruction is rendered
absolutely necessary by military operations.“3
31. They are also in violation of article 56 of The Hague
Convention of 1907, which prohibits the seizure or
destruction of public or private property, municipal property, and institutions dedicated to religion, charity, education, the arts and sciences. According to that article,
“even , . , State property, shall be treated as private
property”.4

26. Israeli propaganda will not fool anyone, least of all the
members of this body. A sober examination of the Israeli
annexation will reveal that the overriding considerations are
to be found in the territorial, military, strategic, political,
touristic and economic benefits that WA accrue to Israel
through facing the world with a fait accompli, Those are
the real reasons for the annexation, clear asdaylight in spite
of the Israeli “oecumenical” smoke screen.

32. After its occupation of the Arab sector of Jerusalem,
Israel did not lose any time in annexing that sector to its
jurisdiction. The so-called administrative and legislative
measures to “unify the city” shocked the feelings of
hundreds of millions of Moslems and Christians all over the
world; it even shocked the conscience of quite a number of
enlightened Jews. As a result the General Assembly dealt
with the situation during its fifth emergency special session.
At that session the General Assembly adopted resolutions
2253(ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of 4 and 14 July 1967,
which considered the measures taken by Israel to change
the status of Jerusalem invalid and called upon Israel to
rescind them and to desist from taking any action which
would alter the status of the Holy City, Instead of
complying with those resolutions, which in essence constituted a deploration by 100 States Members of the United
Nations, Israel proceeded to tighten its grip on the City.

27. Furthermore, reports emanating from the occupied
territories speak of other Israeli attempts in the Knesset,
the Israeli Parliament, to enact a law to confine holy
Moslem religious places in Haram Esh-Sherif area to ,A1
Aqsa and the Dome of the Rock mosques. Thus, the whole
plaza of Haram Esh-Sherif and other religious and cultural
buildings which constitute part of it and which are held
sacred by over 700 million Moslems will no longer be
considered holy any more and therefore will be at the
mercy of future illegal Israeli regulations and excavations.
28. The chronicle of the tragedy of Jerusalem under Israeli
occupation has been the subject of previous debates; hence,
there is no need for me to dwell on it in detail. It is enough
to point out at this stage that all Israeli legislative and
administrative
measures in the Holy City are in utter
disregard of article 49 of the fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, to which Israel is a party and which stipulates:

33, The Secretary-General, acting under the provisions of
the above-mentioned resolutions, sent his Personal Representative, Ambassador Thalmann, to obtain information on
the situation. The report submitted by Ambassador Thalmann noted the changing landscape in Jerusalem and “the
debris of levelled houses”. The houses that were then
levelled by dynamite and bulldozers included 135 houses of
the Magharbah Quarter and two mosques. The report
submitted by the Secretary-General on 12 September 1967
in document S/8146 indicated in paragraph 35 that “the
Israel authorities stated unequivocally that the process of
integration wasirreversible and not negotiable.”

“Individual
or mass forcible transfers, as well as
deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the Occupying Power 01 to that of
any other country, occupied or not, are prohibited,
regardless of their motive.“2
It is also contrary to article 12 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [General Assembly
resolution 2200 A (XXI)].

34, The failure of the Israeli authorities to comply with
the General Assembly resolutions eventually led to the
consideration of the situation by the Security Council and
the adoption of resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968,

29. Whole Arab quarters-private houses, public buildings
and even homes and properties of religious endowments
(Waqf)-were demolished or emptied and their inhabitants

1 Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, 3 Ibid., p. 322.
Sum Iemen t No. 9, p. 29,
4 The Report to the Hague Conferences of 1899 and 1907
(Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1917), p* 520.
2 United Nations, TreatySeries,vol. 75 (1950), No. 973, p. 318.

3

which deplored Israel’s failure to comply with the General
Assembly resolutions, It reaffirmed that the “acquisition of
territory by military conquest is inadmissible” and urgently
called upon Israel to rescind all measures already taken and
to desist forthwith from taking any further action which
would tend to change the status of Jerusalem. Israel’s
response to that resolution was a declaration by its leaders
that they would “ignore” it.

Cairo and the rest of the Arab capitals envious and eagerly
waiting to be “liberated” by the Israeli army. Khalil Gibran
the world-famous Lebanese’poet once said: “Some people
fight with greater fury to justify their wrongs than they do
to justify their rights.” Those words seem to have been
written in anticipation of the Israeli response, which can
only be described as contemptuous of the world Organization.

35. In his report of 11 April 1969 to the Security Council
on the implementation of its resolution [S/9149/, the
Secretary-General included Israel’s note verbale of 25
March 1969, which can only be described as contemptuous
of the Organization and of world public opinion. Instead of
desisting, Israel enacted the so-called Legal and Admlnistrative Matters (Regulation) Law, which seeks further to
consolidate Israel’s annexation of the Old City and to
extend its annexation to a sizable portion of the Arab areas
surrounding Jerusalem. In the meantime, Israel’s arbitrary
arrests, detentions, torture and demolition in the Arab
sector of Jerusalem continue unabated-I refer members to
my delegation’s letters contained in documents S/9001 of
11 February 1969, S/9007 of 13 February 1969 and
S/9197 of 8 May 1969. In view of those violations we were
obliged to request the Security Council to convene urgently
to consider the continued Israeli defiance of its resolution
252 (1968).

39. In the interim between the adoption of resolution
267 (1969) and the Israeli response to it occurred the arson
to the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem on 21 August
1969, That attempt to set fire to Al Aqsa Mosque, one of
the holiest places in Islam, created unparalleled indignation
and world-wide revulsion. The issue was referred to the
Security Council by as many as 25 States Members of the
United Nations. On 15 September 1969 the Security
Council adopted resolution 271 (1969), which expres&
grief at the extensive damage caused by arson to the Holy
Al Aqsa Mosque under the military occupation of Israel,
and called upon Israel “scrupulously to observe the
provisions of the Geneva Conventions and international law
governing military occupation . . ,“. It condemned the
failure of Israel to comply with the previous resolutions on
Jerusalem and called upon it to implement them. It further
requested the Secretary-General “to follow closely the
implementation of the , , . resolution and to report thereon
to the Security Council at the earliest possible date.”

36. On 3 July 1969 the Security Council adopted resolution 267 (1969) by a unanimous vote. That resolution
deplored Israel’s failure to show any regard for General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions; it censured in
the strongest terms all measures taken to change the status
of the City of Jerusalem; it determined “that, in the event
of a negative response or no response from Israel, the
Security Council [should] reconvene without delay to
consider what further action should be taken in [that]
matter” and it requested “Israel to inform the Security
Council without any further delay of its intentions with
regard to the implementation of the provisions of [that]
resolution”,

40. From that date-15 September 1969-until now the
Secretary-General has been unable to obtain the informa.
tion he was seeking from the Israeli authorities to discharge
the reporting responsibility conferred upon him by the
above-mentioned General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions.
41. The Israeli authorities still decline to supply the
Secretary-General, in spite of his repeated requests, with
any details or satisfactory information on the “masler
plan”, which envisages,inter alia, development affecting the
premises of the “Government House”, belonging to the
United Nations. The exchange of communications between
the Secretary.General and the Permanent Representative of
Israel on the subject are embodied in the Secretary
General’s reports contained in documents S/l0124 of 18
February 1971, S/l0124/Add.l
of 20 April 1971 and
S/lOl24/Add.2 of 20 August 1971.

37. It took Israel almost five months from the adoption of
resolution 267 (1969) to respond to the Secretary-General’s
repeated requests for information necessary to submit the
report concerning the implementation of that resolution.
Not until the Secretary-General had set a deadline in his
third note, of 21 November 1969, did Mr. Eban find it
appropriate to respond. The Israeli response avoided the
whole issue under consideration and instead blamed Jordan
for “the division of Jerusalem”; in other words, Mr. Eban
blamed Jordan for standing in the way of the Israeli forces
and their occupation of the whole City of Jerusalem in
1948, notwithstanding the fact that the major part of West
Jerusalem is owned and was inhabited by the Arabs.

42. The so-called “master plan” for “greater Jerusalem’“,
according to The New York Times of 16 February 197 1,
envisagesthe construction of up to 35,000 units capable of
accommodating 122,000 new Israeli residents-almost hallC
of Jerusalem’s present population-in
the territories that
were “seized from Jordan in the six-day war of 1967”. That
entails the construction of four suburbs on confiscated
private and public Arab land and property as follows: 1,700
housing units in Nabi Samuel; 3,000 near the villages of Sut
Bahir and Al Mukabbir and 12,000 between Belt Safafa and
Sharafat.

38. It is worth noting that on the eve of hostilities in 1948
Jewish ownership in the sub-district of Jerusalem was only
2 per cent. Its Mayor wasArab and the majority of the City
Council was Arab as well, taking into consideration that
both the Mayor and the City Council were elected by the
inhabitants and not appointed by the administration. Then
Mr. Eban drew a rosy picture of the benevolent Israeli
occupation, which would leave Amman, Damascus, Beirut,

43. Already, and as a prelude to the “master plan”, the
Israeli authorities have confiscated 11,680 dunurns of Arab
lands by an order issued in the Israeli Official Gazelte
No. 1656, dated 30 August 1970. That area is already
4

i
:
’
i
!

covered with Jewish houses. Huaretz of 19 February 1971
reported that 30 new Israeli industrial projects are to be set
up on confiscated Arab lands near Jerusalem Airport and
that the zone is planned to absorb 100 new Israeli industrial
projects. Moreover, the Hebrew University in Jerusalem is
planning two building projects on the Mount of Olives to
accommodate 13,500 and 18,000 students, respectively,
accordingto Hametz of 9 March 197 1.

50. The Israeli “master plan” has been widely attacked
and criticized by well-known international personalities and
official circles. The Jewish Telegraphic Agency Daily News
Bulletin, Vol. XXXVIII,
No. 5 1, of 16 March 197 1, on
page 3 reported the appeal of the British historian Arnold
Toynbee to the Christian world “to intervene against
pre-emptive actions by the Israeli Government that ‘not
only threaten the beauty and character of [East Jerusalem]
but must seriously jeopardize the chances of achieving a
lasting peace in the Middle East’ “.

44. That is the plan which the Israeli authorities were
hesitant to convey to the Secretary-General, notwithstanding his repeated requests, in their attempt to buy time to
complete the plan and confront the world with a fait
awompli. That is the plan that resulted in bulldozing parts
of the premises of Government House, the headquarters of
IiNTSO, situated in “no-man’s land” in Jerusalem.

51. The most recent official criticism of the Israeli
“master plan” in Jerusalem came from the Government of
the United States of America. On 9 June 1971 a State
Department spokesman declared:
“On the general question of constructing housing and
other permanent civilian facilities in the occupied zone,
including Jerusalem, our policy is to call for strict
observance of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, to
which Israel is a party. This Convention prohibits an
occupying Power from transferring parts of its own
population into occupied territory. We interpret this to
include undertaking construction of permanent facilities
which have the intent of facilitating transfer of Isaeli
population into the occupied territories.

45. The aim of the plan was spelled out by Mr. Sharef,
Israel’s Minister of Housing, as reported by The New York
Times on 16 February 1971: “to settle new immigrants as
8alclcly as possible in order to keep Jerusalem a Jewish
City.”
46. It is worth noting that Jerusalem’s “master plan” was
drawn up in 1964. According to an article by Ada Louise
Huxtable published in The New York Times on 12 June
1969:

“On a broader policy basis, we continue to be opposed
to actions by Israel in the occupied territories which
could prejudice the prospects of a peace settlement”,

“The planning team had clear instructions to take into
account the possibility of ultimate reunification and to’
make provisions for interconnection and integration of
the two sectors. The plan was in the last stages of
preparation at the time of the six-day war.”

52. Opposition to the plan in Israel itself was not confined
to the aesthetic urban aspects of the plan or to investment
for profit by remote speculators. The New York Times, in
its issue of 16 February 1967, reported that:

47. This same fact was confirmep by a commentary that
appeared in Lamerchav on.24 June 1969:

“Five young Israeli architects of the Ministry of
Housing who recently joined the ranks of the critics were
summarily dismissed yesterday by Mr. Sharef, who accused them of talking with forked tongues. The architects, who initially worked on the projects, wrote a letter
to Mayor Kollek on February 3 stating that they had
suffered a crisis of conscience and urged him to oppose
the plan”.

“In 1964 the City Council of Israeli Jerusalem had
approved a zoning map which included the Arab sector of
the city-even before the occupation and annexation of
Arab Jerusalem. Now, Israel is making plans for the whole
area extending from Bethlehem to Ramallah.”
48, Thi$ is another piece of concrete proof that the June
1967 blitzkrieg and the subsequent annexation of Jerusalem were planned long in advance and were in essencean
act of fulfilment.

53. The Old City of Jerusalem was not spared the ordeal
of Israeli confiscation and evacuation of Christian and
Moslem Arabs under the guise of development, On 5 January 1971 Haaretz reported that:

49. Zionist designs on Jerusalem date back to the estabWment of the Zionist movement. Zionist organizations
have made no secret of their resolve to take over Jerusalem
and to transform it into a Jewish community, Since the
June 1967 aggression the Israeli road to Arab Jerusalem and
its Christian and Moslem holy places has been elusive-from
an avowed position of non-annexation to administrative
unity, then to reunification and, finally, to de facto
annexation. Consequently the announcement of the “master plan” did not come as a surprise to my Government,
which anticipated it and warned against it without avail.
However, the announcement of the plan, with its chauvinistic political implications, created an uproar both inside
and outside Israel, particularly when Mr. Sharef, the Israeli
Minister of Housing, declared: “We are moved by national
and not urban considerations”.

“A special unit worked within the Old City; its task is
to evacuate Arab inhabitants. Up till now there are 2,500
families left and all efforts are being made to evacuate
them. Lately, fifty Arab shops and groceries were closed
down and 3,000 Arabs were evacuated”.
54. Jewish families have been moving to take the place of
the evicted Arabs once the houses have been renovated. The
MiddIe East Review in February 1970 reported that:
‘Permanent annexation has become very real to Arabs
no matter how its prospect is shruged off by Israelis. In
December Deputy Prime Minister Allon told the Knesset
that all of East Jerusalem was open for Jewish settlement
5

“3. To set up three Jewish belts in the City-one
around the enclosure of the Mosque, another around the
Walls of the Old City, and the third around the whole of
Jerusalem, the purpose being entire isolation of Arab
Jerusalem, thus creating a de facto status, which might
facilitate their final seizure of the Holy City.”
68. The second document is an editorial entitled “Jerusalem and Peace,” which appeared in the Vatican paper,
LDssewatore Romano on 22-23 March 1971. After describing the Israeli measures to transform the occupation of
East Jerusalem into annexation under the formula of
unification the paper states:

“On 21 February the Hebrew Municipal Council of
Jerusalem approved, despite the open opposition of
technicians and architects, the plans prepared by the
construction ministry for housing in the suburbs. This
means that there will be a real belt of buildings on the
hills around the Holy City consisting of 20,000 homes
destined to house 75,000 Jews. Unfortunately, these are
not peace projects and cannot leave indifferent those who
really work For definitive peace in the Middle East. These,
together with other plans-to which the press is beginning
to refer-confirm the necessity of an international petition in order to guarantee truly the peculiar character of
the city and the rights of minority communities.”

“This determination to acquire the Arab sector as well
for its own sovereignty has manifested itself ever since in
measures of a legislative, fiscal and urban nature which
are impressing on Jerusalem an ever more special character at the expense of the non-Jewish populationMoslems and Christians-who are compelled for reasons
of urban expansion to live in ever increasingly restricted
spacesand finally to look elsewhere for a future they feel
they no longer can find in their homeland’s environment.

69. His Holiness Pope Paul VI on many occasions expressed his deep concern over the measures taken in
Jerusalem that would change its status and character. The
Jewish Chronicle of London reported on page 36 of its
issue of 16 April 197 1 the Pope’s words on Jerusalem:

“As has already been the case regarding the project for
the internationalization of the City, the resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly of the
United Nations forbidding alteration of the ‘status’ of
Jerusalem and ordering the annulment of all measures
taken against it also came to nothing. Nevertheless, they
remain to testify that a very grave state of affairs is
forming against the law and which has the logic of, a fait
accompli, Reference to expropriation measures is sufficient to give an idea of the radical manner with which a
physiognomy is impressed on the City that greatly differs
from its historical and religious character and its universal
vocation.

“These brothers of ours who live where Jesus lived and
who, around the Holy Places, are the successorsof the
ancient first church, which gave origin to all other
churches . . . continue to need more than ever our
spiritual, moral and material support.

“In January 1968, 300 hectares (approximately 660
acres)of land were expropriated in the Mount Scopus
region and most of it is already covered with Hebrew
homes.
“In August 1970, another 1,200 hectares (2,640 acres)
wereexpropriated in the Arab sector of Jerusalem and on
the outskirts of the town for the carrying out of the
‘Greater Jerusalem’ plan. There was another project in the
air for the old part of Jerusalem. Here 6,000 Arabs would
have to leave and various buildings would be expropriated.
“‘We are bound to feel deep apprehension at changes of
such gravity. In Israel itself these plans have met with
justified criticism and not only from the exclusively
urban point of view,
‘The Jerusalem Presshas actually traced a link between
the Government’s haste in preparing and implementing
these plans with the peace undertaking promoted by
American Secretary of State Rogers and without disguising the resulting intention of affirming in deeds
Israel’s sovereignty over the entire City. These intentions
have been confirmed authoritatively by the Israeli Minister for construction who expressly stated that it was ‘a
plan with Hebrew aims’.

“Today we must look with affectionate solicitude
towards the Christian communities in the Holy Land,
already tested so much in the course of history.

“The help of the Christian world which has never Failed
our brothers in Jerusalem is not needed only to maintain
the material buildings which recall the great mysteries of
the redemption, but also to support the religious and
social institutions.”
70. Speaking earlier to the College of Cardinals at the
Vatican on 15 December 1969, His Holiness sounded the
alarm at the continued departure of Christians from the
Israeli occupied areas. His Holiness expressed his concern at
the diminution of the Christian population in the Holy
Land, and voiced the fear that the beautiful and majestic
churches which recall the events of the life of Christ might
some day be found emptied of the living presence of
worshippers.
71. On 14 July 1967, right after the Israeli annexation of
Jerusalem, the Executive Committee of the National
Council of Churches in the United States adopted a
resolution to protest the annexation by declaring that the
Council could not “condone by silence territorial expansion
by force”.
72. The plight of Christian Arabs under Israeli occupation
has been the subject of many appeals, protests and
complaints by Christian leaders everywhere, starting with
the Oriental bishops and patriarchs from the area, including
the Milkite Archbishop of Galilee, and ending with the
Archbishop of the Orthodox Church in North America. All
of them accused Israeli authorities of forcing Arabs,
particularly Christian Arabs, to leave Jerusalem.
73. The truth of the matter is that the number of
Christians in Jerusalem since the Israeli occupation had

declined to less than half. This estimate is substantiated by
the figures that were presented in the testimony of
Dr. James Kritzeck and Reverend Joseph Ryan, on Jerusalem, to the United States House of Representatives
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Sub-Committee on the Near
East, 28 July 1971, In their testimony they declared that:
“The conditions created in Jerusalem and the annexed
territories have produced results and a trend which are
particularly uncheering and unfavourable to Christians, as
well as to Moslems. To speak only for ourselves, we were
approximately 25,000 in Jerusalem alone at the time of
the creation of the State of Israel. We are fewer than
10,000 now, in a city that has grown-depending upon
where you want to stop it-to between 200,000 and
300,000 and intends, according to the Minister of
Housing, Mr. Zev Sharef, to expand to 400,000 very
soon.‘)
74. The fears that were expressed by the King-Crane
Commission pertaining to the Jews becoming the guardians
of the Holy Places or the custodians of the Holy Land have
now become realities. As early as 1919 the Commission
voiced the following judgement, which appeared on page
351 of a book written by Professor H. N. Howard, and
titled The King-Crane Commission:~
“There is a further consideration that cannot justly be
ignored, if the world is to look forward to Palestine
becoming a definitely Jewish State, however gradually
that may take place. That consideration grows out of the
fact that Palestine is the Holy Land for Jews, Christians
and Moslems alike. Millions of Christians and Moslems all
over the world are quite as much concerned as the Jews
with conditions in Palestine, especially with those conditions in Palestine, especially with those conditions which
touch upon religious feeling and rights. The relations in
these matters in Palestine are most delicate and difficult,
With the best possible intentions, it may be doubted
whether the Jews could possibly seem, to either Christians
or Moslems, proper guardians of the Holy Places, or
custodians of the Holy Land as a whole. The reason is
this: the places which are most sacred to Christians-those
having to do with Jesus-and which are also sacred to
Moslems, are not only not sacred to Moslems, are not
only not sacred to Jews, but abhorrent to them. It is
simply impossible, under these circumstances, for Moslems
and Christians to feel satisfied to have these places in
Jewish hands, or under the custody of Jews, There are
still other places about which Moslems must have the
same feeling. In fact, from this point of view, the
Moslems, just because the sacred places of all three
religions are sacred to them, have made, very naturally,
much more satisfactory custodians of the Holy Places
than the Jews could be. It must be believed that the
precise meaning, in this respect, of the complete Jewish
occupation of Palestine has not been fully sensed by
those who urge the extreme Zionist programme. For it
would intensify, with a certainty-like fate, the anti-Jewish
feeling both in Palestine and in ail other portions of the
world which look to Palestine as ‘the Holy Land’.”
5 Beirut, Khayata,1963.

75. Allow me, at this stage to set the record straight bg
reiterating my Government’s stand vis-&vis Jerusalem as it
was outlined in His Majesty King Hussein’s messageto Pope
Paul VI, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Greek Patriarch
Athinagoras and the Maronite Cardinal Ma’ushi:
“I am particularly concerned here about the status of
Arab Jerusalem, Since its occupation we have pointed out
that it is important that nothing should be done which
could affect its character or harm its position or the rights
of the believers in God, the followers of the great
religions, especially the Muslims and Christians and ail
that they have built there throughout history . . .
‘We have devoted all our attention to the problem of
the Holy City. We have repeatedly protested to the
United Nations, to international forums and to friendly
quarters. We have conveyed to the Israeli State our total
indignation at the acts of the Israeli occupation forces in
the city against the rights of all of us and their measures
and laws aimed at Judaizing the Holy City and annexing
the occupied part of it to the Israeli State +, .
“The Holy City is being subjected to rapid and
comprehensive Judaization. Large areas of Arab land
surrounding the city have been taken. Construction of big
housing estates is incessantly increasing, and indeed is
being doubled. Pressure is being exerted on institutions in
the occupied city to carry out the orders of the
occupation authorities. Its Christian and Muslim inhabitants will soon be choked if this continues and our holy
shrines will become tourist attractions at the expense of
their spiritual character.
“I am fully confident that you are awarethat peace wit1
not and cannot be achieved in this area and in the world
unless Jerusalem is rescued from this blatant and shameful tampering with the rights of all of us there and unless
these rights are protected. On our part, we-Muslims and
Christians-would die rather than allow history to my
that we gave up even one iota of Christian and Muslim
rights in the Holy City, and the rights of all mankind. We
implore you to speak out about what is happening in
Jerusalem before it is too late. We want you to say it to
the millions in this wide world so that they learn the
truth and know your view on what is happening and what
must be done before God, history and the peoples. As for
myself, I will continue my contacts with all believers and
with world Governments and peoples to do my duty.
“As for peace, Jerusalem, in our view, is the gem of
peace. Peace will not be achieved except by protecting all
our rights there and by completely ending the occupation
of places holy to all believers in God and to safeguard
their rights to their holy shrines and to allow them to use
those rights.”
76. No matter how Israel tries to justify its illegal
measures in the Holy City the objective observer viewing
the Israeli annexationist measures in Jerusalem cannot help
noting the following violations.
77. First, they constitute a renunciation of the Israeli
commitments under the Armistice Agreement of which
Israel is a signatory.

~
1

declined to less than half. This estimate is substantiated by
the figures that were presented in the testimony of
Dr. James Kritzeck and Reverend Joseph Ryan, on Jerusalem, to the United States House of Representatives
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Sub-Committee on the Near
East, 28 July 1971. In their testimony they declared that:

75. Allow me, at this stage to set the record straight by
reiterating my Government’s stand vis-a-vis Jerusalem as it
was outlined in His Majesty King Hussein’s message to Pope
Paul VI, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Greek Patriarch
Athinagoras and the Maronite Cardinal Ma’ushi:
“I am particularIy concerned here about the status of
Arab Jerusalem. Since its occupation we have pointed out
that it is important that nothing should be done which
could affect its character or harm its position or the rights
of the believers in God, the followers of the great
religions, especially the Muslims and Christians and all
that they have built there throughout history . . .

“The conditions created in Jerusalem and the annexed
territories have produced results and a trend which are
particularly uncheermg and unfavourable to Christians, as
well as to Moslems. To speak only for ourselves, we were
approximately 25,000 in Jerusalem alone at the time of
the creation of the State of Israel. We are fewer than
10,000 now, in a city that has grown-depending upon
where you want to stop it-to between 200,000 and
300,000 and intends, according to the Minister of
Housing, Mr. Zev Sharef, to expand to 400,000 very
soon.”

“We have devoted all our attention to the problem of
the Holy City. We have repeatedly protested to the
United Nations, to international forums and to friendly
quarters. We have conveyed to the Israeli State our total
indignation at the acts of the Israeli occupation forces in
the city against the rights of all of us and their measures
and laws aimed at Judaizing the Holy City and annexing
the occupied part of it to the Israeli State . . .

74. The fears that were expressed by the King-Crane
Commission pertaining to the Jews becoming the guardians
of the Holy Places or the custodians of the Holy Land have
now become realities. As early as 1919 the Commission
voiced the following judgement, which appeared on page
351 of a book written by Professor H. N. Howard, and
titled The King-Crane Commission: 5

“The Holy City is being subjected to rapid and
comprehensive Judaization. Large areas of Arab land
surrounding the city have been taken. Construction of big
housing estates is incessantly increasing, and indeed is
being doubled. Pressure is being exerted on institutions in
the occupied city to carry out the orders of the
occupation authorities. Its Christian and Muslim inhabi.
tants will soon be choked if this continues and our holy
shrines will become tourist attractions at the expense of
their spiritual character,

“There is a further consideration that cannot justly be
ignored, if the world is to look forward to Palestine
becoming a definitely Jewish State, however gradually
that may take place. That consideration grows out of the
fact that Palestine is the Holy Land for Jews, Christians
and Moslems alike. Millions of Christians and Moslems all
over the world are quite as much concerned as the Jews
with conditions in Palestine, especially with those conditions in Palestine, especially with those conditions which
touch upon religious feeling and rights. The relations in
these matters in Palestine are most delicate and difficult.
With the best possible intentions, it may be doubted
whether the Jews could possibly seem, to either Christians
or Moslems, proper guardians of the Holy Places, or
custodians of the Holy Land as a whole. The reason is
this: the places which are most sacred to Christians-those
having to do with Jesus-and which are also sacred to
Moslems, are not only not sacred to Moslems, are not
only not sacred to Jews, but abhorrent to them. It is
simply impossible, under these circumstances, for Moslems
and Christians to feel satisfied to have these places in
Jewish hands, or under the custody of Jews. There are
still other places about which Moslems must have the
same feeling. In fact, from this point of view, the
Moslems, just because the sacred places of all three
religions are sacred to them, have made, very naturally,
much more satisfactory custodians of the Holy Places
than the Jews could be. It must be believed that the
precise meaning, in this respect, of the complete Jewish
occupation of Palestine has not been fully sensed by
those who urge the extreme Zionist programme. For it
would intensify, with a certainty-like fate, the anti-Jewish
feeling both in Palestine and in all other portions of the
world which look to Palestine as ‘the Holy Land’,”

“I am fully confident that you are aware that peace will
not and cannot be achieved in this area and in the world
unless Jerusalem is rescued from this blatant and shame.
ful tampering with the rights of all of us there and unless
these rights are protected. On our part, we-Muslims and
Christians-would die rather than allow history to say
that we gave up even one iota of Christian and Muslim
rights in the Holy City, and the rights of all mankind, We
implore you to speak out about what is happening in
Jerusalem before it is too late. We want you to say it to
the millions in this wide world so that they learn the
truth and know your view on what is happening and what
must be done before God, history and the peoples. As for
myself, I will continue my contacts with all believers and
with world Governments and peoples to do my duty.
“As for peace, Jerusalem, in our view, is the gem of
peace. Peace will not be achieved except by protecting all
our rights there and by completely ending the occupation
of places holy to all believers in God and to safeguard
their rights to their holy shrines and to allow them to use
those rights.”
76. No matter how Israel tries to justify its illegal
measures in the Holy City the objective observer viewing
the Israeli annexationist measures in Jerusalem cannot help
noting the Following violations.
77. First, they constitute a renunciation of the Israeli
commitments under the Armistice Agreement of which
Israel is a signatory.

5 Beirut, Khayats, 1963.
8

78. Second, they are a breach of the cease-fire Agreement
which implied that troop movements must be halted and
any attempt to gain legal and geographical advantages from
the current situation must be deplored.

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)].

83. Seventh, they undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent and sovereign Member
State of the United Nations.

79. Third, they are contrary to contemporary international law and practice which does not recognize the right
of conquest or the right of the conqueror to acquire
territory as a result of his conquest.

84. In the history of this Organisation no other State has
ever defied the authority of the United Nations and
destroyed its reputation as much as and for so long as
Israel. Israel has never respected United Nations resolutions;
consequently, the enforcement of these resolutions cannot
depend on the Israelis’ goodwill or consent.

80, Fourth, they are in contradiction of the principles of
the United Nations Charter which reaffirmed the established principle that acquisition of territory by military
conquest is inadmissible.
81. Fifth, they are in violation of General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions pertaining to Jerusalem, particularly General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V) and Security Council resolutions 252 (1968),
267 (1969) and 271 (1969).

85. If Israel is left unchecked to violate United Nations
resolutions and international conventions, then the very
foundation of this international community will be destroyed together with our hopes and aspirations for
establishing world peace and order. T

82: Sixth, they are in violation of The Hague Convention
of 1907 and the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
international law and practice governing military occupation, the 1954 Convention and Protocol for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,6 the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 and the

86. My delegation believes that the only courseleft for the
Security Council is to invoke whatever sanctions it deems
fit under Chapter VII of the charter to ensure respectfor its
decisions and to prevent a fait accompli in Jerusalem from
interfering with a just solution which must ultimately be
reached.

‘6 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol.

249 (1956),

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

No. 3511.

9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
Ihe world.
Consult
your

may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS
be

obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Los publications
dipositairer
du

des
monde

Nations

Unier,

COMO

CONSEGUtR

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
entier.

Section

des

venter,

New

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicociones
de las Naciones
en todas
porter
del mundo.
Conrulle
Venlar,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U,S.

DES

Unies
rant
Informez-vows
York

NaTlONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
Its libroirier
et ler agencer
aupr&r
de votre librafrie
ou odrerrer-vow
Lr
ov GenBve.

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidor
erfdn
o IV llbrero

0.50 (or equivalent

en venta
o dirfjare

UNIDAS
en librerfor
OI Nacioner

in other

currencies)

y cases dirtriboidorar
Unidor,
Sccci6n

de

82070~July

1973-2,050
