S/PV.9086

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9086

th meeting
Thursday, 7 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Benaabou
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2022/521)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-41617 (E)
*2241617*

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Security
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Ferit Hoxha, Permanent
Representative of Albania, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of June. I am sure I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Hoxha and his team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2022/521)
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Khatir Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel; Her Excellency Ms. Rabab Fatima, Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations, in
her capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
and Ms. Rabia Djibo Magagi, Coordinator of the
Association Alliance for Peace and Security.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/521, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): I am honoured to
be here today to present the latest report (S/2022/521)
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).
I would first like to extend my congratulations to
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July.
2/21

07/07/2022

The subregion of West Africa and Sahel continues
to evolve at different rhythms: on the one hand, there
are citizens who freely exercise their right to choose
their leaders and, on the other, there are military who
increasingly seek to dominate the political space.
National dialogues are under way in many countries
to consolidate democratic governance, at a time
when, in large parts of the Sahel, men and women are
fleeing their land because of insecurity and to ensure
the education of their children. My message today
is hopeful, but it also reflects the concerns and the
urgency of the moment.
At the beginning of April in Dakar, along with the
Governments of Ireland and Ghana and in cooperation
with the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), UNOWAS organized a regional
conference on the various effects of climate change
on peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel,
a conference that brought together representatives of
several Governments, regional organizations, experts
and technical and financial partners.
On that occasion, representatives of rural
communities shared daily experiences about the
devastation caused to agriculture by the increasing
irregularity of the rains, affecting transhumance routes
and triggering conflicts over dwindling resources. As
in other parts of the globe, climate change amplifies and
exacerbates the existing conflicts, in an environment
already vulnerable to other shocks.
It is no longer a secret to anyone that, in many
parts of the Sahel in particular, extremist and criminal
groups exploit such weaknesses, exacerbated by State
structures that are often inadequate. Their promises to
be providers of protection and social justice often find
fertile ground among vulnerable populations.
Today the southward spread of extremist violence
has grown from isolated incidents to a genuine threat
in coastal countries, leading countries such as Togo to
declare a state of emergency in the north of its territory.
There is no magic formula for effectively combating
insecurity. That necessarily requires democratic and
accountable governance, including the establishment
of decentralized Administrations that deliver solutions
to the daily lives of the population, while respecting a
social contract of participation and mutual obligations
between the Government and the citizens.
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

In fact, several West African countries are
successfully strengthening the foundations of
democratic governance. In the recent local and
legislative elections in Senegal and the Gambia, citizens
maturely took the opportunity in what they considered
to be fair processes to hold their representatives in
power to account.
In exemplary polls, organized by electoral
management bodies trusted by the citizens, Gambian
voters sent a message to strengthen the opposition
in Parliament after unambiguously giving President
Adama Barrow a second term four months earlier. In
many cities and towns in Senegal, in the first direct
local elections, young candidates were easily elected as
mayors, in some cases even replacing the candidates of
the ruling coalition.
In addition, dialogue processes are under way
in several countries, thereby building political
consensuses, which provide opportunities to strengthen
social cohesion. In Nigeria, where the incumbent
President Muhammadu Buhari is completing his
second and final term in office, the various stages of
the electoral process for the 2023 polls are proceeding
in accordance with the timetable set and agreed by all
national stakeholders.
I am also very encouraged by the contents of
the Gambian Government’s white paper, which
endorsed almost all the recommendations of the Truth,
Reconciliation and Reparations Commission. If the
trend continues, as we are mindful of the stagnation of
similar processes elsewhere in the region, that will go a
long way towards national harmony, thereby allowing the
Gambia to focus effectively on development challenges.
UNOWAS, as well as the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes in the subregion, continue to
support those important processes. I have just returned
from Nigeria, where I particularly had discussions
with the leaders of the two main coalitions in the
presidential election race, as well as the officials of
the Electoral Commission. In Sierra Leone, in close
consultation with ECOWAS, our joint involvement has
helped to reduce political tensions ahead of the June
2023 presidential election.
I have personally maintained contact with the
leaders of the military transitions, particularly in
Burkina Faso and Guinea, based on the clear principle
of a return to constitutional order within the most
acceptable time frame possible and in the context of

S/PV.9086

specific actions to be undertaken to achieve that in
the best possible conditions for the people. In Burkina
Faso, our ongoing dialogue has contributed greatly
to maintaining bridges between the authorities in
Ouagadougou and ECOWAS.
In that regard, we should welcome the agreement
reached between the transitional Government of
Burkina Faso and President Mahamadou Issoufou,
ECOWAS Mediator, which was endorsed by the
ECOWAS summit on 3 July, setting the transition
period at 24 months from 1 July 2022.
I am also pleased that the transitional authorities
in Guinea, with whom I met last week during a visit to
Conakry, have reaffirmed their willingness to maintain
the talks with ECOWAS and to hold an inclusive
dialogue. I hope that the ECOWAS appointment of a
new mediator for Guinea will allow a consensus to be
reached that is acceptable to all stakeholders.
At the subregional level, we are assisting partners
to adapt mechanisms and normative frameworks to the
current requirements. In that regard, I am pleased to
report on the progress made in establishing a regional
platform of Ministers of Justice of ECOWAS members,
which is in the process of being formally adopted by the
ECOWAS Heads of State.
Similarly, through those various channels of
engagement, UNOWAS continues to encourage
the ongoing process of revising the 2001 ECOWAS
Supplementary Protocol on Democracy and Good
Governance, initiated by the Heads of State of
the Community.
Such
initiatives,
among
others,
provide
encouragement to address the relevant governance
concerns. According to recent reports, press freedom
has declined significantly in many countries, while
there are increasing concerns about a shrinking civic
and political space. The allegations of human rights
violations and the manipulation of the judicial system
have an undermining effect on trust in institutions and
the credibility of electoral processes.
Despite their stated priorities, the military
authorities seem to be reluctant to reverse the
deteriorating security situation. Recent statistics reveal
that the number of civilian casualties from extremist
violence in the central Sahel at the end of May already
exceeded the number of deaths in the whole of last year.
Civilians are caught in the crossfire of armed groups

22-416173/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

fighting for supremacy in their respective areas, as well
as in the counter-terrorism actions of national defence
and security forces.
The reports that we are all receiving of massacres of
innocent and unarmed civilians, including women and
children, reflect the tragedy that is currently unfolding
in that part of the world.
As we know, the impact on the humanitarian
situation is very marked. Recent expert reports indicate
that West Africa is facing an unprecedented nutrition
crisis. In the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
countries, 12.7 million people are food insecure, that
is, 45 per cent more than at the same time last year.
Last year’s lack of rainfall reduced food production by
an average of 11 per cent in the Sahel. Exacerbated by
the international geopolitical context, food prices have
risen by between 40 and 60 per cent, putting them out
of reach for many poor and displaced households.
At the same time, the announced withdrawal of
the G-5 Sahel from Mali and the ongoing military
redeployments
are
jeopardizing
the
security
arrangements in the subregion. Meanwhile, some
countries, such as the Niger and Burkina Faso, are
redefining their respective counter-terrorism strategies,
setting up dialogue and reconciliation mechanisms at
the national and local levels.
At the regional level, together with ECOWAS and
other partners, I continue to advocate for the Accra
Initiative to forestall and prevent the much-feared
spread of instability to coastal countries. We are
currently finalizing discussions on helping to set up the
secretariat of that regional framework and to contribute
to capacity-building through the United Nations Office
for Counter-Terrorism.
Furthermore, I continue to seek the commitment
of international partners to fund the implementation of
the 2020-2024 ECOWAS action plan for the eradication
of terrorism.
UNOWAS will continue to use all its resources to
promote cross-cutting and holistic solutions, of which
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is a
key vehicle. Under the active leadership of my colleague
Mar Dieye, Special Coordinator for Development in the
Sahel, the Strategy now has a project bank that includes
15 projects from the United Nations country teams of
Mali, the Niger, Senegal, the Gambia, Mauritania and
Guinea. The process has benefited from the contributions
4/21

07/07/2022

of more than 10 separate agencies involved in the Sahel,
thereby materializing the humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus. This concept of co-creation has the dual
advantage of strengthening the coherence of projects
and operationalizing joint programme modalities that
reflect the spirit of delivering as One United Nations.
We are now preparing to celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the creation of UNOWAS in a few weeks,
which coincides with that of the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, set up in 2002 to implement the
ruling of the International Court of Justice on the
border dispute between those two great neighbouring
and brotherly countries.
In that regard, allow me to underscore the colossal
work accomplished by the Mixed Commission. As part
of that process, Nigeria and Cameroon have completed
the transfer of sovereignty over the Bakassi peninsula
and have finalized agreements for the demarcation of
the entire length of their maritime borders and over
2,050 kilometres of their 2,100-kilometre land border,
leaving, only 50 kilometres under dispute. The Security
Council would do well to solemnly congratulate Nigeria
and Cameroon for their commitment, which led to this
success. The Mixed Commission will forever remain a
concrete model of effective United Nations support for
peaceful conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
This Council meeting is being held in the wake of
the 3 July ECOWAS summit, which reached agreements
to end the crisis with the transitional regimes in Mali
and Burkina Faso and the relaunching of a promising
dialogue with the transitional authorities in Guinea.
At this point, I want to express the wish that we seize
these opportunities together, building on the efforts
made by the peoples and the leaders of West Africa
and the Sahel, working with them to make a significant
impact that lays the foundations for change towards
sustainable development.
However, I deplore the fact that women, who make
up more than half of the West African population,
continue to be grossly underrepresented in governance
structures and decision-making processes. I regret that
some national Parliaments have even rejected bills
aimed at ensuring a more equitable representation
of women. More than 20 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), that is not only an injustice to
women, but a threat to our common future.
I therefore call on national and international
actors to redouble their efforts to ensure that similar
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

laws under deliberation in the Parliaments of the
subregion are adopted as a matter of priority, and I urge
Governments, citizens and partners to unite in making
national and regional action plans a budgetary and
strategic priority.
On behalf of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, I would like to thank the Council
for its continued support and guidance. In accordance
with our mandate and by constantly putting our good
offices and other specific comparative advantages at
the service of the subregion, we will continue to work
together with our regional and international partners
for the consolidation of peace, security and democracy
in West Africa and the Sahel.
The President: I thank Mr. Annadif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fatima.
Ms. Fatima: I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and your excellent stewardship. I also thank
you for inviting me to share the perspective of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on the situation in
West Africa and the Sahel.
At the outset, I wish to express the Commission’s full
support for the good offices of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif
in West Africa and the Sahel and the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). Drawing on the Commission’s countryspecific and regional engagements, I wish to bring the
following issues to the attention of the Security Council.
The Commission has consistently recognized
the region’s potential to yield peace and inclusive
development for its nations and peoples and has
advocated for intensifying efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals in order to ensure
shared prosperity and lasting peace in the region.
The Commission is concerned about the recent
military takeovers in the region and echoes the calls
made by the African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for
a return to constitutional order. The Commission
underscores the importance of strengthening democratic
institutions in the countries under transition and remains
ready to help mobilize international support for their
national peacebuilding priorities. In Burkina Faso, for
example, the transitional authorities have requested the

S/PV.9086

Commission to convene a meeting in order to discuss
areas in need of support in the country.
The Commission is gravely concerned about the
persistence of violent incidents perpetrated by non-State
armed groups and terrorist groups affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida,
such as Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, the Islamic
State West Africa Province and Jama’a Nusrat ulIslam waal-Muslimin. The expansion of those terrorist
groups to the coastal countries, notably in the Gulf
of Guinea, and their growing nexus with organized
criminal networks and pirates in order to facilitate the
trafficking of drugs, arms and ammunition is another
worrisome trend.
The Commission notes that the security situation
in the Gulf of Guinea is precarious and that maritime
insecurity in the Sahel remains a significant concern
for the coastal countries. The Commission takes note of
the adoption of the resolution 2634 (2022) and reiterates
its support for the efforts that aim to strengthen the
regional maritime security architecture.
The Commission underscores the importance
of political unity between and among the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries in order to
consolidate the gains achieved through its cooperative
efforts. It is important to continue investing in efforts
to address the root causes that aggravate the conflicts,
instability and violence in the region. The Commission
welcomes UNOWAS efforts to reinvigorate the
Ministerial Coordination Platform of the Sahel
Strategy as part of the responses to this challenging
context. The Commission also welcomes the planned
joint AU-United Nations-ECOWAS-G-5 Sahel strategic
assessment on the security and governance situation
and response initiatives in the region, and it encourages
timely follow-up and support. The Commission
encourages greater support for the objectives of the
G-5 Sahel priority investment plan, which incorporates
climate-change adaptation and governance reforms.
In that regard, the PBC underscores the pre-eminent
role of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change to comprehensively address the issue
of climate change.
The Commission is concerned about the
unprecedented levels of insecurity in the Sahel arising
from the growth in terrorism and the consequent
displacement and humanitarian needs, threatening
social cohesion, all exacerbated by the socioeconomic

22-416175/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic. It urges
sustained and coordinated support by the United
Nations system for building and sustaining peace,
including through the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and improved
cooperation among the United Nations country teams
in the region, as well as between the country teams
and UNOWAS.
Particular attention is needed to combat terrorism
and the prevalent violent extremism that is conducive
to terrorism. The Commission also notes the SecretaryGeneral’s calls for predictable and sustained financing
for the counter-terrorism operations in the region and
acknowledges the need to address the adverse effects of
climate change, ecological changes, natural disasters,
drought, desertification, land degradation, energy
access and food insecurity. It calls for strengthening
conflict prevention and management mechanisms, as
well as food-security intervention in the region.
In the Lake Chad basin region, the Commission
stresses the need to increase support for the
implementation of the Regional Strategy for the
Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko
Haram-affected Areas of the Lake Chad Basin Region,
with a focus on the critical role of the territorial action
plans. It welcomes the expansion of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission’s (LCBC) support base to include
humanitarian, development and peace actors. In
implementing the Regional Strategy, the Peacebuilding
Commission encourages sustained partnership between
the LCBC, including its Governors’ Forum, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the United Nations.
Allow me to draw from the Commission’s countryspecific engagements. In the Gambia, the Commission
welcomes the holding of peaceful parliamentary
elections. However, it notes that more needs to be
done to ensure the equitable representation of women
in Parliament and other decision-making spaces. The
Commission also notes the Government’s release
of its white paper on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the Truth,
Reconciliation and Reparations Commission and
reiterates its commitment to supporting their timely
and effective implementation.
In Guinea-Bissau, the Commission stresses the
importance of inclusive dialogue for urgently needed
reforms, as stated in the 2016 Conakry Agreement and
6/21

07/07/2022

the 2019 Stability Pact. The Commission encourages
continuing support from the international community
for the country’s peacebuilding priorities, which
among other things include expanding socioeconomic
opportunities, implementing fiscal policy and
accountability reforms, advancing the women and
peace and security agenda and strengthening national
institutions, including those at the forefront of the
fight against drug trafficking and organized crime.
The Commission also welcomes the appointment of the
President of Guinea-Bissau as Chairman of ECOWAS.
In Liberia, the Commission has been supporting
the country’s peacebuilding efforts, including its
investments in social cohesion, national reconciliation,
the promotion of gender equality and women’s
empowerment, youth empowerment and crossborder cooperation for peace and development. The
Commission will also support efforts to ensure that the
presidential and legislative elections scheduled to be
held in 2023 are inclusive, peaceful, transparent, free
and fair.
In Sierra Leone, the Commission welcomes efforts
to foster an inclusive dialogue in the run-up to the June
2023 general elections. It fully supports the ongoing
efforts to increase women’s participation, including
by establishing quotas for women, and encourages
continued action to consolidate the democratic space,
pursue policy and institutional reforms and strengthen
national and local institutional capacity.
In line with its gender strategy and action plan,
the Commission fully supports efforts to strengthen
regional frameworks in support of women, peace and
security and encourages UNOWAS to bring them
to the attention of the Commission, in collaboration
with ECOWAS and the G-5 Sahel. The Commission
further encourages the adoption and implementation
of national action plans on youth, peace and security
across the region in line with resolution 2250 (2015),
and expresses its readiness to support such efforts. It
also highlights the importance of greater investment
in the region to increase employment opportunities for
young people.
Finally, the Commission recognizes the critical
support provided by the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
to countries in the region. With an active portfolio of
more than $177 million, the Fund supports cross-border
cooperation with an emphasis on reducing farmerherder conflicts and preventing the spread of terrorist
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

threats. Through its regular portfolio and annual
dedicated Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative, the
PBF supports national initiatives focusing on women
and young people’s participation in decision-making
processes, as well as ensuring that women and young
people’s voices are heard on all peacebuilding issues.
The PBF also supports targeted socioeconomic
initiatives linked to responses to community grievances
and peace dividends. The Commission therefore invites
partners to explore how PBF support for addressing the
root causes of crises in the region could be scaled up,
including through strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and international
financial institutions.
The President: I thank Ms. Fatima for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Magagi.
Ms. Magagi (spoke in French): Let me thank
Brazil for this invitation to the Citizens’ Coalition for
the Sahel.
In January, it was my Burkinabé sister, Cécile
Yougbaré of Médecins du Monde, who was here to bring
our call for a radical change of strategy in the Sahel
in order to better take into account the needs of the
populations (see S/PV.8944). Now, six months later, the
situation has greatly deteriorated for women, children
and all civilians in my country, the Niger, as well as
in Burkina Faso and Mali — the three countries in the
central Sahel that are most affected by the conflict.
Today we heard a bleak picture from His Excellency
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif and the other briefer.
Let me add some data from the progress report of the
People’s Coalition for the Sahel that we just published
last month in Dakar.
In our three countries, eight civilians are killed
every day, on average, due to terrorism-related violence.
In Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger, there is a lot of
talk about the rise in power of our armies. However,
we are also helplessly witnessing the exponential rise
in the massacre of civilian populations. Over the past
year, the number of civilians killed by armed extremist
groups doubled. On a positive note, the number of
abuses attributed to defence and security forces has
fallen by 11 per cent, although it is still too high.
In any case, every massacre leads to more people
on the road. Those people will no longer have access to
their land for farming, which is their main activity. We
will soon be in the lean season between two harvests,

S/PV.9086

and 10 million people are reported to be food insecure
in the Sahel — 60 per cent more than last year.
Many people of goodwill are mobilizing to help
us, including the members of the Security Council,
which we thank for their efforts. However, we must
admit that it is not enough. We will therefore have to
start doing things differently. Otherwise, we will face
multidimensional problems.
We have been saying this for years, but no one
has wanted to listen to us. That is why we created the
People’s Coalition for the Sahel, which brings together
more than 50 civil society organizations from the
region so that our voice is heard more loudly and where
it is needed. My presence here today is proof that we
are finally beginning to be heard. What does it mean to
do things differently? It means putting the protection
of the population at the heart of any response to the
security crisis in these three countries.
Some time ago, we saw our President announce
that he had bought helicopters from Türkiye to fight
terrorists and secure the country. That is, of course,
reassuring from a military point of view. However, as a
history and geography teacher in Niamey, I am saddened
every day to see my students attending classes without
a desk and chair. For most of our classes, pupils have to
sit on canvas bags. To do things differently is therefore
to ask what we most urgently invest in — in a mainly
military response, the limits of which are now clearly
visible, in the education of our children, who no longer
go to school because of the conflict, or in our health
facilities, which are either closed or increasingly empty
due to a lack of medicines or health workers?
Our motto at the Association Alliance for Peace
and Security is “Without young people, there can be
no lasting peace. Without women, there can be no
real peace.”
I congratulate Brazil for its commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda, because
women are among the first victims of conflict. But in
truth, they are not only victims, but they are also part
of the solution if they participate and have access to
decision-making processes. At the moment, they are
barely involved, if at all.
Take the example of my country, the Niger, in which
there are eight regions with eight governors — all men.
One of the measures of the state of emergency is the
curfew decreed in four of its regions. That means that a

22-416177/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

07/07/2022

pregnant woman who goes into labour during the curfew
can access a health centre only with great difficulty. I
think that a female governor would be more sensitive
about that issue. In addition, the parliamentarians who
voted for the state of emergency are renewing it without
a real evaluation of its impact on civilians, in general,
and on women in particular.

of the Council’s business for the month of June. Let me
start today by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Annadif and our dear friend and
colleague Ambassador Rabab Fatima, for her statement
on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
work Ireland strongly supports. I have looked forward
to hearing from Ms. Djibo Magagi.

At the Association Alliance for Peace and Security,
we strengthen the capacities of female teachers,
preachers and traditional leaders on issues of social
cohesion and the prevention and fight against violent
extremism. We are convinced that it is through
dialogue and mediation that we will succeed in
bringing peace to our countries — not through arms
or sanctions that weaken already suffering populations.
I am delighted that the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) lifted the sanctions that
were hitting the brotherly and sisterly populations of
Mali hard — a decision worthy of what we call the
“ECOWAS of the people”.

The security situation in the region has deteriorated
rapidly since January. Ireland strongly condemns
the deadly attacks carried out against civilians and
peacekeepers. We offer our sincere condolences to
the families of the peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali who were killed in further heinous attacks
this week.

In the Sahel, we truly feel left to our own devices.
We therefore need the members of the Security Council
to convince our leaders and Governments that all their
energy must be spent on better protecting the people.
That means that we must stop talking about eradicating
terrorists. Instead, we need to eradicate the reasons
that drive our young people to take up arms and kill
their brothers and sisters. To achieve that, we need to
improve governance and access to basic social services.
We must continue our fight against stigmatization and
impunity, particularly that enjoyed by certain members
of own defence and security forces, because that only
perpetuates the vicious circle of violence.
Our report Sahel: What Has Changed contains
specific recommendations for implementing this new
response, which places the people at the heart of all
decisions. It is a toolkit for the Security Council and
for our Governments. We count on the Council to make
good use of it and, above all, to implement it.
The President: I thank Ms. Magagi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Before I start, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, and your team on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
wish you every success. I would also like to express
my gratitude to Albania for its excellent stewardship
8/21

The threat of violence and insecurity, which
was already catastrophic in Mali, Burkina Faso and
the Niger, continues to intensify and has expanded
southward into the coastal States. That expansion
should not come as a surprise to any of us. We have
been warned about it time and time again.
Regional leadership and cooperation are crucial
to facing those threats. We welcome the intensified
collaboration under the Accra Initiative. However, we
remain concerned that cooperation within the Group
of Five for the Sahel has weakened at a time when
the security situation is deteriorating. The increased
terrorist threat has led to an intensification in counterterrorism responses. We call on all national authorities
to ensure that international law is always obeyed in
counter-terrorism activities.
Reports of human rights violations allegedly
perpetrated by security forces, in some cases
accompanied by foreign mercenaries, are deeply
troubling. Failure to ensure accountability serves only
to further drive radicalization. To prevent the further
spread of terrorism, greater focus must be placed on
addressing the underlying drivers of radicalization.
We know that a military solution alone will not suffice
when the drivers of violence remain unaddressed.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the impact of unconstitutional changes of Government
on the stability of the subregion, as well as on political,
economic and social progress.
The role of the Economic Community of West
African States is key. We welcome the outcome of
the recent summit and its efforts to support political
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

transitions in Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea. We
also commend its work on the review of the 2001
Supplementary Protocol on Democracy and Good
Governance. Those transition processes must be
genuinely inclusive. They should result in free, fair,
transparent and credible elections and a return to
constitutional order.
Ireland deeply regrets the growing restrictions
of civil liberties, as well as the continued underrepresentation of women in decision-making processes
across the region.
We are also extremely concerned about the
increasingly dire humanitarian situation. Climate
shocks have contributed to the dramatic food crisis, and
we remain concerned about the adverse implications of
climate change for peace and security in the region.
In that regard, Ireland was delighted to co-organize
April’s regional conference on climate change and
peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel, to
which the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral referred earlier.
We welcome the adoption of a call to action,
through which the countries of the region clearly
recognized the challenges presented by climate-related
security risks. We hear their call for more inclusive and
evidence-based analysis and policymaking, integrated
partnerships and scaled-up conflict-sensitive climate
finance. The United Nations system, including the
Security Council, has a critical role to play in enabling
those actions.
West Africa and the Sahel are at a crossroads. The
challenges faced by the region are complex and farreaching, but they are not insurmountable. Achieving
political stability through inclusive democratic
governance, addressing the drivers of violence and
alleviating the humanitarian crisis will help us to
ensure that the hard-won gains of recent years will not
be eroded.
In that context, we hope that the Council will unite
in support for the continued work of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and unanimously
agree on a presidential statement — which we will
propose alongside our Ghanaian colleagues — to guide
its vital work over the next six months.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): First of all, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, and the Brazilian delegation
on your assumption of the Security Council presidency

S/PV.9086

for this month and to assure you of our cooperation. I
would also like to thank the Albanian delegation for
its successful leadership of the Council during the
past month.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council,
namely, Gabon, Kenya and Ghana (A3).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/521) and thank Special Representative
Annadif for his briefing and insightful perspectives
on the situation in the region, as well as his continued
personal engagement in resolving the challenges in
the region. We also welcome the participation in this
meeting of Ambassador Rabab Fatima of Bangladesh,
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as
well as Ms. Rabia Djibo Magagi, Coordinator of the
Association Alliance for Peace and Security, and their
additional perspectives.
The participation of the PBC in this meeting and
the recommendations of the Commission on the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
underscore the importance of the whole of the United
Nations system addressing the multidimensional
challenges of West Africa and the Sahel in an integrated
and coherent manner. The coordination of the Council
with PBC will allow for broader engagement with the
political, governance, security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian situations and the provision of practical
support to the implementation of regional strategies
and investment programmes.
On the political situation, we welcome the efforts
to consolidate democracy in the region, including in
the Gambia, Senegal and Benin, and the reforms being
undertaken in Cabo Verde to improve governance and
sustain social cohesion, as well as the political dialogue
initiated in Côte d’Ivoire to address political grievances.
Despite the progress being made, we continue to be
concerned about the rollback of democracy in countries
such as Mali, Guinea and Burkina Faso.
We underscore the urgent need to restore
constitutional order in the region and welcome the
decisions taken by the Authority of Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) at its sixty-first ordinary
session, held in Accra on 3 July. In that regard, we
welcome the progress made in the ongoing review of
the ECOWAS Supplementary Protocol on Democracy
and Good Governance and the operationalization of its

22-416179/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Conflict Prevention Framework. We believe that those
measures are critical in consolidating democracy in
the region.
We take note of the 24-month electoral timetable
submitted to ECOWAS by the Burkina Faso authorities,
as well as the scheduling of presidential elections
in Mali by March 2024. We urge the transitional
authorities concerned to spare no effort in robustly
implementing the electoral timetable to ensure a
definite return to constitutional rule. We welcome the
lifting of the economic and financial sanctions imposed
on Mali and Burkina Faso based on the current progress
made towards transition, and we note the continuing
suspension of their participation in the decision-making
processes of ECOWAS.
Concerning the security situation, we note with
concern the deteriorating security environment in parts
of the region, which is reflected by the heightened
incidence of terrorist attacks and the aggravation
of intercommunal and herder-farmer conflicts, as
well as the expansion of terrorist activities into the
neighbouring littoral countries of the Sahel, such as
Côte d’Ivoire, Benin and Togo.
The A3 condemns in the strongest terms the
persistent attacks against civilian populations, United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers. We
particularly deplore the use of explosive devices and
attacks on schools and hospitals by armed groups, as
well as terrorist groups.
We remain anxious over the spillover effect of the
protracted crisis in Libya on the Sahel, the possible
return of foreign terrorist fighters and the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. We therefore urge
coordinated action among the countries of the region,
including in the area of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, in addressing the matter.
We reiterate our support for regional initiatives,
since that remains one of the sustainable ways of dealing
with the security situation in the region. The question
of adequate, predictable and sustainable funding for
regional security initiatives that respond to threats to
international peace and security is a pressing matter,
on which the Council must have a coherent position. We
encourage funding and logistical support for regional
arrangements, such as the Accra Initiative, the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and
the Multinational Joint Task Force fighting the Boko
Haram insurgency in the Lake Chad basin.
10/21

07/07/2022

While we welcome the decline in kidnappings in the
Gulf of Guinea, with no kidnappings of crews reported
in the first quarter of 2022, as compared to about 40
during the same period in 2021, we remain concerned
about the growing link between the terrorists on land
and the pirates at sea. In that connection, we look
forward to the Secretary-General’s report following
the adoption of resolution 2634 (2022), on maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea, and we believe that it
will provide a good basis to understand the nature of
the problem and the best approach to resolving it.
In view of the interlocking and transregional nature
of the challenges, we encourage the harmonization of
the efforts of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and UNOWAS to improve coordination
in tackling issues such as maritime security and the
fight against terrorism and organized crime.
The A3 is alarmed by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, as evidenced by the more
than 6.2 million displaced persons across the Sahel,
due to the heightened insecurity. The situation is
further compounded by other factors, including the
coronavirus disease pandemic, climate change and
food insecurity. The seriousness of the climate menace,
which has manifested itself in floods and droughts,
requires urgent attention. In that regard, we welcome
the outcome document of the regional conference on
climate and security held in Dakar this year, and we
share its call to action. Furthermore, funds to support
the increasing humanitarian needs remain a challenge.
We therefore reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for
funding support from donor partners to help to meet
the target of the more than $2.9 billion required for the
implementation of the humanitarian response plan in
the region.
The A3 also condemns the persistent abuses
perpetrated against women, girls and children,
including sexual exploitation, and attacks against
schools by armed groups, which led to the closure of
more than 6,800 schools in the region. Such acts are
in flagrant violation of international human rights law,
continue to have a pyschosocial impact on children and
diminish future contributions to the economic growth
and development of the affected societies.
Before concluding, we would like to reiterate the
need to further invest in addressing the root causes of the
insecurity in the region by focusing on the governance
and development deficits. In that context, we encourage
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

support for the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as well as the priority
investment plan of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
and we laud the PBC’s interventions in the region,
including initiatives targeting young people, women
and agricultural self-employment. We encourage
further measures to empower women and young people
to enhance their full and meaningful participation in all
political processes, including elections and transitions.
The Commission’s involvement in climate-related
peace and development interventions, as well as in
the promotion of community-based dispute resolution
mechanisms, is also critical.
The A3 believes that a comprehensive approach,
characterized by deeper cooperation at the national,
regional and multilateral levels, is indispensable to
addressing the complex challenges in the region. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of the ongoing
African Union-United Nations-ECOWAS-G-5 Sahel
joint strategic assessment on governance and security
in the Sahel, and we believe that the outcome of that
assessment will provide a holistic and comprehensive
approach in combating the challenges in the region.
Finally, following today’s meeting, as indicated
by the representative of Ireland, the co-penholders on
UNOWAS intend to circulate an initial draft presidential
statement on UNOWAS. We count on the support of
all delegations for its consensual adoption, which,
we believe, will underpin the efforts of UNOWAS in
dealing with the challenges in the region.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me thank
Special Representative Annadif, Ambassador Fatima
and Ms. Magigi for their helpful and insightful briefings.
As the number of coups and transition Governments
have grown in West Africa, so has the importance of
the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWAS).
The United States strongly welcomes the UNOWAS
efforts to support the democratic process in the Sahel
and advise those transitional Governments, especially
in Mali, Guinea and Burkina Faso. I therefore thank the
Special Representative for that work.
Today I would like to talk about how we can make
progress in those three countries, as well as in the
broader regional security threats.
In Mali, the authorities must urgently restore
constitutional rule by holding timely elections.
Fortunately, the Economic Community of West

S/PV.9086

African States (ECOWAS) and Mali came to a
welcome agreement on a 24-month transition timeline,
starting from March 2022. We trust that the transition
Government of Mali will turn its full attention to
implementing the benchmarks for the remainder of that
transition. That is what we expect; that is what the Malian
people expect; and that is what the entire international
community expects. We will all pay close attention to
those benchmarks in the days to come. I must stress that
the United States Government is very concerned about
the alarming increase in credible allegations of human
rights violations and abuses carried out by the Malian
armed forces, in conjunction with the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group. Those potential abuses and violations
are exactly why we warn countries against partnering
with the Russia-backed Wagner Group.
Turning to Guinea, the transition Government
must support the right of peaceful assembly and
peaceful protest. It is long past time to return the
country to constitutional, civilian-led democracy.
In that regard, ECOWAS is an essential partner. We
encourage its continued engagement and dialogue with
all stakeholders.
Likewise, in Burkina Faso, ECOWAS plays a key
role in support of transition processes and security. We
are encouraged by the transition Government’s proposal
to ECOWAS for a two-year transition timeline to return
Burkina Faso to democratically elected, civilianled governance. We encourage partners to prioritize
productive engagement with the transition Government
and to take into account Burkina Faso’s security and
humanitarian challenges.
Finally, at the regional level, terrorist violence against
civilian and military targets in the Sahel is tragically
rampant. The ongoing conflict in neighbouring Libya
increases instability by contributing to an increased
flow of arms and mercenary groups in the region.
Working in that dangerous, complicated
environment is not easy. We therefore applaud the
UNOWAS efforts to address many of the region’s
challenges, from climate change to security to
development in West Africa. We especially support
work through its partnerships with the International
Organization for Migration, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
United Nations Environment Programme.
For our part, the United States continues to work
with the Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in

22-4161711/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Iraq and Syria. The Coalition welcomed Burkina Faso
as its eighty-fourth member in late 2021, and Benin in
spring 2022 as the Coalition’s eighty-fifth member. The
Coalition also announced the formation of the Africa
Focus Group in December 2021, which seeks to enhance
African Coalition members’ civilian-led counterterrorism capabilities. All those efforts are critical. We
can stamp out terrorism only by working together.
This is a moment of crisis for West Africa and
the Sahel, but it can also be an opportunity to defeat
terrorism, promote democracy and put the people of the
region first. Let us all continue to work closely with
UNOWAS to do just that.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Let me first thank
Albania for its presidency and wish Brazil all the best
for its presidency during the month of July.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif for his briefing and the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for its
key role in preventive diplomacy. We further welcome
the strong briefings by civil society representative
Ms. Rabia Djibo Magagi and by Ambassador Fatima, the
latter on the important links between the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Security Council.
Let me also pay our deepest respect and condolences
to the troops of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
who once again this week fell victim to a mine,
following a tragic month of unusually high casualties.
Norway welcomes the progress made by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in negotiations with Mali and Burkina Faso
on transition timetables and benchmarks resulting in
the lifting of some economic and financial sanctions.
We also welcome the release of President Kaboré. For
the sake of both national and regional stability, the
transition authorities in Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea
must now make good on their promises. In Mali, we
also expect the authorities to respect the Security
Council’s new mandate for MINUSMA (resolution
2640 (2022)) and its status-of-forces agreement,
including by allowing for mandated reporting and the
timely rotations of troops.
We appreciate the ECOWAS review of the Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance and urge reaching
consensus on that important instrument. But while
governance crises continue to hamper Governments in
12/21

07/07/2022

fulfilling their responsibilities, humanitarian responses
cannot wait. Throughout the region, food prices and the
numbers of food-insecure people are rising by the day.
Despite military takeovers in several countries, we see
few signs of increased security for civilians. Rather
what we see is insecurity that is spreading, especially
from the central Sahel towards coastal States. In the
past few months we have also seen terrorist attacks in
countries such as Côte d’Ivoire, Togo and Benin. This
worrisome trend clearly merits our collective vigilance,
and together with the regrettable decision by Mali to
withdraw from cooperation between the Group of Five
for the Sahel further underlines the timeliness of the
high-level panel on security and development in the
Sahel. We count on former President Issoufou to steer it
to swift, realistic and tangible recommendations.
In our view, the panel’s security thinking should
take a holistic approach, including on political
dialogue. Discussions cannot shy away from financing
or from mandates for robust, regionally led operations.
They must also be founded on the due diligence and
compliance frameworks for human rights of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. That joint security responses are indeed possible
has been demonstrated with regard to the issue of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. We welcome the positive
trends in that area, thanks to the strong leadership of
Nigeria, Ghana and other coastal countries, which have
been matched by stronger international support. Ahead
of next year’s 10-year mark for the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct, resolution 2634 (2022) should serve as a
strong call to action for a final push.
Lastly, as the sixth assessment report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change states,
“There is increasing evidence linking increased
temperatures and drought to conflict, [and], though
not the only cause, climate change undermines
human livelihoods and security in Africa”.
A growing number of regionally focused reports
show the particularly strong effects of climate change
on security in West Africa and the Sahel. Norway
therefore welcomes the work of UNOWAS on the issue,
including by briefing the Peacebuilding Commission
and supporting ECOWAS and States in developing
strategies to address the adverse impacts. Such support,
aimed at preventing problems jointly with other actors
in the region, shows UNOWAS at its best.
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1
Annadif for briefing us on the latest developments in
West Africa and the Sahel. I also thank the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Rabab
Fatima, for her presentation, and the civil society
briefer, for her insights.
The democratic traditions of West Africa and
the Sahel have once again found resonance in the
successful holding of parliamentary and local elections
in the Gambia and Senegal. The people in West Africa
have consistently anchored their faith in democracy.
We also welcome the efforts of Governments in the
region to launch electoral and administrative reforms
to address long-standing grievances about political
exclusion. Those developments augur well for the next
electoral cycle in 2023. However, the consolidation
of democracy has been overshadowed by successive
coups in Mali, Guinea and, most recently, Burkina
Faso. And democratic processes in the region risk
being undermined by unabated violence perpetrated by
terrorist and armed groups.
Amid that fragile political and security situation,
we commend the leadership of the President of Ghana,
as Chair of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). We appreciate the efforts of
ECOWAS in consolidating democracy and promoting
good governance. We also commend ECOWAS for its
continued engagement with the transitional authorities
of Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea in pursuit of a
transitional road map. The constructive deliberations
and decisions adopted at the summit of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government in Accra,
particularly with respect to Mali, are encouraging.
The violence in the region perpetrated by terrorist
groups affiliated with Al-Qaida and Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant has reached unprecedented
levels. We strongly condemn those attacks, including
the attack on the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali two days
ago. They is indicative of some worrisome trends,
including the exacerbation of internal displacement
and the humanitarian crisis, the southward expansion
of terrorism from the central Sahel region, evident
from attacks in Benin and Togo, and the exploitation
of security gaps by armed groups amid the ongoing
reconfiguration of international security forces.

S/PV.9086

In that context, the countries in the region have
shown tremendous grit and resilience in fighting
terrorism individually and collectively through
regional security initiatives. However, some of those
mechanisms are handicapped by inadequate political
cohesion and the lack of resources. We encourage the
countries in West Africa and the Sahel to re-energize
their security cooperation. We also reiterate our support
for calls for sustainable and predictable support to the
regional security initiatives, including through the
United Nations assessed contributions.
The United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel should remain focused on its mandate and
work closely with national, regional and subregional
stakeholders, particularly ECOWAS. The issue of
climate change should be addressed holistically
through the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change in accordance with its provisions and
principles and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
We reiterate that no artificial link should be drawn
between climate change and security-related issues
without a firm scientific basis. We are glad to note that
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/521) has
rightly prioritized the growing threat of terrorism over
other issues. The humanitarian needs of vulnerable
countries in the region also merit the attention of the
international community.
In conclusion, India attaches great importance to its
relations with countries in West Africa and the Sahel,
and our commitment to development partnerships has
remained steadfast. So far, India has provided soft
loans of more than $3.5 billion for projects in the region
related to agriculture, irrigation, water supplies, energy
and the solar and health sectors. Within the ambit of
the India-United Nations Development Partnership
Fund, we have also undertaken significant livelihood
projects in nine partner countries in West Africa.
Additionally, we have extended support through the
capacity-building of civilians and defence forces, as
well as through scholarships for higher education. India
reiterates its commitment to the people of West Africa
and the Sahel in their quest for peace and development.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate Brazil
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
July and Albania on concluding its presidency for the
previous month.

22-4161713/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

I thank Mr. Annadif, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing
and his tireless efforts in leading the important work
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS). We also thank Ambassador Rabab
Fatima for her briefing and take this opportunity to
express our appreciation for her efforts as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We wish her every success
in her new role at the United Nations. We listened
carefully to the briefing by Ms. Djibo Magagi.
I would also like to express the sincere condolences
of the United Arab Emirates to the Arab Republic of
Egypt and to the families of the Egyptian peacekeepers
who fell victim to the recent terrorist attack in Mali, as
well as all the victims of terrorist attacks in the region.
The United Arab Emirates condemns in the strongest
terms all attacks against civilians and peacekeepers.
I would like to highlight the encouraging
improvements in the regional maritime security
situation since our previous meeting on UNOWAS (see
S/PV.8944), including the inauguration of the West
Africa Regional Maritime Security Centre and increased
cooperation among the countries of West Africa and the
Sahel. In addition, the Council’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 2634 (2022), on maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea, sent a strong message about the
international community’s commitment to supporting
the region’s efforts in that regard.
The increase in cross-border threats posed by
terrorist groups is one of the security challenges that
requires the Council’s special attention, especially given
that those groups continue to expand their operations
across the region. In that context, the international
community must spare no effort to dismantle those
terrorist networks and ensure that a comprehensive
approach is adopted that focuses on addressing the
root causes of extremism and terrorism and building
community resilience.
It is also essential to ensure synergy among
international
and
regional
counter-terrorism
frameworks, as well as regional ownership of those
initiatives. In that regard, we note the importance of local
initiatives, including the efforts of Burkina Faso and the
Niger to incorporate local dialogue and reintegration
initiatives into their counter-terrorism strategies.
With regard to political developments, the United
Arab Emirates continues to emphasize the importance
of national dialogue for addressing existing challenges
14/21

07/07/2022

and establishing institutions that reflect the aspirations
of the people of the countries concerned. In that
context, we stress that it is essential for political
processes to be inclusive and ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in leadership and
decision-making posts.
In addition, responding effectively to challenges
with regional implications requires strengthening
cooperation, solidarity and dialogue at the regional
level. We stress the crucial role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
working with the countries in West Africa and the
Sahel as they forge solutions to address the challenges
they face. In that regard, we note the convening of the
ECOWAS summit in Accra on 3 July, which issued
decisions that responded to developments in the region.
We also express our deep concern for the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, which is
compounded by climate shocks and increased conflicts
across the region. We emphasize the importance of
responding to those complex challenges. That includes
the need for Council members to work together to
address the interlinkages between climate change and
security in West Africa and the Sahel. In that context,
the United Arab Emirates commends UNOWAS for
its efforts in conducting climate security assessments
throughout the region and encourages further initiatives
in that regard.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
UNOWAS and commend its continued cooperation
with regional bodies, including ECOWAS and the
African Union, which remains pivotal to addressing the
challenges facing the region.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I join others in
congratulating Brazil on its assumption of the Security
Council presidency and wish to assure you, Sir, of
my delegation’s full support. We thank the Brazilian
presidency and the other Council members for their
kind words addressed to our delegation.
We welcome the briefings by Special Representative
Annadif, Ambassador Fatima and Ms. Magagi.
At the outset, Albania strongly condemns the
attacks yesterday against a convoy of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, which killed two peacekeepers and injured many
others. We express our condolences to the Government
of Egypt and to the victims’ families.
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

I would first like to recognize the role played by
Special Representative Annadif and the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) in supporting the countries of the Sahel.
Albania is concerned about the alarming
humanitarian situation in the Sahel. The region’s
already dire levels of food insecurity, caused in part by
climate shocks, have been further exacerbated by the
impact of the war in Ukraine. We urge international
partners to strengthen their response and support the
2022 humanitarian response plan, which is less than
20 per cent funded. We have to do more.

S/PV.9086

In conclusion, we welcome the decision by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to lift the economic and financial sanctions
on Mali and commend efforts to agree on acceptable
timelines to return to constitutional order in Mali and
Burkina Faso. In the same vein, we call on the Guinean
authorities to cooperate with ECOWAS and present an
acceptable transition timeline. Appropriate frameworks
must be established by transitional Governments to
encourage dialogue and consultations with political
and civil society stakeholders to ensure a peaceful
transition to constitutional order.

Albania remains concerned about the security
situation. We condemn the recent terrorist attacks
perpetrated in several States in the Sahel region. We
encourage the authorities to intensify their collaboration
under the Accra Initiative and strengthen cross-border
cooperation to prevent terrorist attacks. In that regard,
we stress that the Group of Five for the Sahel remains
vital for regional stabilization, and we encourage
members to step up their efforts. In that context, we
consider that the implementation of the resolution on
the Gulf of Guinea (resolution 2634 (2022)) is a good
starting point and will help to further strengthen
maritime security.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, and the Brazilian delegation on your assumption
of the Security Council presidency. I am confident that
your presidency will be productive and successful. I
would also like to thank the Albanian delegation for its
presidency last month.

Albania welcomes the positive developments
achieved since we last met in January (see S/PV.8944),
including the peaceful elections held in the Gambia
and Senegal. However, we continue to see the underrepresentation of women in decision-making positions.
Governments must increase their efforts to address
structural barriers in order to promote women’s
full, effective and meaningful participation in
political processes.

We share the concerns that have been voiced
today about the situation in many countries in West
Africa, in particular in the Sahel. The region is facing
increased terrorist threats and ongoing inter-ethnic
and intercommunal conflicts, while organized crime
and drug trafficking are flourishing. During the first
half of 2022, more people died at the hands of militants
than in the whole of 2021. We express our support to
all of those who are leading the complex fight against
terrorism in the region.

Political stability in West Africa is under threat.
In that context, focus must be placed on strengthening
democratic governance, the rule of law and the justice
system. The increase in human rights violations is
deeply worrisome. We call on the Sahel States to
investigate all allegations of abuses and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
perpetrated by non-State actors and defence or security
forces. Independent and effective judiciary systems
must ensure that impunity is finally addressed.
We would also welcome enhanced cooperation in
the Sahel among United Nations country teams and
between country teams and UNOWAS to address the
challenges related to insecurity.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Khatir Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for the
information he provided. We also thank the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ms. Rabab Fatima, and the
civil society representative, Ms. Rabia Djibo Magagi.

The humanitarian situation is also very difficult.
The number of internally displaced persons has
significantly increased, as has the number of people
requiring food assistance. Many schools and medical
establishments have closed. All of that requires that the
States in the region, first and foremost in the Sahel,
redouble their efforts to re-establish effective State
control and socioeconomic governance as well as
strengthen regional cooperation. We therefore wish
every success to the countries of the region in carrying
out the joint strategic assessment of the governance
and security situation and in implementing the
Accra Initiative.

22-4161715/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

We welcome the agreement between Mali and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) reached on 3 July at the summit held in
Accra. The lifting of sanctions from Bamako and the
agreement on the deadlines for elections are positive
events for the whole region. We hope that that will
help to rebuild trust, normalize relations, re-establish
economic and other relations and open the path to
cooperation in the fight against increasing threats
and challenges. That could be helped by significant
progress in settling the disagreement regarding the
issues involving Burkina Faso and Guinea.
At the same time, we must note that the withdrawal
of the Barkhane counter-terrorist operation and the
European Union and Takuba forces without Bamako’s
agreement, at least in the short term, is having a
negative effect on the security situation.
Given those conditions, on the basis of a bilateral
agreement Russia is providing the country with
assistance in the fight against terrorism. We have
already seen positive results. Here we reject any baseless
insinuations that attempt to depict the help provided by
Russia to Mali and other countries on the continent in
a negative light. We have heard no complaints from the
countries themselves.
We are deeply concerned at the fact that some
countries, as we heard today in the statement made
by the representative of the United States, speak so
confidently on behalf of the population of the countries
in the region, including Mali, saying that they know
what the people want and what they expect and that that
is the same as what Washington expects. That is very
worrying, because evidently, the United States knew
what ordinary people wanted in Iraq, Afghanistan and
Libya. I think that the inhabitants of the Sahel or Libya
could not have imagined the nightmare that people are
suffering now as a direct result of the intervention in
Libya in 2011.
We see that outside intervention continues to cause
discord in the region, for example in the important
structure of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, from which Mali
has been virtually compelled to withdraw. But what
is also not being taken into account is the commonly
recognized fact that without the participation of that
country, it will be impossible to defeat terrorism in the
region. We are therefore convinced that the main role in
maintaining peace and security in the Sahelo-Saharan
region should fall to the Sahelians themselves.
16/21

07/07/2022

We are in favour of the States of the region holding
a truly independent line in resolving the corresponding
issues on the basis of the principle of African solutions
to African problems.
Coming back to the subject of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), we
are convinced that the Office has a large-scale and
difficult set of tasks in helping to resolve regional crises,
participating in political mediation, providing assistance
to strengthen State institutions and implementing the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as
well as carrying out coordinating functions for other
United Nations structures on the ground.
The effectiveness of the Office’s work will depend
directly on how successfully it is able to work with other
regional organizations, including the African Union,
ECOWAS and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
We support the conclusions of the African Union
Peace and Security Council meeting held on 1 June
on the need to strengthen interaction and coordination
between all of the structures working in the region in
order to resolve the issues in the Sahel.
In conclusion, we would also like to remind
colleagues that after the closure of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, in
2020, the responsibility for monitoring the situation in
that country became part of the mandate of UNOWAS.
We therefore believe that maintaining Security Council
sanctions on Guinea-Bissau under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, which relates only to
conditions involving threats to international peace
and security, is absurd, and we call for these to be
gradually lifted.
I should like to take this opportunity also to say
to Mr. Annadif that Russia welcomes his commitment
and efforts to help the countries of West Africa, the
Sahel and the Lake Chad basin in overcoming their
current difficulties.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Like others, we
wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July
and Albania for its excellent stewardship of the Council
in June. We welcome the Special Representative to the
Chamber and thank him for his very helpful update.
We also welcome the presence of the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and thank Ms. Magagi for
her briefing.
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

As we have heard, there have been some positive
developments since we last met. The peaceful elections
in the Gambia and Senegal are a welcome example of
progress in West African democracy.
We remain very concerned by the political
situation in Mali, Guinea and Burkina Faso, although
the recent progress made on election timelines in Mali
and Burkina Faso is encouraging. Sustained progress
towards the organization of credible elections and a
return to constitutional order is now vital. The United
Kingdom encourages the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) to continue to
focus on democratic processes across the region, in
close coordination with the Economic Community of
West African States and the African Union. We also
welcome the focus that we have heard today on boosting
women’s participation in those processes.
It is also clear from today’s briefing that the
security situation in the region remains very fragile.
The progress in the Gulf of Guinea is welcome, but
the United Kingdom remains very concerned by
the deteriorating security situation in Nigeria, the
central Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin as well as by
ongoing conflicts, including those involving extremist
groups. The presence in the region of mercenary
groups, including the Wagner Group, is a dangerous,
destabilizing factor.
We encourage UNOWAS to focus on the practical
steps that the United Nations can take, in a coordinated
fashion, to address the root causes of conflict,
including through the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as the Special
Representative said.
The United Kingdom, for its part, is committed
to supporting that. We are working with Nigeria to
respond through our Security and Defence Partnership,
and we are supporting long-term stability in Mali and
the wider Sahel, including through our contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and, like others, I
should like to take this opportunity to offer our deep
condolences in connection with the deadly attack on
Egyptian peacekeepers last week.
I also want to focus today on the humanitarian
situation, given the worrying developments we have
heard. We are particularly concerned about the food
security situation, especially where humanitarian

S/PV.9086

access is restricted and where the effects of the global
food crisis and climate change compound the situation.
The United Kingdom is committed to improving
the humanitarian situation, including through providing
more than $200 million of development assistance
across the Sahel between 2019 and 2021.
The United Kingdom calls on all actors to continue
cooperation with UNOWAS at the national and regional
levels to facilitate humanitarian access. We hope that
the Special Representative can use his good offices to
work with all parties to conflict and the wider United
Nations system to ensure safe and unimpeded access.
Finally, we are deeply concerned by the challenging
human rights situation outlined in the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/521). We urge UNOWAS
to continue to work with States to ensure accountability
and improved compliance with international human
rights standards.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): As this is the first time that Mexico has
taken the floor, I would like, on behalf of my country,
to warmly congratulate you, Sir, and wish you the
very best of success in your presidency. I should also
like to acknowledge the work undertaken by Albania
last month.
In addition, we would like, in connection with
the deaths of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
convoy peacekeepers who lost their lives, to extend our
condolences to their families and to the Government
of Egypt.
We should also like to express our gratitude to
Special Representative Annadif and to the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ms. Rabab Fatima,
who is here with us today, and to thank them for their
briefings. We also welcome Ms. Magagi and thank her
for her briefing.
Mexico welcomes the peaceful holding of elections
in Senegal and the Gambia. We also take note of the
consolidation of the regional institutional architecture
through the implementation of the Accra Initiative to
counter violent extremism and the inauguration of the
West Africa Regional Maritime Safety Centre.
However, we are concerned by the fact that violence
has increased in the region and is continuing to spread
to the coastal States. The increasing number of civilian

22-4161717/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

victims in the attacks seen in Burkina Faso, Mali and
Nigeria is quite simply alarming, as are the frequent
attacks on MINUSMA. As we warned at our most
recent meeting on the subject (see S/PV.8944), so long
as weapons continue to circulate in the region without
being monitored, it will be impossible for those trends
to be reversed.
We welcome the recent agreement between the
Ouagadougou authorities and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to set a timetable for
the transition, and we also take note of the fact that
the timetable to re-establish the constitutional order in
Guinea is still pending.
Mexico supports the work undertaken by ECOWAS
to move towards successful transitions in those
countries and welcomes the agreement reached with
Mali to hold elections in 2024 and to partially lift the
regional sanctions.
In that context, I would like to refer to two issues
that my country deems of critical importance.
First, it is a priority to resolve the governance
problems that are affecting some countries in the
region. International cooperation, including the
significant work undertaken by the PBC, must focus on
strengthening State institutions to ensure that they are
able to shoulder their obligations to the population. We
have seen time and again how the vacuum generated
by the absence of the State is capitalized upon by
extremists to impose their control through violence.
At the same time, Mexico is concerned to see
an excessive military focus in strategies for State
consolidation in countries that are assailed by violence.
If military efforts do not go hand in hand with the
provision of basic services such as health care and
education, if there is no respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
then such efforts will be doomed to fail and will only
contribute to the generalization of violence.
Secondly, Mexico believes that there must urgently
be a regional mobilization to strengthen the resilience
of Western Africa and the Sahel. Given the effects of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, the increase in the
price of food and fuel and the consequences of climate
change, the States of the region must make tremendous
efforts to maximize the results of existing programmes
such as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel.
18/21

07/07/2022

West Africa and the Sahel, with the support of
international financial institutions, must invest in their
development and take measures that make it possible
to capitalize on the demographic bonus to promote
economic growth that benefits and has a positive impact
on the population.
A sustainable development strategy in which
women and young people actively participate is the best
way of countering the worsening of the humanitarian
situation, which has led to more than 6 million people
being displaced and rendered more than 13 million
food-insecure.
Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Rabia Djibo
Magagi for their statements.
I would like to make two points.
First, on the political situation in West Africa and
the Sahel, France restates its support for the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and those of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel to promote stability and
democratic governance in the region.
We welcome the holding of local elections in
Senegal in January and of legislative elections in the
Gambia in April. We take note of the outcome of the
ECOWAS summit of 3 July and congratulate President
Sissoco Embaló on his election to head the organization
for the coming year.
We call for respect for the commitments undertaken
for a return to constitutional order and the holding of
elections in Mali, Guinea and Burkina Faso. We also
hope that the legislative elections to be held in Senegal
this month and in Guinea-Bissau in December will take
place in a calm environment. It is important to ensure
the holding of free and transparent elections that are
open to the participation of the opposition and of civil
society as well as of significant numbers of women and
young people.
Inclusive dialogues and institutional reforms are
also necessary to consolidate democratic processes.
In that regard, we welcome the advances made in the
political dialogue in Côte d’Ivoire.
My second point concerns the security situation.
France reiterates its concern at the spread of the terrorist
threat in the region, of which civilians are the primary
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

victims. Countries such as Benin and Togo are also
affected. In that context, France welcomes the adoption
last month of a resolution on maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea.
France will continue its security support to those
countries in the region that request it, in coordination
with their partners, in particular European partners.
We are ready to, inter alia, reinforce our support
to the coastal countries with which we are holding
discussions. Efforts in the area of security must also be
complemented by simultaneous action on governance
and development, in the spirit of the International
Coalition for the Sahel.
We support the efforts under way in the framework
of the independent high-level panel on security and
development in the Sahel, led by Mr. Mahamadou
Issoufou, and hope that they will produce operational
recommendations that will allow us to better provide
collective support to the countries of the Sahel.
We once again raise the alarm on the consequences
of climate change and its effects on food security in the
region. France remains committed to fighting the food
crisis in West Africa, in particular through the Food
and Agriculture Resilience Mission.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): First,
I would like to congratulate Brazil on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month. I wish you
every success, Sir. I also congratulate Albania on the
successful conclusion of its presidency last month.

S/PV.9086

help countries in the region cope with the challenges
facing them.
In conjunction with the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/521) and the briefings we have heard, I would
like to mention the following points.
First, we must remain committed to the overall
approach of resolving political differences through
dialogue. Since the beginning of the year, countries
including Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Benin and
Togo have been actively preparing for elections. Côte
d’Ivoire has held a political dialogue, while the Gambia
has held parliamentary elections. Many countries will
start their election agendas next year. The international
community should respect the sovereignty and
leadership of countries of the region, support them in
following development paths that suit their national
conditions and assist the parties concerned in resolving
their differences through dialogue. The Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) recently
held a summit, which made important decisions, such
as lifting the sanctions against Mali. China supports
Africa in finding African solutions to African issues.
We support ECOWAS in continuing to maintain
dialogue with countries in political transition in order
to jointly advance that transition along the right track.

Since assuming his duties, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Annadif has led the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in actively
carrying out political mediation. The Peacebuilding
Commission has helped the countries concerned
achieve lasting peace by means of the considerable
amount of work accomplished by Ambassador Fatima.
China appreciates their efforts.

Secondly, we must pay close attention to
maintaining security and stability in the region.
Recently, violent terrorist forces in the region have
launched frequent attacks, spreading their activities
from the Sahel countries to coastal States along the Gulf
of Guinea and seriously jeopardizing regional security
and stability. Counter-terrorism is a comprehensive
war, and countries in the region form an inseparable
security community. China supports such countries
in strengthening cooperation in terms of equipment,
intelligence and logistical supplies, promoting the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants and actively and effectively curbing
the spread of terrorism. When countries outside the
region adjust their military deployment, it is necessary
to strengthen communication and coordination
with countries in the region to avoid creating any
security vacuum.

Currently, West Africa and the Sahel is facing an
increasingly complex political and security situation.
Secretary-General Guterres visited the three countries
in the region in May, calling on the international
community to increase its attention and input so as to

The countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) are at the forefront of counter-terrorism
and have made major efforts and great sacrifices to
curb the spread of terrorist forces over the years. Their
role in counter-terrorism in the region and the wider

I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif and Ambassador Fatima for
their briefings. I also listened attentively to
Ms. Magagi’s statement.

22-4161719/21

S/PV.9086

Peace consolidation in West Africa

African continent is irreplaceable. Counter-terrorism
cooperation among the G-5 Sahel countries faced
some difficulties in the past period. We hope that the
five countries will seize the opportunity of ECOWAS
lifting the sanctions against Mali to strengthen
solidarity and cooperation, remove obstacles and build
a regional counter-terrorism bulwark. The international
community should provide sustained and predictable
financial assistance to counter-terrorism operations
in the region. China supports the African Union and
ECOWAS in conducting a joint strategic assessment of
the Sahel issue, giving new impetus to regional counterterrorism cooperation.
Thirdly, we must strengthen national capacitybuilding in the region. West African countries face
multiple challenges in the post-pandemic recovery.
Thirty million people in the Sahel need humanitarian
assistance; there are 6.2 million displaced persons,
and food security is in a dire situation. That is really
disconcerting. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, the lack of development funds and humanitarian
assistance has become a severe challenge faced by many
countries of the region. The international community
and the relevant countries should maintain the level
of assistance and honour their commitments through
action. The focus should be on helping countries of the
region to strengthen capacity-building and prevent and
defuse threats. The maritime security situation in the
Gulf of Guinea has improved, mainly thanks to the joint
efforts of the countries of the region. China supports
the international community in increasing its attention
and input in that regard and in actively cooperating at
the regional and international levels.
China pays attention to the challenges posed by
climate change to countries of the region. During
his visit to the region, the Secretary-General called
on developed countries to honour their $100 billion
climate finance commitments to developing countries.
We hope that developed countries will heed the call of
the Secretary-General and provide tangible assistance
to the countries of the region in adapting to the impact
of climate change. On 24 June, China held a highlevel dialogue on global development, announcing
a series of major measures to implement the Global
Development Initiative and calling on all parties to
follow a development pattern featuring benefits for
all, balance, coordination, inclusiveness, mutually
beneficial cooperation and common prosperity. Such
initiatives address tough issues, including difficulties
20/21

07/07/2022

in the global economic recovery, the widening
development gap between the North and the South,
the lack of momentum for international development
and cooperation and increasing marginalization of
development issues. They are the common concerns of
regional and developing countries. China is committed
to building a global partnership for development,
and we look forward to working with all to expedite
the implementation of the outcomes of the high-level
dialogue so as to leave no country and no one behind
by making a greater contribution to the peaceful
development of the countries of the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Annadif
for his participation in our meeting and for his tireless
efforts at the head of the United Nations Office for
West Africa. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Rabab Fatima for the highly informative briefing. We
very much welcome the inputs on West Africa and the
Sahel from the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and
especially the opportunity of an exchange between
the Council and the PBC, which could, and in fact
should, happen more often. Finally, my warm thanks
go to Ms. Rabia Magagi for enriching our meeting with
her unique perspective as a champion for the rights of
women and young people.
The situation in West Africa and the Sahel
demonstrates how closely linked the political, security,
economic and humanitarian dimensions of a crisis are.
The lack of progress in one of those domains has a
direct impact on the others.
In the region, we have witnessed ruptures of the
constitutional order in several countries. The de facto
authorities that have emerged after those ruptures often
justify their actions by the alleged need to combat
security threats more effectively.
The overthrow of the constitutional order generates
a reaction in the domestic sphere, often intensifying the
pre-existing conflicts and security threats, as well as
at the international and regional levels, with sanctions
being imposed by regional bodies.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/521)
shows how the coup in Mali and disagreements over the
pace of the transition in the country have impacted the
efficacy of the Joint Force of the countries of the Sahel
in fighting terrorism.
22-41617

07/07/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Brazil is therefore encouraged by the news that
Mali and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) have come to an agreement on a
time frame for the return of the constitutional order
and the holding of constitutional, parliamentary and
presidential elections. We welcome the fact that the
ECOWAS leaders have deemed that conditions are in
place for the lifting of sanctions against that country.
We congratulate former President Goodluck Jonathan
on his successful mediation efforts.
We are also encouraged by the progress made on a
transition time frame in Burkina Faso. The participation
of the opposition is indispensable to a truly meaningful
agreement. As for Guinea, we note with concern that
the authorities in Conakry have not accepted a mediator
from ECOWAS. We urge them to engage with the
opposition and with regional partners with a view to a
return of civilian rule.
As I said, progress on the political front is
necessary for the West Africa region to be able to tackle
its significant security challenges. As the SecretaryGeneral points out in his report, armed groups have been
expanding their range of action from the Sahel towards
the coast. Benin and Togo are already suffering the
consequences of that trend. We take note of the efforts
of the countries of the region to better coordinate their
response to that threat.

S/PV.9086

On a more positive note, we welcome the
improvement in the security situation in the Gulf of
Guinea. Resolution 2634 (2022), adopted last May,
demonstrates the commitment of the Security Council
to addressing the issue.
The humanitarian situation in West Africa and
the Sahel is directly affected by the actions of armed
groups, which have caused the displacement of
millions of people. As a result, economic activities are
disrupted, the education of children is interrupted and
lives are shattered.
Moreover, livelihoods across the region are being
affected by rising food and fuel prices, increasing
food insecurity. Brazil has a long-standing partnership
with the World Food Programme and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
promote trilateral South-South cooperation, including
in countries in the West Africa region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting so
that the Council can continue its deliberations in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-4161721/21
