nd
MEETING:

15 JUNE

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2282). . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ,.........,............I.......~.................

1

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the ChargC d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509) . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . .

1

SjPV.2282

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2282nd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 15 June 1981, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Portirio MUNOZ LED0 (Mexico).

Mrs. Nguyen Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam), Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia), Mr. Mutukwa (Zambia) and Mr. Terzi
(Palestine Liberation
Grganization)
took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Bangladesh, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Hungary, Mongolia, Sierra Leone and the Syrian Arab Republic in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant pravisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2282)

I.

Adoption of the agenda

2, Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the ChargC
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/14509)
The meeting

procedure.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Kaiser
Hulinsk$
{Czechoslovakia),
(Bangladesh),
Mr.
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Rdcz (Hungary),
Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia), Mr. Koroma (Sierra
Leone), and Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint
by Iraq
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charg6 d’affaires
of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509)

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the letter dated 13 June 1981 from the
representative of Bangladesh to the President of the
Security Council [S/145301.

I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2280th and 2281st meetings], I invite the
representatives of Iraq and Israel to take places at the
Council
table, and I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cuba, Guyana, India, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Pakistan, Romania, Somalia,
the Sudan, Turkey, Viet Nam, Yugo%lavia, Zambia
and of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council

4. Mr. OTUNNU (Uganda): Mr. President, I greet
you warmly in the name of the delegation of Uganda.
We are very privileged to have you preside over affairs
of peace and security in the world during these difficult
and precarious times. Your uncompromising commitment in favour of justice and peace, your distinction as
a statesman and your boundless energy, as well as
your diplomatic skills will, I am sure, all combine to
make the Council’s work during the month of June
both rewarding and memorable.

chamber.

5. I also greet you, Mr. President, as a great son of
Mexico. You represent a people whose revolutionary
tradition is an inspiration to the peoples of the third
world and whose relentless advocacy of a new andjust
international economic order is a source of strength to
all of us.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kittani (Iraq)
and Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at the Council table
and Mr. Beajaoui (Algeria), Mr. Corre*a da Costa
(Brazil),
Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr.
Nuseibeh
(Jordan), Mr. Al-Sabah
{Kuwait),
Mr.
Tudni (Lebanon),
Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan),
Mr. Marinescu
(Romania),
Mr. Adan (Somalia),
Abdalla
(Sudan),
Mr.
Kirca
(Turkey),
Mr.

6. I wish also to take this opportunity to pay a welldeserved tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Nisibori of
1

Japan, who presided over the Council last month with
great wisdom, patience and diplomatic skill. It was a
distinct pleasure for my delegation to work with
Mr. Nisibori during the month of May.

whose views on this subject, incidentally, are long
outdated and have been rejected by the overwhelming
body of international legal opinion. In any case, the
opinions of commentators, however well placed and
interesting, cannot be a substitute for the actual
provisions of the law.

7. In the early evening of Sunday, 7 June 1981, the
quiet peace that prevailed in the historic city of
Baghdad on the shores of the river Tigris was
suddenly and brutally disturbed by the sounds of
intensive bombardments. The messengers of death
and destruction had struck once again. The Israeli Air
Force was engaged in an armed attack deep into the
territory of Iraq. Their target this time was Iraq’s
nucfear research station at Tuwaitha just outside the
city of Baghdad. The attack resulted in the loss of
many human lives and extensive material damage.

13. What, then, are the actual provisions of the law
with regard to the right of self-defence?
14. The requirements of self-defence, under what the
representative of Israel has called general international
law, have been well established since the famous
North American case of The Caroline in 1837.That
case arose when the British Government sent an
armed expeditionary force into the United States to
seizearms and destroy The Caroline, a vessel that was
being used by Canadian militants in their fight against
the then British Dominion Government in Canada.

8. This incident has given rise to the present complaint by Iraq against Israel. As it happens, the facts of
the case are not in dispute. What is in dispute is
Israel’s claim that its raid on Osirak falls within the
purview of the doctrine of self-defence.

15. The rule of necessity established in the case of
and stated by the then American
Secretary of State, Daniel Webster, is that self-defence is justified only when the necessity of that selfdefence is “instant, overwhelming, leaving no choice
of means and no moment for deliberation”,
The Caroline

9. The unilateral use of force by a State beyond its
borders has always constituted a fundamental issue in
international relations. Such use of force, in violation
of the territorial integrity of another State, always
entails grave consequences. For this reason, the
present international legal regime, as represented by
treaty laws and customary principles, has placed an
absolute prohibition on such use of force.

16. Prime Minister Begin of Israel and the Commander of the Israeli Air Force, General Ivri, have both
informed the world that the raid was preceded by
many months of elaborate planning and rehearsals.
These are circumstances that are plainly inconsistent
with the requirements of self-defence under general
international law.

10. The clearest expression of this prohibition is to
be found in Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which provides as follows:

17. The present claim of self-defence by Israel is
therefore quite preposterous. It is as credible as
the claim made by Nazi Germany at the Nuremberg
trials in 1945that it had invaded Norway and Denmark
in 1940 in exercise of the right of self-defence.
The International Military Tribunal at Nurembeg,
applying the rule of necessity to which I earlier
referred, rejected the Nazi argument. The Council
must today likewise reject in the strongest terms the
Israeli argument.

“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations”.
11. The rare and only exception to this otherwise
absolute prohibition is the exercise of the right of selfdefence. Israel has invoked this exception in an
attempt to justify its attack on Osirak. In his statement
before the Council last Friday, the representative of
Israel made the following categorical assertion:
“In destroying Osirak last Sunday, Israel was
exercising its inherent and natural right of selfdefence, as understood in general international law
and well within the meaning of Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations.” [228&h meeting,

18. Apart from general international law, Israel has
also invoked Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations. However, it is interesting that, while the
representative of Israel last Friday readily referred to
Article 51 by name, he seemed strangely shy when it
came to discussingthe actual contents of that Article.
Well, the reason for that shynessis to be found in the
explicit provisions of Article 51 itself.

12. But, in a curious twist, the representative of
Israel did not present to the Council the body of law on
which he based the assertion which I have-just quoted.
On the contrary, the representative of Israel proceeded to bombard the Council with quotations from
the opinions of a few well-selected commentators,

19. I have heard many fantastic arguments from the
representative of Israel but I have not heard him
stretch our imagination by suggesting that the mere
fact of having a nuclear research centre somehow
constituted an armed attack by Iraq against Israel. But
Article 51 is explicit in stating that the right of
collective and individual self-defence is only permissi-

para. 97.1

2

ble in response to an armed attack. Since there was no
armed attack against Israel, whose border lies some
1,000 kilometres away from Iraq, how, then, can Israel
take refuge under Article 51? Indeed, I recall no
previous occasion when the Council has accepted the
plea of self-defence in the absence of a prior armed
attack.

gorically: “The Agency has inspected the Iraqi reactors and has not found evidence of any activity not in
accordance with the Non-Proliferation Treaty.“’ And
in its resolution of 12 June 1981, the Board of
Governors of IAEA strongly condemned the Israeli
aggression. In the view of the Board, the aggression
constituted “clear disregard for the Agency’s safeguards regime and the Non-Proliferation Treaty and
could do great harm to the development of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes” [S/145321.

20. Clearly, the Israeli claim flies in the face of not
only the principles of customary international law but
also the provisions of the Charter. The Israeli argument is a tortuous attempt to force a square peg into a
raund hole. It amounts to a cynical perversion of the
norms of international law as we know them.

26. Unlike Iraq, Israel is not a party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [General
Assembly resolution 2373 (XXrr), annex]. Unlike those
of Iraq, none of Israel’s nuclear facilities is subject to
international inspection.

21. The Israeli raid on Osirak constitutes an act of
aggression under Article 39 of the Charter.

27. It is significant that, throughout his statement
[228&h meeting] about the supposed dangers posed by
Osirak, the Israeli representative made no reference to
Israel’s own nuclear facilities. He was strangely silent
about the nuclear arsenal at Dimona in the Negev
desert, where Israel is manufacturing nuclear weapons
with impunity.

22. The Israeli representative also tried to justify this
act of aggression by referring to a so-called state of
war between Israel and Iraq. The notion that a state of
war justifies everything is a heresy that is unknown to
the civilization of international law. As the representative of Algeria has rightly pointed out, even a state of
war involves precise obligations that are clearly set out
in the Geneva Conventions of 1949 [ibid., para. 1461.

28. The Israeli discourse on the need for a nudearweapon-free zone in the Middle East reminds meof an
armed bandit who walks into a courtroom, takes
everybody hostage and then lectures the group on the
virtues of being a law-abiding citizen.

23. In that regard, Israel should learn from the wise
words of Professor Yehuda Blum, when he said that
“a State cannot invoke in its favour benefits
deriving from certain provisions of international law
without being prepared at the same time also to
abide by the duties flowing from international law”.
[ibid.,

29. The Israeli claims are the product of a political
hallucination, a condition in which the Zionist leaders
imagine most things to constitute a danger to Israeli
security and most people to be enemies of Israel, It is
not only the Arab world which has been the victim of
that political hallucination. The Security Council and
the General Assembly have been subjected to constant
Zionist vilification. Even the Secretary-General of the
United Nations has come under virulent attack. The
list of enemies has recently been expanded to include
Chancellor Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany, the former President of France, Mr. Valery
Giscard d’Estaing and the United States Secretary of
Defense, Mr. Caspar Weinberger. I could go on with
this catalogue of the so-called enemies of Israel. The
trouble is, it begins to sound more and more like a rollcall of Who’s Who in the world.

paru. 75.1

Moreover, article 3 of the Definition of Aggression
adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 3314
(XXIX) states that “regardless of a declaration of
war, . . . bombardment by the armed forces of a State
against the territory of another State or the use of any
weapons by a State against the territory of another
State” shall qualify as an act of aggression. .Furthermore, article 5, paragraph 1of the Definition rules out
the justification of aggression on any grounds whatsoever. It states that “No consideration of whatever
nature, whether political, economic, military or otherwise, may serve as ajustification for aggression.”
24. The last justification offered by Israel is the
allegation that Osirak was about to produce nuclear
weapons., The representative of Israel even went to
great lengths to produce bits of information from
various dubious sources.In this matter, obviously, the
most authoritative and objective source of information
is the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which has carried out regular safeguards inspections.
The most recent inspection was carried out last
January.

30. Any man or woman of conscience who has dared
to question Zionist policies of domination and expansion and who has raised a voice in support of
Palestinian rights has been labelled an enemy of Israel
or given some other equally ugly epithet.
31. But there is rhyme and reason to this political
hallucination. To be sure, the attack on Osirak is not
an isolated incident; it is an integral part of a Zionist
programme which includes the permanent oppression
of the Palestinian people, the dismemberment of
Lebanon and the domination of the entire Arab world.
That is the meaning of the act of aggression of 7 June.

25. In a statement issued on 9 June, the Director
General cf IAEA, Mr. Sigvard Eklund, stated cate:
3
.

,.

.‘.’

’

..,

.
,;.

:

._

..
,,‘.

.

presidency of the Security Council. I salute you as a
statesman and diplomat whose experience has, since
your arrival in New York, been a source of inspiration
for the Organization and has often helped us to steer
clear of obstacles. I also salute the representative of a
great country which occupies a notable place in the
community of nations and with which France maintains the friendliest and most co-operative of relations.

32. But the Israeli act of aggression has a larger
meaning which transcends the territory of Iraq and the
borders of the Arab world. Nuclear research is a
science whose role in the field of positive technology
for development is rapidly expanding. By attacking the
nuclear research .centre at Tuwaitha, Israel is seeking,
to close that horizon of knowledge to Iraq and the
Arab world. If this act of barbarity goes unchecked
and unpunished, then all of us in the third world will be
consigned to a permanent state of scientific and
technological underdevelopment.

40. I should like also to pay tribute to the exemplary way in which your predecessor, Mr. Nisibori,
conducted our work last May in very delicate conditions and circumstances.

33. If the Israeli aggression is not condemned and
punished by the Council, what guarantee is there that
in the future some leader facing the pressures of
elections will not launch an attack on his neighbour’s
nuclear yard just to engage in jingoism and impress the
electorate?

41. At the request of the Government of Iraq, the
Council is meeting to consider the situation resulting
from the attack carried out on 7 June by Israeli aircraft
against the Tamuz nuclear installations in Iraq.

34. Our world will have finally degenerated from a
rt5gime of universal norms to a militarized jungle in
which nuclear holocaust is the only prospect for the
grand finale.

42. Thus, the Council, which already has before it
numerous questions concerning the situation in the
Middle East-and I note, in particular, Lebanon, the
Iraq-Iran conflict, the question of Palestine, Jerusalem, and the occupied territories-is called upon to
take a stand on a particularly serious event. It is,
indeed, a clear violation of the rules of international
law. That is why France so quickly expressed itself as
being in favour of an urgent meeting of the Council.

35. Imagine for a moment the plight of those of us
from Africa. We have the apartheid regime in the
south, with proven nuclear capability, and the Zionist
regime to the north, with a definite nuclear arsenal.
Both regimes are collaborating very closely on their
schemes of domination and destruction. And for
whom, may I ask, are the nuclear time bombs of
Pretoria and Tel Aviv ticking?

43. In a release published the day following the
attack, the Israeli Government claimed responsibility
for the operation and noted that France had participated in the construction of the Iraqi nuclear
centre.

36. Both Israel and South Africa rely on external
assistance to sustain their war arsenals. Those who
have persisted in supplying Israel and South Africa
with the means of death and destruction cannot escape
responsibility for the actions of their proteges.

44. Following that statement, the French Government reacted in the clearest possible way; the
Prime Minister, Mr. Pierre Mauroy, said on Monday
evening, $ June, that the bombing was “an unacceptable act, which the French Government condemns and
which can only increase tension in the region.”

37. Israel is the spoilt child of the Middle East, which
has grown in arrogance and aggression on the indulgence of its benefactors. The spoilt child is so used to
special treatment that it does not expect to be made to
account for its actions any more. But the Security
Council must act without fear or favour and impose
sanctions against Israel under Chapter VII of the.
Charter of the United Nations. In that way, Israel will
know that the policies of aggression and expansion do
not pay.

45. Shortly thereafter, an official press release,
published by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, emphasized that “Any attack on the territory of a foreign
State constitutes a violation of law and is therefore to
be condemned.” The President of the French Republic
and the Government sent their condolences to the
family and colleagues of the French engineer who was
killed during that bombardment. After having given
initial indications as to the damage to the Tamuz
centre, the official communique recalled that those
installations had been made subject to IAEA control,
and I shall come back to this point. Finally, the
Ambassador of Israel in Paris was summoned by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who informed him of the
French Government’s feelings about the incident and
asked him to provide explanations.

38, Those who live by the sword live danaerouslv.
Yet; it is not too late for Israel to heed the cal of the
prophet Isaiah and the call of the prophet Micah, and
renounce aggression and beat the machine guns’ into
ploughshares, the tanks into tractors, and those
messengers of death and destruction, the F-16s, into
doves, the messengers of peace. Otherwise, the peace
and security Israel seeks will remain forever elusive.
39. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from

46. Hence my Government’s position was clearly
expressed from the very first moment the incident
took place. I would add that French public opinion

French): Mr. President, it is a very special pleasure for

me to welcome your accession to the office of the
4

was particularly shocked by this intolerable infringement of the principles of law which, furthermore,
threatened the security of our compatriots working
abroad. At the same time, French public opinion felt
the seriousness of this act of force which exacerbated
the dangerous situation prevalent in the Middle East.

bomb to build a reactor such as the Tamuz reactor to
get material for military purposes. As everybody
knows, there are simple ways to achieve that goal: the
purchase of centrifuges for the enrichment of uranium,
or the construction of natural uranium reactors for
making plutonium, for example.

47. Given the diversity of the comments published in
the press with regard to French-Iraqi nuclear cooperation, I feel it useful to furnish some additional
information.

54. Pursuant to the agreements of 1975 and 1976,
which were duly made public, Iraq made precise
formal commitments to France in the matter of
safeguards and guarantees. In keeping with the obligations of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, Iraq entered into
all the necessary implementation agreements with
IAEA and provided it with all the information called
for. On two occasions, the latter being this year, it
received at the Tamuz site inspectors from the
Agency, who found nothing amiss. For its part, the
French Government, anxious not to allow any diversion and to avoid any criticism and any suspicion, had
only recently made sure that no measure would be
neglected to guarantee the use of the supplies for
exclusively peaceful purposes.

48. My Government rejects the allegations of the
Israeli Government that the Tamuz reactor “was
intended to produce atomic bombs”. This mixing of
peaceful and military uses of nuclear energy is
inadmissible. The sole purpose of the Tamuz reactor
was-and is-scientific research, and the agreements
between France and Iraq exclude any use of it-even
indirectly-for military purposes.
49. We can speak knowledgeably about the Tamuz-1
and Tamuz-2 reactors, because they are the exact
replicas of the Isis and Osiris reactors which were built
for the needs of the French civil programme; they are
in operation at the Saclay centre, in my country, and
are intended for experimental irradiation of materials
and for the production of radioisotopes;

55. In these circumstances, the Israeli attack, among
its other consequences, seriously damages the very
principles of peaceful nuclear co-operation among
States within the framework of an international nonproliferation regime. It could shake the very foundations of international co-operation in that field. In this
regard, my delegation can only subscribe to the view
expressed by the Director General Eklund of IAEA in
his statement before the Governing Council of that
Agency:

50. During our meeting on 12 June, attention was
drawn to two possible dangers: the diversion of
enriched uranium and the production of plutonium.
51. The first hypothesis is groundless. The IAEA
safeguards are designed precisely to ensure that
fuels are not diverted. And these safeguards have
worked quite satisfactorily. Furthermore, once fuels
have begun to be irradiated in a reactor core, the
highly enriched uranium which they contain becomes
unsuitable for the manufacture of explosives. Finally,
I recall the summary published by the French Government in 1980, to the effect that:

“The Agency has inspected the Iraqi reactors and
has not found evidence of any activity not in accordance with the Non-Proliferation Treaty. A non-NPT
country has evidently not felt assured by our
findings and about our ability to continue to discharge our safeguarding responsibilities effectively.
. . . one can only conclude that it is the Agency’s
safeguards regime which has also been attacked.
Where will this lead us in future? This is a matter of
grave concern which should be pondered well.“’

“The ways and means employed for the delivery of
this uranium are in keeping with the needs of
the research reactor alone. They are programmed
accordingly and are accompanied by all the necessary precautions.”

56. Where would we end up if a State were to
proclaim itself judge of the intentions of another State
even though the latter was complying with the rules
and disciplines of the international community in so
sensitive an area as nuclear energy? More serious,
perhaps, is the scorn shown for the rules of international law. The Israeli attack, directed against the
territory of a foreign State, constitutes a violation of
the fundamental principles which all States espouse
when they sign the Charter-in particular, the right of
each State to have its sovereignty and independence
respected, as well as the obligation of all not to resort
to the use of force but, rather, to seek means of
peaceful settlement. Nothing can justify an act which,
moreover, has aroused unanimous criticism throughout the world.

52. The second hypothesis isjust as groundless. The
Tamuz reactor is conceived exclusively for scientific
research. Any attempt to use it to produce plutonium,
for military purposes-which presupposes the massive
irradiation of natural uranium for the subsequent
extraction of plutonium-would require a radical
alteration of the installation and the manipulation of
quantities of dangerously irradiated materials in the
order of several tons. Such an operation would
immediately be discovered before it couid succeed.
53. To conclude this technical aspect, it would be
absurd for a country wishing to manufacture ti nuclear
5

57. Finally, I should like to share with the Council
my Government’s grave concern over the heightened
tension which grips the entire Middle East as a result
of that act. At a time when efforts are being made on
all sides to promote a settlement of the Lebanese
crisis, this act of war can only compromise those
efforts, introduce,an additional factor of discord and
further complicate the search for a peaceful settlement
in the Middle East-a search to which France and its
European partners are actively committed.
58. In these circumstances, it is for the Council to
take a ctear stand on the matter that has been
submitted to it by the Iraqi Government. The Council’s responsibility is at stake and it cannot avoid this
responsibility without doing damageto its authority. It
is important that a firm resolution result from our
debates. That resolution should, as we understand it,
contain the following elements: first, condemnation of
the Israeli military action; secondly, a solemn appeal
to Israel to cease such military actions; and thirdly,
equitable reparation for the destruction and damage
for which Israel has publicly acknowledged responsibility. In our view, those should be the conclusions
of the Council’s debate.
59. But, over and above those conclusions, it is to
the future of peace in the region that we must now turn
our thoughts. We have many times affirmed, and we
rearm, our attachment to Israel’s security. We are
,convinced that the resort to force in the long run does
not serve either that security or the security of the
Israelis. The true solution of the problem lies in a just
and negotiated settlement of the Middle East conflict,
for this and future generations. There must be an end
to this chain of violence and, reprisal. It is not by
ignoring the guarantees given by the international
community and the efforts which that community is
making to bring about peace that Israel will win
recognition from its neighbours as a trustworthy
partner. And is that not what ail the peoples of the
region are hoping for? Peace and security through
confidence.
60. Mr. ZACHMANN (German Democratic Republic): The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic shares the world-wide indignation at the
barbarous raid of the Israeli Air Force on the nuclear
research centre near the capitai of the Republic of
Iraq. The Foreign Minister of the Republic of Iraq has
informed the Security Council [ibid.] in detail about
the scope and the extent of that brutal act of
aggression, which has far-reaching consequences for
world peace and security.
61. In gross disregard of international law, the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Iraq and
other Arab Stateswere violated. The raid made with
aircraft supplied by the United States resulted in
casualties and the lives of thousands were endangered
without any scruples. In this connection, my delegation would like to offer its deepest sympathy to the
representatives of Iraq and France.

62. Despite the repeated calls of the Security Council
to Israel to cease its acts of aggression against
sovereign Arab States, once again a State Member of
the United Nations has become the victim of a
malicious attack.
63. It is evident that the aggravation of the international situation by the most aggressive circles of
imperialism has encouraged the aggressor to escalate
its policy of State terrorism to a dangerous extent. As
is well known, the leading representatives of international reaction have made no secret of the fact that
they want to implement their so-called interests in the
Gulf region “with the full range of their means”-and
that implies nothing else but armed force. In this
strategic conception Israel plays a decisive role.
64. The aggression against Iraq is renewed evidence
of the continuation of the provocative action of Israel
against Arab States and the Palestine Liberation
Grganization. It reaffirms the fact that Israel is
unscrupulously using military force to achieve its
aggressive goals against the legitimate interests of
Arab peoples.
65. As a result of the world-wide protest, the ruling
circles in Israel now seek to fabricate an alleged threat
by Iraq to justify this flagrant violation of international
law. This allegation is just as mendacious as it is
unfounded. The truth is that Iraq, as a party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
has strictly adhered to the provisions of that Treaty.
The Iraqi nuclear research centre had been subjected
to the inspection of the IAEA.
66. During the debate of the Council, reference has
already been made to the statement given in this
connection by the Director General of IAEA,
Mr. Eklund, in which he confirmed that the Agency
has inspected the Iraqi reactors and had not found
evidence of any activity not in accordance with the
Non-Proliferation Treaty.’
67. Israel, however, is not a party to that Treaty. It is
developing its nuclear capacity for military purposes,
using its close collaboration with imperialist Statesand
South Africa. That explains, too, why Israel has not
acceded to the Treaty and refuses inspection by
IAEA.
68. The attack on the Iraqi nuclear reactor, which
was designed for the peaceful use of atomic energy, is
an unparalleled precedent, a direct attack on the
entire safeguards regime of IAEA and a challenge to
all parties to the Treaty-not to mention the outrageous impudence of giving Arab countries lessons on
what advanced technologies they are permitted to use.
69. Many States have rightly raised the question: By
whom will the aggressorfeel threatened tomorrow and
against whom will it then use its well-equipped war
machinery supplied by United States imperialism?

.

70. The statements of “regret and concern” made
by Israel’s major ally on this Israeli attack sound
like theatrical thunder. Such manifestations remain
untrustworthy as long as they are not combined with
true, effective measures for the complete cessation of
military support to the aggressor. The danger of a
further aggravation of the situation in the region, for
which Israel is responsible, makes it imperative to
cease all nuclear and military collaboration with the
aggressor, as is demanded in the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, in particular its resolutions
33171A, 34189and 351157.

74. I should like also to express our gratitude to the
representative of Japanfor the work he did last month,
75. The attack carried out by Israeli forces on 7 June
against the Iraqi nuclear centre is an act of aggression
against a State Member of the United Nations, an act
that endangers international peace and security. It is a
clear violation of the basic rules of international law
and of the principles on which the Organization is
founded.
76. Immediately upon hearing of the perpetration
of this act, my Government issued a communiqud
strongly condemning this intolerable act of force

71. The German Democratic Republic strongly condemns this new Israeli act of aggression. My delegation supports the demands of the Iraqi Government
and the League of Arab States for the imposition of
mandatory sanctions against Israel, in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
to stop the continued breach of international law and
the flagrant violation of the Charter by the ruling
circles of Israel, which endanger the peace and
security of the peoples in that region and not only
there. Once again the urgency of a comprehensive
political solution of the Middle East issues is underscored. The proposal to hold an international peace
conference on this subject is extremely timely.

[S/14511] *

77. Israel seeks to justify this act of aggression by
presenting it as preventive action to avert some future,
hypothetical threat to its security. That justification is
absolutely unacceptable.
78. The Charter of the United Nations clearly
enshrines the principle of refraining from the threat or
use of force; and when, in Article 51, it refers to the
inherent right of self-defence, it limits that right to a
case of armed attack against a Member of the United
Nations -and only until this organ, the Security
Council, has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security. The Charter does not
allow for-indeed, if it did, that would amount to a
return to the law of thejungle-any right to preventive
action by which a Member State could set itself up as
judge, party and policeman in respect to another
country. To act in that way would be to destroy the
basic principles governing the organized international community and to create the most absolute
lawlessness.

72. In conclusion, I should like to refer to the
statement of 10June 1981of the Central Committee of
the Socialist Unity Party of Germany, the State
Council and the Council of Ministers of the German
Democratic Republic. It states, inter afiu:
“At this hour, the German Democratic Republic
reaffirms its full solidarity with Iraq and all Arab
countries and comes out for a just, peaceful settlement of the Middle East issue in line with the
proposals of the Soviet Union and the United
Nations.

79. The Security Council now has the responsibility
firmly to condemn this act of aggression carried out by
Israel and to consider the measures necessary to
prevent any other action-as irresponsible as the one
we condemn today-that would threaten international
peace and security not only in the area of tension in the
Middle East, but throughout the world.

“The German Democratic Republic, as always,
holds the view that peace and security in this region
require the complete withdrawal of Israel from all
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories and the
guaranteeing of the inalienable rights of the Arab
people of Palestine, whose only legitimate representative is the PLO.

80. This Israeli act of aggression is the most recent
and serious incident in a large series of confrontations
in the Middle East that have made of that region a real
powder keg and a true source of jeopardy to world
peace, To rid ourselves of this jeopardy we must
achieve peace in the Middle East and find a solution to
the problem of Palestine. Only in that way can there be
established among all the States of the region a
relationship of trust that would make possible the
peaceful development of the entire region, the avoidance of confrontations and the elimination of recourse
to acts like the one the Council is now examining.
A sblution of that kind should be based on the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force-which means that Israel must
withdraw from all the Arab territories occupied in

“This includes the right of the Arab people of
Palestine, of all expelled Palestinians, to return to
their homeland, to self-determination, and to form
an independent Palestinian State.” [S/14526.]
73. Mr. de PIN&
(Spain) (interpretation
from
Seldom does one have so much satisfaction
as I have today in seeingyou, Sir, the representative of
Mexico, presiding over the Security Council, You are
an illustrious son of a country so closely linked to my
own, a country to which, through you, I should like to
pay a well-deserved tribute.
Spanish):

7

88. In the evening of 7 June, the Israeli authorities
brazenly sent warplanes to bomb the nuclear reactor in
the vicinity of Baghdad. This was a deliberate,
premeditated act of naked aggression against a sovereign Arab State and another serious crime the Israeli
authorities have committed against Iraq, as well as the
entire Arab nation. The Chinese Government and
people condemn in the strongest terms and voice their
utmost indignation at this Israeli act of aggression,
which has rudely trampled upon the Charter of the
United Nations. It was entirely necessary andjustified
for the Iraqi Government to request an immediate
meeting of the Council to consider this matter. The
Chinese delegation listened attentively to the important statement made to the Council by Mr. Saadoon
Hammadi, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, in
which he exposed Israel’s criminal aggression with
irrefutable facts,

1967; recognition and implementation of the national
rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to
self-determination in its homeland; and, finally, the
right of all the States in the region to live in peace
within secure and recognizedborders.
81. The action we are considering today obviously
could bring about a further delay in the achievement of
a general solution to the Middle East conflict. It should
make all those who supply large amounts of war
mutkriel to that region aware of the responsibility they
have for the use to which that mattSd may be
put-for it is extremely difficult to identify purely
defensive uses, and operations can be carried out with
such matdriel to penetrate deeply into the territory of
another country.
82. Moreover, as the Director General of IAEA
has himself pointed out, the nuclear centre that was
attacked was covered by international safeguards and
it had been visited recently; there is no excuse for
saying that there were any potential dangers, in the
near or distant future.

89. .The Israeli authorities have tried to exonerate
themselves by resorting to utterly absurd excuses.
They claim that the Iraqi nuclear reactor was intended
to develop atomic bombs for use against Israel and
that, therefore, they had to take pre-emptive steps to
destroy the reactor. According to this argument, Israel
would be free at all times to send war planes to attack
any factory or nuclear reactor in any country that
Israel imagined to be operating against it. If this outand-out gangster logic were allowed to run rampant,
what then would be left of the code of international
conduct? If every country were ta behave like this,
would not the world be in total chaos? Thus the
conduct of the Israeli authorities once more shows that
they are the enemies of world peace and security.

83. The representative of France, in the statement
which he has just made, to which we have listened
with attention, has madeclear the fallacy of allegations
that the Iraqi nuclear reactor was intended for the
production of, or was at the point of producing,
nuclear weapons.
84. If, following Israel’s example, other countries
were to try to eliminate the nuclear capacity that Israel
is said to have, we would be at the beginning of a
military conflict with incalculable proportions. There
can be no greater irresponsibility than that shown by
the Government of Israel.

90. All these years the Israeli authorities have
persisted in their hostility against the Arab and
Palestinian peoples and gone farther and further down
the road of aggression and expansion. Israel still
occupies the homeland of the Palestinian people,
subjecting them to persecution at will. It has carried
out constant armed invasions or raids against southern
Lebanon, massacring Lebanese citizens and Palestinian refugees and creating turmoil in Lebanon. And
now Israel has stretched out its tentacles of aggression
to Iraq. It must be pointed out that the Israeli
authorities’ policy of aggression and expansion has
long enjoyed the support and connivance of the superPowers. Their recent frenzied escalation of aggressiveness has in turn provided the super-Powers with
opportunities and conditions for further intervention in
the Middle East, thus aggravating the tension there
and threatening the peace and security of the entire
work!. The Council, whose primary responsibility is
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must take most resolute and stern measuresinstead of
viewing this situation with indifference,

85. The Council must energetically condemn the
Israeli action and call for proper reparations in the
caseof the victims of this indescribable action and for
all material damage caused. The Council should also
reiterate the right of all States to have access to
nuclear technology for peaceful uses and should
appeal to all countries to refrain from supplying areas
of conflict with highly developed weaponry that may
be used for offensive actions such as that now being
considered by the Council.
86. My delegation is willing to support a draft
resolution containing such elements.
87. Mr. MI Guojun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): First of all, pleaseallow me, on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, to extend a warm welcome and
thanks to Mr. Hammadi, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq; Mr. Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber AlSabah, Deputy Premier and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait; Mr. Caid Essebsi Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Tunisia; and Mr. Klibi, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States,for attending the
current Security Council meetingsand for the important statements they have made to the Council,

91. Israel’s barbarous crime of aggression has naturally aroused indignation and condemnation among the
People of the Arab countries and the rest of the world.
The extraordinary session of the Council of the
8

heague of Arab Statesheld a few days ago at Baghdad
Jjgorously condemned this latest crime of Israel and
&opted important decisions regarding the measures to
be taken to cope with the situation [S/14529, annex].
@$s fully reflects the just call and solemn position of
tfie Arab countries and people. We are confident that
dl the Arab people, including the Palestinian people,
Njll, by carrying out a concerted struggle and with the
firm support of the people of the world, ultimately
defeat the Israeli aggressorsand win final victory.

Israel may be further heightened by this incident. We
are heartened that the use of force has not escalated in
the region since the attack occurred. Furthermore, we
highly regard the self-restraint which Iraq and the
States friendly to it have exercised and greatly
appreciate their attitude in seeking to settle the dispute
peacefully through the United Nations and other
forums. The Government of Japan will spare no effort
for the peaceful solution of this question.
97. Japan has on many occasions expressed its view
that Israel and the Palestinians, together with the Arab
countries, should recognize each other’s position and
that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East should be achieved through peace talks.
Japan has been exerting efforts towards this end in cooperation with other countries concerned. That Israel
undertook an action contrary to these efforts is
deplorable. Israel, as we all know, continually claims
“the right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries”. By violating the boundaries of
other countries in such an arrogant manner, Israel has
undermined its own credibility in the international
community.

92. The Chinese Government and people have
&vays firmly stood by the Arab people, we firmly
support Iraq and other Arab countries in their just
struggle to defend their State sovereignty and recover
their lost territories and we firmly support the Palestinian people in their just struggle to regain their national
rights, including the right to return to their homeland
=nd to establish their own State. We believe that, in
order to uphold justice and defend the fundamental
principles of the Charter, the Council should sternly
condemn Israel for its latest crimes of aggression, take
effective measures resolutely to put an end to all the
Israeli acts of aggression against the Arab countries
and prescribe the necessary punishment for Israel
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter.

98. To conclude, allow me ro refer to the fact that the
Japanese people are particularly disturbed by the
present incident since it involves the question of
nuclear development. Japan, as the only nation to
have experienced the devastation of the atomic bomb,
has been strongly promoting nuclear disarmament as
the item of first priority of disarmament. It has also
been exerting vigorous efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, particularly through the
regime of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The recent
Israeli attack on the nuclear installations of a State
party to that Treaty must, in the view of the
Government of Japan, be regarded as a grave challenge to the safeguards systemof IAEA and indeed, to
the rdgime of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.

93. Mr. NISIBORI (Japan): The Government of
Japan finds it extremely regrettable that on 7 June the
Israeli Air Force attacked the nuclear reactor in Iraq
and strongly condemns such an outrageous action,
The basic position of the Government of Japan on this
incident
was made clear in the statement of the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs on 9 June [S/14512].
Israel’s
action in violating the territorial airspace of
Iraq and destroying its facilities, clearly constitutes a
violation of international law and of fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
non-use of force.

99. It is imperative that the adverse effects which
94.

Israel is attempting to justify the action by
claiming
that it was carried out for defensive purposes.

this incident may have on the maintenance and

strengthening of such international efforts be kept to a
minimum. We wish to reconfirm Japan’s position that
further efforts should be made to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and that the countries
which are not party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty,
including Israel, should accede to it as soon as
possible.

95. My delegation would like to point out that, in a
recent statement, the Director General of IAEA
confirmed that Iraq, as a party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, subscribed to
the safeguards system of the IAEA and that it had
fuIfilled
its obligations under the system to the
satisfaction of the Agency.’ If, in spite of that
assurance, Israel suspected that Iraq intended to
Produce
atomic bombs, it should, in our view, have
Sought to settle the matter by peaceful means, for
example
by submitting it to IAEA for consideration.
We believe that Israel’s resorting directly to military
measures is absolutely unjustifiable.

100. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
Mr, President, first I congratulate you most warmly as
a good friend and as a respected colleague on your
assumption of the exacting responsibilities of the
presidency of the Security Council and I also, on
behalf of my delegation, thank Mr. Nisibori of Japan
with equal warmth for the admirable way in which he
conducted our affairs last month.

g6
As the Foreign Minister indicated in his statement [ibid.], the Government of Japan is deeply
concerned that tensions between the Arab States and

101. The situation in the Middle East has for many
years been the subject, of intense concern to mY
9

Government. Apart from the human and political
issues which it raises, such as the imperatives of
peace, justice and security, we are acutely conscious
of the risks posed for the international community as a
whole by continuing turmoil in a region of such
strategic importance.
102. When he addressed the General Assembly in
September last year, my Foreign and Commonwealth
Secretary, Lord Carrington, argued that the Middle
East conflict was above all one which cried out for
negotiations leading to a peaceful solution. The violence had gone on far too long. Negotiations were
bound to be a lengthy and complex process, andcould
hardly succeedunless a calmer atmosphere could be
created, Lord Carrington appealed again to all concerned to refrain from inflammatory acts and
statements.*
103. But the dismal fact is that the situation in the
region has become more inflamed and more dangerous. Recent events have gravely deepened our
concern and reinforced my Government in its view
that renunciation of violence is the essential prerequisite for any progress towards peaceful solutions.
The world has watched with mounting concern the
continuing tragedy in Lebanon. All our sympathy goes
out to that troubled country and its people, who have
so long been denied the opportunity to live in peace;
also to the Lebanese Government, whose sovereign
rights have long been so grossly infringed. We have
also followed anxiously the so-called Syrian missile
crisis. We admire the continuing efforts of Mr. Habib
and still hope that a peaceful outcome can be
achieved, Now there is the Israeli air attack on the
Iraqi nuclear facility at Baghdad, which is the subject
of this debate.
104. My Government has condemned that attack
without equivocation. My Prime Minister said in the
House of Commons on 9 June:’
“The Government have already made plain their
view that armed attack in such circumstances
cannot be justified. It represents a grave breach of
international law.”
105. Mrs. Thatcher was asked about the fact that,
whereas Iraq has signed the nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty and acceptedIAEA safeguards, Israel has not,
She replied:
“The Government firmly support the Non-Proliferation Treaty andwish that more countries would
become signatories.”

because a country is trying to manufacture energy
from nuclear sources, it must not be believed that
she is doing something totally wrong.“’
106. It has been argued that the Israeli attack was an
act of self-defence, But it was not a response to an
armed attack on Israel by Iraq. There was no instant or
overwhelming necessity for self-defence. Nor can it be
justified as a forcible measure of self-protection. The
Israeli intervention amounted to a use of force which
cannot find a place in international law or in the
Charter and which violated the sovereignty of Iraq.
107. It has also been argued that, whatever the legal
rights and wrongs of the matter, the international
community privately breathed a sigh of relief after the
Israeli raid, the suggestion being that the Iraqi Government will not now have a nuclear-weapon potential for
some further time to come. That is certainly not the
caseso far as my Government is concerned. We do not
believe that Iraq had the capacity to manufacture
fissile material for nuclear weapons. Answering an
assertion of this kind in the House of Commons, the
Prime Minister replied:
“Had there been an attack on Israel of the kind
that there hasjust been on Iraq, I should totally and
utterly have condemned it. I therefore totally and
utterly condemn the attack on Iraq.“’
108. My Government also believes that the Israeli
attack has very serious implications for the international nuclear safeguards system. We note the
recent statement by the Director General of IAEA’
that all the facilities and fuel concerned were covered
by Agency safeguards under the Non-Proliferation
Treaty safeguards agreement between Iraq and the
Agency; that Iraq accepts Agency safeguards on all its
nuclear activities; that those safeguards have been
satisfactorily applied to date; and that, during the last
safeguards inspection in January of this year, al1
nuclear material was satisfactorily accounted for. We
share Mr. Eklund’s view that the Agency’s safeguards
system is a basic element of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and that the Israeli attack amounts to an
attack on the IAEA safeguards regime. The member
Statesof the European Community have already made
a statementat Vienna rejecting the assertion implicit in
the Israeli action that safeguards are ineffective and
reiterating the strong support of the member States for
the Agency’s safeguards system and their full confidence in its efficacy.
109. It will be clear to the Council that my Govemmerit shares the concern of the international community at the Israeli raid. It reinforces our belief that a
just solution of the Middle East problem is urgently
needed, and that it can only be reached through
negotiation. But negotiations can succeed only in a
climate of confidence. This in turn requires that acts of
violence in the area must cease. For our part, the
British Government is ready to play a full role with our

She went on to say:
“A tragedy of this case was that Iraq was a
signatory to the agreementand had been inspected,
but neither of these facts protected her. It was an
. unprovoked attack, which we must condemn. Just
10

partners in the European Community in the searchfor
a peaceful settlement. The Ten have committed
themselves to the search for common ground and to
gain acceptanceof the principles set out by the Heads
of Stateand Government and the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Nine at Venice in June last year
[,$/14009].We believe that those principles can form
the basisfor ajust and lasting settlement, which alone
will ring down the curtain on the long and bitter
tragedy of the Middle East and enable its people to live
their lives in peace and security.
110. In the mean time, in the context of our present
debate, I should like to express the support of my
delegation for the three points to be contained in a
resolution of the Council as set out this morning by my
French colleague [pnra. 58 above].

111. In conclusion, I express my sincere condolences and those of my Government to the family of the
young French technician who was killed in the attack.
I12. The PRESIDENT (interpretution from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon. I now invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
113. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): Mr. President, at the
outset, let me thank you and the other members of the
Council for allowing me to speak in this most
important debate.
114. I should like to address my thanks to all those
who, in this context, have found it possible to speakof
Lebanon as well.
115, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, for leading the present debate as
you did once before, when you presided over a similar
discussion, in April 1980, with statesmanship as well
as diplomacy. Not only have you displayed qualities
that have inspired confidence and trust, but you have
also represented the culture and ideals of your country
with which we in Lebanon have had the closest
historical bonds.
116. There would have been no reason for the
representative of Lebanon to burden the present
debate with yet another statement a few days before
the Council’s meeting to discuss the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, had it not been for the ideological-and,
I dare say, the organic-links between Israel’s attack
on the Iraqi nuclear installations and its consistent
aggression in Lebanon under the guise of so-called
pre-emptive attacks against the Palestinians.
117. As many of my friends have already said in
various ways, what Israel is trying to “pre-empf”, in
Iraq as well as in Lebanon, is nothing other but the
establishment of peace, of a genuine and just peace, in
the Middle East, a peace in which the imperatives of
‘11

both national security and self-determination will be
respected and guaranteed,
118. To those of us who want to view the Middle
East question in its historical perspective, Israel is
confronted today with two options: either to accept
the Arab world as it is, and as it will more and more
become-independent, responsible, prosperous and
fully developed-or to try to maintain that Arab world
in a state of colonia1 dependence and cultural underdevelopment, whatever its wealth and geo-strategic
importance.
119. The vicious attack on Baghdad on Sunday,
7 June, is symptomatic of Israel’s choice, Peace, as
perceived by Israel, can only be apocalyptic. To
preserve Israel’s security myth, it should have an
unchallengeable superiority and the uncontested right
to police 20 countries and over 140 million people
living at the crossroads of history and of the world.
120. I shall not repeat the very eloquent and very
learned arguments of my friends, from the legal to the
scientific. Yet I cannot resist the temptation to add
another quotation to the numerous testimonies they
cited in support of our case.
121. In a recent study published in the spring 1981
edition of Fweiglz Affairs on Israel’s security,
Mr. Shai Feldman from the Israeli Centre for Strategic
Studies gives us this rare insight into present Israeli
thinking:
“Israel should develop the capability and adopt an
appropriate strategy and doctrine for overt nuclear
deterrence. . . .
“In terms of capability, Israel should develop
nuclear weapons in a quantity and of a yield
sufficient to demolish salient targets in each of the
Arab States. The suggested doctrine is counter
value--that is, threatening the destruction of cities
and resources. . . . The strategy’s purpose would be
to deter the Arab States from pursuing most forms
of violence against Israel by letting them know
that she possessesthe means for devastating punishment.“’
122. Are we not justified in asking how such intellectual arrogance can be conducive to peace or compatible with the international rule of law? The Arabs are
even denied, in more explicit literature displayed
during this debate, the very right, let alone the
possibility, of acceding even to the academic qualifications compatible with nuclear research and the use of
atoms for peace. We are one word away from being
described as subhuman.
123. Yet we are hopeful that Israel will someday,
before it is too late, understand that, in the words of
Rabbi BaIfour Brickner, as reported in The New York

of 12 June, “Israel does not live in a vacuum.
She is part of an international community and dependent on that community for aid and peace”.

“Americans need not be afraid to point out that
the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, does not look
more prone to use terrorist tactics than Menachem
Begin.”

124. We are hopeful, not only because such voices
have been heard in Israel itself, but because we believe
that the time has come for the international community
to defend itself against another atomic holocaust. Shall
I say how much it revolts my country and countrymen
to see that what may have appeared almost permissible on the scale of a Lebanese war now becomes a
universal danger by acquiring the nuclear dimension?

129. Similar comments have been numerous, almost
unanimous, and the latest was by none other than The
New York Times, which pleaded editorially in a most
eloquent manner for precisely the same messagethat
many of our Arab colleagues have expressed in the
Council. I shall quote at random from an article of
yesterday, 14 June:

Times

125.

“But as the Israelis too often forget, their dependence on American support and influence in the
Arab world imposes unavoidable limits on their
concepts and tactics of self-defense.

What is still more revolting for us in Lebanon is

to hear the representative of Israel [228&h meeting], in
his very special variations on international law, speak
of the Armistice Agreements of 1949. Iraq, we are
told, had no right to claim immunity from Israeli
aggression because it failed to sign the Agreement of
1949. But what about Jordan? And what about the
violation of Saudi Arabia’s airspace? Does that logic
mean that the oilfields of the Gulf-let alone the Holy
City of Makkah, or Taief or Riyadh-may become the
‘targets of yet another “pre-emptive” attack because
the Islamic Conference meetings held in Saudi Arabia
spoke of jihad in a manner that displeased Mr. Begin?

“The strike against Iraq’s nuclear reactor served
none of these interests. It may delay one Moslem
nation’s nuclear-weapons project, but it will not
arrest the march of technology to the Middle
East. . . . It heightened distrust of America in the
Middle East.
‘I
.

.

.

“American responsesto Israel’s attack will either
help repair or further destroy the frail conventions
of sovereignty and territory that are vital to every
nation’s security. . . .

124. Lebanon did sign the 1949 General Armistice
Agreement with Israel [S/1296/Rev.Z] referred to in
this chamber. We have time and time again called
upon Israel to respect that Agreement. The Council
has reiterated its support for the Agreement in no less
than ten resolutions calling upon Israel to abide by its
provisions and to consent to reactivating it. Yet we
have constantly been confronted with queer interpretations of law to justify, day after day, the state of
constant aggression against Lebanon and the occupation of Lebanese territory, with people dying almost
every day of every month of every year, not only since
the invasion of 1978, but well before, long before the
so-called civil war was ignited in the martyr country
which I here represent.

“Israel’s place in the Middle East will never be
secured by force alone, certainly not by transient

monopolies in weaponry.
I‘ . . *

“Those who let sympathy for Israel lead them to
condone its claims to an ever-widening zone of
defense condemn it to perpetual isolation and
siege.”

128. A most distinguished American journalist,
Joseph Kraft, who can hardly be accused-as so many
others are on such occasions-of anti-Semitism, wrote
in TIze Washington Post of 11 June that:

130. I could go on quoting almost forever, certainly
for as long as it took the representative of Israel to
make his most unconvincing case, if not longer. If
I have abused the Council’s time, it was simply to
show that whatever we are told later in defence of
Israel cannot fool the more enlightened and soberminded American public. There is one reality which
appears to us beyond question: Mr. Begin was not preempting war; he was pre-empting peace. In clearer
terms, he was pre-empting the Americans, while
pretending to protect Israel against a most problematic
Arab danger, at the most inopportune time.

“The Israelis struck at a time when American
diplomacy was engaged, through the mission of
Ambassador Philip Habib, in a promising effort to
ease tension in the Middle East by restoring the
integrity of Lebanon. In conducting the raid, the
Israelis violated the airspace of a couni~‘y crucial LO
the Habib mission-Saudi Arabia. . . ,

131. Israel has assumedonce more, as often before,
the self-appointed role of the region’s policeman and,
if I may say so, the role of a dangerously pretentious
policeman with an atomic stick-the self-appointed
custodian of the interests of its so-called friends,
against those friends’ better judgement, and even
against their will,

127. Strange are the hazards of political coincidence.
Or is it really coincidental that the Government of
Israel chose to “pre-empt” Iraqi nuclear development
precisely when tremendous Arab and American efforts
were converging to restore peace in Lebanon?

12

132. Hencewe are compelled to address ourselves to
Israel’s friends in the Council, as Prince Saud AlFaisal did yesterday in a most eloquently gentle yet
forceful manner. There can be no compromise with
condemnation, but condemnation alone is not sufficient. The international community-and the United
States in particular-must find it possible to put an end
‘to Israel’s licence and sense of impunity. Israel, not
the atom, must be harnessed for peace.

subjecting Israel’s nuclear superiority to the imperatives of international compacts. Any other course
would render our debates here and whatever resolutions we adopt an exercise in futility.
135. As for peace-peace according to the Israeli
mythology of self-defence-&can only lead, as once
before in history, to national suicide. except that this
time it may be so apocalyptic thai the fate of all
of humanity will be equally imperilled.

133. We have all come here to demonstrate our
confidence in the United Nations, undiscouraged by
the defiant rhetoric which has often described this
body as a “monument of hypocrisy”; for we in the
Arab world believe that, if ever there should be peace,
it can only be achieved through dialogue in this
framework and through the use of force in defence of
the Charter and the rights of nations.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

I This statement was made at the 563rd meeting of the Board of
Governors of IAEA, the official records of which are published in

summaryform,

134. In this context, there can be no security without responsibility ,and the application of compulsory
measures of international law. Hence, beyond the
sanctions authorized by the Charter, we should seek,
in practical terms, compulsory ways and means of

2 OfJicial

Records

of the General

Assembly,

Thirty-Jfth

Session,

Plenary Meetings,
7th meeting, para. 10.
’ United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Parliamentary
Debates,
Sixth Series-vol. 6 (London, Her Mqjesty’s
Stntionery OfIke), p. 262.
’ Ibid.,
p. 264.

13
