United Nations

S/PV.6565

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6565th meeting
Friday, 24 June 2011, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Alzate
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Eick
Mr. Shri Anand Sharma
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Parham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Briefing by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-38700 (E)

*1138700*

S/PV.6565

Also yesterday, as the Council is aware, the
World Drug Report 2011 was launched at United
Nations Headquarters in New York for the first time.
That was yet another step towards mainstreaming
issues of drugs and crime into the overall United
Nations agenda.

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Briefing by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the impact
that transnational organized crime and trafficking can
have on global peace, security and development.
As members are aware, the Council has focused
on these issues for some time now, recognizing the
increasing threats to peace and security posed by drugs
and crime, including in presidential statements calling
for the mainstreaming of responses to these global
challenges into the broader United Nations security and
development agenda, as well as increased regional and
international cooperation as part of a shared
responsibility for confronting them. We in the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) take
those messages from the Security Council as guidance,
and we translate that guidance into our policies and
operational activities.
I am happy to report to the Council today that a
United Nations system task force on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking, established by
the Secretary-General and co-chaired by UNODC and
the Department for Political Affairs, has started its
work. Yesterday, at a special meeting of principals, we
took decisions aimed at fostering more meaningful
coordination within the United Nations system, as well
as at strengthening our capacity to respond to illicit
trafficking and organized crime. We look forward to
keeping the Council informed of the task force’s
activities in the future.

2

Illicit drugs continue to undermine stability,
security and health in many parts of the world today.
Millions throughout the globe are suffering and dying
from the illicit use of drugs. Meanwhile, drug
trafficking is fuelling a global criminal enterprise
worth hundreds of billions of dollars. For example,
opiates alone can generate up to $68 billion in illicit
benefits annually, and cocaine $85 billion. That
seriously impacts on development and security. We are
witnessing more and more acts of violence, conflicts
and terrorist activities fuelled by drug lords.
Confronting the global drug problem is a shared
responsibility. Our response at the national, regional
and international levels must be comprehensive,
balanced and targeted. Supply-reduction measures must
go hand in hand with efforts to reduce demand. Neither
will be effective without the other. The drug
conventions provide a firm universal legal framework
for such a balanced approach that is centred on health
and grounded in respect for human rights.
Many crisis situations under consideration by the
Security Council — such as recent events in the
Middle East, the Somalia piracy phenomenon and
Afghanistan, and I could name a few more — starkly
demonstrate the ability of transnational organized
crime and its proceeds to destabilize transitions,
disrupt political processes and obstruct development.
Those cases also show how just one fragile State beset
by drugs and crime can hold hostage the stability and
progress of an entire region.
We need to take practical and pragmatic
responses to those problems. From the perspective of
UNODC, we see at least four potential areas of
response at this stage. First, with regard to
strengthened international collaboration, the United
Nations can facilitate the process, but it takes
concerted political will on the part of Member States to
have a real impact on suppressing an organized
criminal market. We need to be better coordinated.
Indeed, coordination has to begin with the United
Nations system; but it cannot end there. Undoubtedly,

11-38700

S/PV.6565

the Security Council can play here a leading role in
that regard.
Secondly, strengthening regional capacity can
create a bulwark around a fragile State and enable its
neighbours to play a proactive part in the response. For
example, UNODC has now completed drafting a new
regional programme for Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries. It will be the first such programme to
address this issue, whereas before we had separate
programmes for Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and
Central Asia. We are now discussing the draft regional
programme with our Member State partners. The idea
is to address the issue in a more comprehensive,
targeted, meaningful and results-oriented way. I hope
that we will be able to sign the programme and begin
implementing it by the end of the year.
The same applies with regard to West Africa —
an area of concern for the Security Council — where
last year UNODC and the Economic Community of
West African States adopted a new regional
programme. We intend to help countries in the region
to overcome the problems that are generated by illicit
drug trafficking and organized crime. I hope that this
regional programme will also help to curb the flow of
illicit drugs going to Europe from Latin America
through West Africa.
With regard to the Middle East and North Africa
region, as the Council is aware, the Secretary-General
plans to come up with a comprehensive United Nations
contingency strategy for better addressing problems in
the region. UNODC is also prepared to contribute to
that on the basis of our comprehensive programmatic
approach. We could address such issues as corruption,
which has been one of the triggers that provokes unrest
in many States of the region, as well as the rule of law,
police reform and prison reform. We also need to think
about preventing an explosion in crime and drug
trafficking in this region. And we must be prepared to
face the threat of terrorism. UNODC can provide a
network of field offices and advice based on our
experience as guardian of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the Convention against Corruption.
Thirdly, with regard to reinforcing the rule of law
and criminal justice systems, consistent and proactive
investments in the criminal justice institutions of weak
States will help to uphold the rule of law in those
countries. This reduces susceptibility to organized

11-38700

crime, dampens the impact of negative phenomena
associated with corruption, increased violence and the
financing of terrorism and enhances the potential for
national institutions to play an effective role in the
response.
Fourthly,
with
regard
to
adopting
a
comprehensive and cross-disciplinary strategy, we may
have a chance to deliver if we address the challenges
posed by organized crime and illicit trafficking in a
coordinated and holistic way. UNODC has developed
such an integrated approach in its field missions and
other programme activities.
Just one example: we are proud of the fact that
we have been able to help the Government of
Kyrgyzstan to restart its drug-control agency. It was
done, the agreement was signed, and the agency began
to function. But we immediately took another step and
launched a programme that helps the Government of
Kyrgyzstan address challenges related to corruption;
the lack of the rule of law; the need to improve
legislation; police reform; and prison reform. Thus we
are addressing not only the drug issue but all related
areas that are fuelling and benefiting from illicit drug
trafficking.
The same applies to Somalia and the issue of
piracy. UNODC continues to help the countries in the
region to prosecute and jail pirates, and we take pride
in the fact that as many as 800 pirates have been jailed
as a result of our efforts to help Kenya, Seychelles,
Mauritius and other countries of the region.
However, efforts cannot stop there, because, after
all, pirates cannot exist without financial support and
without money laundering. We recently organized a
conference in Nairobi which started the process of
addressing the flow of money and the criminal
proceeds from piracy which help organize acts of
piracy.
It appears that now some pirates do not
even get any part of the bounty resulting from acts of
piracy but are getting, as it were, fixed salaries. Also,
they are expendable. Even if many pirates are jailed,
others will pop up because of the situation in Somalia.
We therefore need to address this issue in a
parallel manner. Only then can we expect to obtain
results. The West Africa Coast Initiative is an
important initiative that is aimed at preventing West
Africa from becoming a real hub for the supply of
cocaine from Central America to Europe, and we are
prepared to help the countries in the region to address

3

S/PV.6565

this issue. But at the same time, we cannot address the
issue of drug control without addressing the issues of
corruption, the rule of law, criminal justice, and also
drug treatment and prevention. Indeed, many drug
cartels in Central America are paying their clients in
West Africa not in cash but in kind, and now West
Africa has started to become another market for the
consumption of cocaine, which had never happened
before.
UNODC, on the basis of its experience and
guided by Member States, is prepared to take part in
the implementation of such comprehensive initiatives
as the Paris Pact on drugs from Afghanistan, or the
French initiative on cocaine routes to Europe, adopted
by the Group of Eight.
To conclude, I should like to commend your
initiative, Mr. President, in having convened this
highly relevant debate. I welcome the leadership of
Gabon in bringing to the fore the growing threat of
transnational organized crime. I hope that the Council
will continue to be actively seized of this important
matter.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Shri Anand Sharma (India): I would like to
commence by thanking the Gabonese presidency for
having organized this meeting on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking. I would also like
to thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing.
Transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking do not exist in isolation. They belong to a
malignant complex that includes terrorism, money
laundering, illegal arms trafficking and the illegal
movement of nuclear, chemical, biological and other
potentially deadly materials. This wider malignancy is
destroying and destabilizing societies and nations.
Weak and fragile States, such as those on the
agenda of the Council, are particularly vulnerable.
Even as many parts of the world enjoy unprecedented
peace, prosperity and technological advancement, they
remain mired in unending conflict and misery. Some of
these conflicts have lasted for decades, imposing a
human cost that is difficult to comprehend. Economies
have been wrecked, and human and material resources
that could have fuelled progress have been diverted.

4

Non-State actors and criminal organizations are
among the principal delinquents responsible for this
state of affairs. They thrive in areas of conflict and in
post-conflict situations. Their activities exploit the
weaknesses of the nations they operate in and are
designed to perpetuate those weaknesses.
Their success is evident from the fact that their
organizational capacities and firepower match or even
better those of many States. They have much in
common with terrorists, with whom they ally, because
they have the same objectives and use the same
methods. Their motivations are also the same, even as
they attempt to mask those motivations with great
sophistication.
One of the great tragedies of our time has been
the inability of some States to see through the
machinations of this criminal-terrorist nexus. Their
short-sightedness has imposed a cost that the whole
international community is bearing.
The threat posed by drug trafficking deserves
special mention. More than 90 per cent of the world’s
production of opium takes place in India’s
neighbourhood. We are situated between the two large
drug-trafficking zones — the Golden Crescent, centred
around the Afghanistan area, and the Golden Triangle,
in the Myanmar-Laos area. The illicit production and
trafficking of drugs has spawned a huge network of
criminal groups in our neighbourhood with close links
to various international terrorist networks. The money
and resources generated from those activities are
fuelling the growth of terrorism and funding extremist
groups.
It is evident that the threat posed by transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking, terrorism, money
laundering, illegal arms trafficking and the illegal
movement of nuclear, chemical, biological and other
potentially deadly materials requires a coordinated
global response on the part of the international
community. We believe that the United Nations is the
best mechanism for developing such a coherent
transnational response. India is committed to
strengthening the international normative and
legislative mechanisms that are required to create a
framework for countering this threat.
In this connection, I am happy to inform the
Council that India ratified the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its three Protocols last month. We are also

11-38700

S/PV.6565

strengthening this international framework by entering
into several bilateral and plurilateral agreements and
memorandums of understanding in this area.
The UNODC also deals with corruption, and I am
glad to inform the Council that that the Government of
India ratified the United Nations Convention against
Corruption last month. At the operational level, we are
committed to strengthening the international structures
that respond to these threats. We are committed to the
sharing and exchange of information, and we would
also like to exchange best practices. We believe that
assisting Member States in the training of law
enforcement officials on a regular basis should receive
priority in the international cooperation agenda.
We support the efforts of UNODC to assist in
developing capacities, training and in creating the
administrative, legal and institutional frameworks for
fighting transnational organized crime. Indian agencies
are working in those fields with UNODC in some
South Asian countries. We have contributed $200,000
to the Paris Pact initiative of UNODC and will host the
Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement
Agencies this year.
The late Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi,
once said that “A nation’s strength ultimately consists
in what it can do on its own”. We believe that
determined national efforts are required. The
cornerstones of this fight are still supply-reduction
strategies involving sustained alternative development
programmes for the cultivators of drug-yielding crops,
as well as the overall economic development of the
concerned regions.
India chairs the Security Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee. We have found that terrorists
and criminals nourish each other. Terrorists, like
criminals and drug traffickers, recruit in one country,
raise funds in another and operate in still others. An
effective international counter-terrorism strategy must
complement and supplement an effective international
strategy to combat transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking, money laundering, illegal arms trafficking
and the illegal movement of nuclear, chemical,
biological and other potentially deadly materials. There
is a need for a new global compact to tackle terrorism
and transnational crime. We need to remove the moral
and legal ambiguities that allow terrorists and
criminals to gain succour and even legitimacy.

11-38700

We need an international mechanism to ensure
accountability and justice. We need concerted
international efforts to expose and destroy the linkages
that exist between terrorists and criminals and their
State and non-State supporters. We need to expand the
scope of legal instruments and expand enforcement
efforts to destroy their safe havens, their financial
flows and their support networks. We would also argue
that the need to squarely face the complicity of States
is a central requirement if we were to proceed.
He who does not prevent a crime when he can
encourages it. India has been a targeted victim of crime
and terrorism and has paid an enormous price over the
years. Thousands of innocent victims have lost their
lives. As we prepare to mark the tenth anniversary of
11 September 2001, we should collectively resolve to
confront and vanquish terror and the terror-crime
nexus. We owe it to future generations to give them a
safe and secure world.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I also wish to thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov for his detailed briefing.
Drug
trafficking
and
organized
crime
compromise the full enjoyment of human rights by
millions of people around the world, including through
their negative effects on economic and social
development. The international community must
continue to work towards a strong and coherent
response to these transnational problems. We applaud
the contributions of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and other relevant United
Nations bodies to that response.
Organized crime and drug trafficking are complex
problems that manifest themselves differently in
different parts of the world. There is no silver bullet
that will resolve these issues. Facing them requires a
case-by-case approach that takes due account of the
multidimensional nature of transnational crime. In
particular, we cannot attempt to deal with them
exclusively by using security-related tools.
Repression alone is not enough for a long-term
solution. Effectively combating the problem requires
sustained attention to its underlying causes, which in
many cases include the lack of development, high
unemployment and economic difficulties.
Brazil believes that efforts to support countries in
the struggle against organized crime must be of a
cooperative nature and fostered by the principle of

5

S/PV.6565

shared responsibility, with a view to resolving all
aspects of the problem. In that regard, we must work
on the basis of the pertinent United Nations
conventions. Moreover, it is imperative to recognize
that addressing the world drug problem will require
active engagement by the world’s largest consumers of
illicit drugs.
Coordinated action by the United Nations system,
including by UNODC, the United Nations
Development Programme and the other agencies, funds
and programmes is more important than ever. Their
work can help to prevent organized crime and drug
trafficking from threatening international peace and
security.
Regional organizations can also play a crucial
role, given their understanding of the specificities of
each situation. In our own region, the establishment of
the South American Council to Combat Drug
Trafficking is an example of the promising avenues of
cooperation that such organizations can foster. In that
respect, Brazil welcomes the West Africa Coast
Initiative’s important contribution to fighting drug
trafficking and organized crime in a critical region.
When organized crime or drug trafficking
threaten international peace and security, the Council
may have a role to play in accordance with its Charter
responsibilities. In such cases, it must take into account
the specificities and the need to cooperate with other
relevant actors in order to address all relevant
dimensions of the issue.
It is our view that the Council’s role ultimately
must be to ensure support to national authorities so that
they can better fulfil their responsibilities.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the head of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his comprehensive briefing.
We view today’s meeting as an important step in
strengthening the contacts between the Security
Council and UNODC. We support the Security
Council’s intention to continue along this path, in
accordance with earlier Council decisions, including
the presidential statement of 24 February 2010
(S/PRST/2010/4).
There is a need to more actively use the unique
expertise and potential of UNODC and other
specialized areas of the Secretariat in the Council’s

6

work to counter threats to international peace and
security posed by drug trafficking and other forms of
transnational crime. In that regard, we reaffirm the
topical nature of the Security Council’s proposal to the
Secretary-General to include those threats as a factor in
conflict analysis and joint mission planning and
assessment, as well as to analyse the impact of those
threats in connection with situations on the Security
Council’s agenda.
These tasks of priority importance concern a
number of areas, including drug threats from
Afghanistan, which remains a pressing issue. The
destructive impact of Afghan drug trafficking has
spread far beyond its borders and those of the region.
We are dealing here with a threat to international peace
and security. The response to that threat should be
comprehensive and coordinated, including adapting the
United Nations internally to new challenges.
We welcome the steps taken by the SecretaryGeneral to strengthen interdepartmental cooperation
within the United Nations on the issues of drug
trafficking and crime, including the creation, to that
end, of a cross-cutting task force within the Secretariat,
with a leading role played by UNODC and the
Department of Political Affairs. Those measures are in
keeping with the Security Council’s decisions, as set
forth in relevant presidential statements on threats to
international peace and security stemming from drug
trafficking and organized crime.
The Russian Federation advocates the creation,
with the United Nations playing a leading role and with
the participation of Afghanistan’s neighbours, of a
comprehensive system of counter-narcotics and
financial security belts. The basis for carrying out such
work lies in the decisions taken within the framework
of the Paris-Moscow process, which is being conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations. That process
is one of the most effective and promising instruments
available to the international community.
We place great hope in the third international
ministerial conference to be held in Vienna in
December under the auspices of UNODC. The
conference will undertake a detailed analysis of ways
to bolster the effectiveness of technical and other
assistance to the Government of Afghanistan and those
of the States of Central Asia and adopt a concrete
programme of action.

11-38700

S/PV.6565

We attach special importance to the UNODC’s
development and launching of a regional programme
for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, which will
reinforce UNODC’s current work in the region. We
support improved coordination of efforts in this area, in
our national capacity and within the framework of
relevant international organizations and structures. We
will continue to contribute to the counter-narcotics
efforts of the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the
Eurasian Group on Combating Money-Laundering and
the Financing of Terrorism and the Central Asian
Regional Information and Coordination Centre on the
trafficking in illicit narcotics, psychotropic substances
and their precursors.
We welcome the forging of relevant contacts
between UNODC and those organizations, especially
the recent memorandum of understanding between
UNODC and the SCO. At its recent summit, the SCO
adopted a counter-narcotics strategy for the period
2011 to 2016, including a programme of action for its
implementation that gives priority to cooperation on
combating opiates from Afghanistan.
One important track in combating the flow of
narcotics from Afghanistan remains the interdiction of
shipments to Afghanistan of precursors for the
production of heroin and opium. We stand ready to
cooperate closely with all our partners in implementing
the provisions of resolution 1817 (2008).
In our view, the role of the UNODC in this field
is of great importance, alongside those of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the Inter-Agency
Coordination Body (IACB). We believe it is important
that the Office be actively involved in devising
initiatives to strengthen the international control
regime on precursors, in particular the marking of
precursors to identify specific manufacturers and
suppliers to Afghanistan, as well as the strengthening
of international monitoring of the movement of
precursors on the basis of pre-export notification, reexport notification and re-sale to third-State systems,
and the monitoring of large-scale bulk transport across
Afghanistan’s borders, licensing activities related to
the shipment of precursors and replacement products.
In countering the interlinked threats of drug
trafficking, terrorism and other forms of transnational
organized crime, it is important to make full use of the
United Nations legal instruments available to Member

11-38700

States, such as existing international conventions and
Security Council resolutions. We must guard against
any weakening of the regime established by United
Nations counter-narcotics conventions and ensure that
they and the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime are effectively implemented. In that
regard, we note the substantial contribution made by
UNODC, the need for the Office’s technical assistance
and the high quality support functions provided by the
IACB, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
and the Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
To strengthen the international legal basis to
combat crime, Russia advocates that appropriate
measures be developed to regulate the use of new
information and communication technology. The
Security Council has already expressed its concern at
the growth of cybercrime. We believe that the time has
come to develop an international convention for
cooperation to combat cybercrime, as well as rules, or
perhaps a code of conduct, in this area. We trust that
UNODC will provide assistance for relevant initiatives
and agreements in this area.
Given the range of large-scale and long-term
tasks facing UNODC, its financial situation, including
its de facto dependence on voluntary contributions, is
alarming. We advocate careful consideration of these
issues in the General Assembly with a view to restoring
a balance of financing from the regular budget of the
United Nations and extrabudgetary resources.
In conclusion, I should like to underscore again
that we highly value UNODC’s work and see a
substantial role for the Office in assisting the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies in
implementing their counter-narcotics activities. We
welcome the practice of holding regular briefings for
the Security Council by the Executive Director. We
believe that relevant formal documents should be
adopted at the conclusion of such meetings, as was
previously the case, to bolster the effectiveness of such
meetings, reaffirm our commitment to agreed policies
and, when necessary, clarify, fine-tune and expand our
approaches.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
briefing and for focusing the attention of the Security
Council on the threat to international peace and

7

S/PV.6565

security posed by international organized crime and
drug trafficking. I am also very grateful to Mr. Yury
Fedotov for his informative briefing.
International
organized
crime
and drug
trafficking have a profoundly negative impact on our
global society. They are corrosive influences that cause
pain and suffering to individuals, families, businesses
and communities. Organized criminal groups act across
international borders, exploiting conflict, poverty and
weak governance.
Estimates put the cost of organized crime to the
United Kingdom alone at between $30 billion and
$65 billion per year. Worldwide, the figures are
staggering, with the international drugs market alone
estimated to be worth $320 billion. The United Nations
estimates that the most powerful organized crime
syndicates can earn $1.5 billion per year. In practice,
this means that criminal groups have access to
resources many times greater than those of the
countries in which they operate.
Conflict and poverty, alongside poor governance,
create the conditions for organized crime to thrive.
High levels of corruption allow organized criminals to
operate, while the pervasiveness of organized crime
increases corruption, undermines institutions and
threatens stability in fragile countries. This underlines
the
importance
of
coordinated
international
engagement, often with a strong peacebuilding focus,
to build capacity in countries and regions most at risk.
Time and again, when we look at areas where
organized crime is thriving, we see that weak judicial
systems and lack of effective policing capacity are a
significant part of the problem. Past experience has
also shown that where autocratic regimes have
suddenly collapsed, the resulting vacuum has allowed
the development of serious organized crime problems.
We must remain particularly alert to that threat in the
Middle East and North Africa, and look to quickly
support emerging new legal and governance structures.
The scale of the challenge requires a coordinated
response from the international community. As we
have heard today, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) can play a vital role in this
regard. The United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Convention
against Corruption remain the cornerstones of the
international legal framework in the fight against
transnational organized crime and corruption. We urge

8

all States to ratify and implement the provisions of
these treaties.
It is also vitally important that both Conventions
have robust and transparent review mechanisms to
ensure widespread implementation. It is for this reason
that last week in Vienna the United Kingdom, along
with 41 other Member States, agreed to a peer review
under the Convention against Corruption process. As
part of our peer review, the United Kingdom has
committed to holding a country visit, involve civil
society and publish the final report of our review this
year.
As we have heard today, UNODC, through its
expertise and field-based projects, is coordinating the
international community’s efforts to tackle organized
crime and drug trafficking. One example is the
UNODC counter-piracy programme, to which the
United Kingdom recently contributed more than
$7 million. The UNODC’s work in this field is a prime
example of the international community working
together in the face of organized criminals feeding off
instability, poverty and weak governance.
Organized criminals will continue to be attracted
to what is undoubtedly highly lucrative illicit activity.
But we do know that such groups can be constrained
and defeated by effective law enforcement activity and
by combating the underlying causes. Our aim must be
to reduce the threats to our collective interests from
organized crime by working to ensure that the risks to
organized criminals outweigh their potential profit, to
reduce our collective vulnerabilities to organized crime
and to ensure that organized criminals have fewer
opportunities. A task of this size demands a
coordinated and sustained effort to help protect our
citizens and maintain peace and security. We look
forward to working with other Member States and with
the UNODC to achieve this.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for initiating this important discussion
on transnational organized crime and drug trafficking.
By holding this debate, the Council is making a very
significant statement of intent just two days after the
release of the World Drug Report 2011. We also want
to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov for his invaluable briefing,
which brings into sharp focus not only the scale but
especially the inevitable consequences of illicit drug
trafficking for international peace and security.

11-38700

S/PV.6565

Drug trafficking remains an endemic, organized
and lucrative transnational crime, which in turn is a
major threat to global peace and security. In Africa,
illicit drug trafficking, cultivation, processing and
abuse are unrelentingly on the rise, inevitably
constituting barriers to the continent’s development
efforts. International drug cartels from other regions of
the world continue to exploit the under-resourced law
enforcement capability of most African countries,
turning them into major transit points for prohibited
drugs and arms.
The subregion most affected by these nefarious
activities is West Africa, which is fast emerging as a
major warehouse and transit hub for cocaine and illicit
drugs. The activities of drug cartels in the subregion
constitute devastating impediments to subregional
efforts to promote human prosperity, the genuine
creation of wealth, the development of productive work
and peacebuilding.
It is against this backdrop that we welcome
yesterday’s release of the World Drug Report 2011. We
agree with the Secretary-General when he notes that
the report “paints a sobering picture of the threat posed
by illegal drugs”. Mr. Fedotov’s own observation that
the gains we have witnessed in the traditional drug
market have been offset by the fashion for synthetic
designer drugs vividly points out the complexity of the
challenges we face ahead of us. We share not only his
sense of urgency but also his assessment that
confronting the global drug problem is a shared global
responsibility. We believe that the four potential areas
of international collaboration, building regional
capacity, reinforcing criminal justice systems and
adapting cross-disciplinary strategies, to which the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
is directing its response, will undoubtedly increase the
scope and strength of the international response. This
approach obliges all of us to always take into account
the larger question of drug supply and drug demand
control channels, as they are two sides of the same
coin.
Nigeria supports the mainstreaming of crime
prevention in conflict prevention strategies, conflict
analysis, integrated mission assessment and planning.
To achieve this objective, it is important to build the
capacities of regional and national authorities to enable
them to fulfil their international obligations on narcotic
drugs, terrorism, arms control and transnational
organized crime.

11-38700

Only four days ago, the high-level policy
committee of the West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI)
held its inaugural session with the participation of the
United Nations, INTERPOL and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). At the
meeting, stakeholders began to map the direction that
support for the ECOWAS regional action plan on
trafficking might take. WACI’s transnational crime
units for Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau also
greatly complement the effort to combat West Africa’s
drug trade. Such initiatives are important for our
subregion as we endeavour to close off transit routes
for cocaine and other narcotics. We very much look
forward to their planned expansion into other countries
in need of support in the subregion.
We cannot overstate the need for cooperation,
coordination and concerted action by the international
community. We already have the legal instruments and
tools to make crime unattractive and unprofitable.
What we need most at this time is to mobilize the
requisite political will and, indeed, the resources to win
the war against organized crime and organized
criminals.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting on the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC). I would also like to thank
UNODC Executive Director Fedotov for his thorough
briefing and to welcome him back to the Council.
The World Drug Report 2011, released yesterday,
underscores the threat of illicit drug use and
trafficking. The report states that 200,000 people die
every year from using illicit drugs, that drug traffickers
are working to circumvent traditional routes and
expand illicit drug markets and that defeating the
scourge will require transnational efforts.
We believe that we as a body are already on the
right track. Over the past several years, we prioritized
the important role of the United Nations in assisting
States in implementing the three United Nations drug
control conventions that form the backbone of our
common approach.
International organizations such as UNODC
make substantial contributions to the fight against
transnational organized crime and drug trafficking. In
2010, the United States provided $34 million to
support UNODC activities. We are committed to
continuing our support in 2011. Such efforts act as a

9

S/PV.6565

force multiplier and complement the work of bilateral
programmes.
On a bilateral and regional level, the United
States has expanded cooperation with our neighbours
in Mexico and Central America. This year, we will
deliver $500 million in equipment, training and other
expertise to support Mexico’s strong law enforcement
response to the threat posed by drug cartels and other
criminal groups. The United States is also committed to
helping the nations of Central America to combat drug
trafficking, transnational gangs, organized crime and
related violence through initiatives such as the Central
American Citizen Security Partnership.
The United States supports regional efforts, such
as UNODC’s Paris Pact, to combat the Afghan opiate
trade and its links to insurgency, instability and
organized crime, as we have heard. The United States
is also committed to partnering with West African
nations to enhance citizen security and address the
significant threat of increased drug trafficking and, as
Mr. Fedotov pointed out, the increasing use in the West
African nations, which had previously not been a
significant threat.
We are trying to strengthen criminal justice
systems and control and prevent the diversion of drugs
while still ensuring their availability for medical and
scientific purposes, which is a long-term process that
requires a continued commitment to reducing
transnational crime. To that end, the United States
commends UNODC’s capacity-building efforts in its
decade-long work to provide technical assistance to
help States with the practical application of the
provisions of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. The United States is
committed to continuing its support for efforts to
develop a peer review mechanism that helps State
parties identify challenges and successes in
implementing the Convention. The United States also
believes that these long-term anti-crime efforts must
attack the corruption that makes such criminal
activities possible.
The United States is pleased to be one of the
countries that will be reviewed during this first year of
the United Nations Convention against Corruption peer
review mechanism, which was launched in June 2010.
In conclusion, the collective action of concerned
Member States is critical to addressing the threat posed
by transnational crime and drug trafficking. The United

10

States looks forward to continued cooperation with
other nations committed to this important effort, as
well as with UNODC.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We also wish to
express our delegation’s appreciation to Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his briefing.
At the outset, I would also like to offer our delegation’s
deep condolences to the families of the four members
of UNODC who lost their lives last month while on
duty in Bolivia.
The world drug and crime problem continues to
be an immediate and continuing threat to people in
many parts of the world. It has a negative impact on
socio-economic development, since it affects the public
health, security and well-being of all humanity.
Tackling the problem requires support and more
cooperation on the part of the international community.
Drugs and crime threaten development, create
instability and jeopardize the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals.
We strongly support the four areas of UNODC’s
response, as identified by the Executive Director in his
statement,
that
is,
strengthened
international
collaboration, building regional capacity, reinforcing
the criminal justice system and, finally, adopting a
comprehensive cross-disciplinary strategy. Those four
areas present a realistic, action-oriented response to the
increasing challenge of transnational organized crime
and drug trafficking. Drug trafficking and transnational
crime are growing concerns that can threaten countries’
security. We have seen how in cases such as
Afghanistan and the West African region the drug trade
is used to fuel conflicts. Likewise, we have seen how
piracy along the coast of Somalia has become a
continuing factor in fuelling instability on land.
In the response to the scourge of piracy, we have
seen the benefits of an international collaborative
response. Such collaboration in our collective fight
against piracy must be replicated in addressing other
forms of transnational crime, and in our fight against
drug trafficking. The success of the Kimberley Process
in stopping the flow of blood diamonds illustrates how
strategic measures, through our collective collaboration
at the international level, can reverse the negative
impact of such crimes.
The production of, and trafficking in, illicit drugs
has the potential to fuel violence, fear and insecurity,

11-38700

S/PV.6565

thereby undermining the authority of the State. My
delegation shares the views expressed by the SecretaryGeneral, speaking at the African Union Summit in
January 2010, in which he noted that criminal networks
are very skilled at taking advantage of institutional
weaknesses on the ground. In that regard, we strongly
support UNODC’s appeal for the reinforcement of the
criminal justice institutions of weak States.
As most transnational trafficking is regional and
intercontinental, planning integrated drug control
strategies at all levels is essential. South Africa
welcomes the role played by UNODC in creating
regional programmes. Such programmes are important
because they assist countries with technical support in
their fight against the world drug problem and
strengthen partnerships between UNODC, regional
bodies and Member States. We welcome the
collaborative efforts of UNODC, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
to address this problem in West Africa. Similarly, my
delegation hopes that the regional programme for
southern Africa can further enhance our region’s ability
to fight the scourge of drug trafficking and abuse. We
also hope that consultations, as well as the
implementation of that programme, will be finalized
soon.
South Africa is in full agreement with UNODC’s
recommendation to adopt a comprehensive and crossdisciplinary approach and strategy in dealing with the
challenge of organized crime and illicit trafficking. In
that regard, in 2010 the South African Government
established an inter-ministerial committee for
combating substance abuse. The committee will guide
high-level integrated strategies nationally to prevent
substance abuse.
In
conclusion,
international
cooperation,
including bilateral and regional treaties on extradition
and mutual assistance in criminal matters, is a key tool
to fighting organized crime. In that regard, we need a
comprehensive, integrated approach that strengthens
coordination among the countries of origin, transit and
destination, as well as taking into account the principle
of common and shared responsibility.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
presidency of the Council for convening this important
meeting, and I thank Mr. Fedotov for his
comprehensive and useful briefing. I fully share in his
analysis and comments, and would like to reiterate

11-38700

Portugal’s full support for the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
Transnational organized crime, as no one
disputes, has an increasing impact on international
peace and security. That is why it is important to
discuss the issue here today. The dimensions of this
phenomenon, with its political and security
repercussions, require an enhanced coordination effort
on the part of the international community. We
welcome the action taken by the Council in 2009 and
2010 to acknowledge the serious implications and
global nature of this threat. They point in the right
direction, stressing the need to mainstream the issue of
organized crime into conflict-prevention strategies,
conflict analysis and integrated mission assessment, as
well as peacebuilding support.
The Council must now take a step forward by
solidifying this approach, aiming at early detection of
conditions conducive to or favouring organized crime
that could trigger severe implications for regional or
international security, as well as by ensuring that
missions in the field are prepared to tackle such
challenges as potential threats to peace and security,
and that the institutions and the legal framework they
are helping to build are robust enough to resist and
counter organized crime. Fighting international
organized crime also prevents conflicts from occurring
or spreading, and today conflict prevention is more
central than ever to the Security Council’s concerns.
The nature of the threats posed by transnational
crime at the national, regional and international levels —
by exploiting, among other things, structural State
weaknesses, conditions of poverty and porous borders —
seriously
undermines
development,
democratic
governance, the rule of law and stability in a growing
number of States and regions. The complexity of the
challenge we have before us requires developing
resolute and effective international and regional action
under United Nations coordination. This is more
imperative now, as we face the evidence of increased
synergy between transnational crime networks and
terrorist groups.
Transnational crime networks will not be easily
deterred. They have enormous resources and means at
their disposal. They will always strive to be one step
ahead of our efforts to counter them. They will persist
in diversifying further and becoming more and more
global. Many of them have already developed close

11

S/PV.6565

links with non-State armed groups. No part of the
world is immune to this threat, which often affects
countries in post-conflict transition struggling to build
their own fragile institutions and sustain their
development processes.
Assisting such countries in countering these
threats, in close coordination with the respective
regional and subregional organizations, is thus
essential, as their own success has a direct effect on
stability and security at the regional and international
levels. I would like to mention in particular UNODC
support for the Economic Community of West African
States regional action plan against organized crime. We
fully support the important role of UNODC in helping
to build the capacity needed to counter organized crime
and strengthen the rule of law, and we commend
Mr. Fedotov’s efforts to increase the international
community’s awareness of the crucial importance of
these activities.
I would like to make two final comments, the
first of which is related to the particular situation of
children and young people caught in the net of
organized crime activities. As in conflict situations, the
manipulation of children in organized crime and armed
violence disproportionately affects young people. This
is, however, still largely unrecognized as a priority and
thus has failed to lead to strategic action. However, the
reasons why young people join organized armed
violence or fall victim to armed gang crime are indeed
very similar to those that lead to joining armed groups.
My second and last remark relates to the issue of
trafficking in persons, a growing phenomenon that
threatens the very foundation of our societies.
Sometimes, however, we forget the human beings
behind the numbers. The international community, and
every single Member State, has a fundamental
responsibility to prevent and combat this practice, to
alleviate the suffering of trafficked victims and to
punish the traffickers. And yet the number of
trafficking prosecutions worldwide every year is very
low. Portugal is fully committed to effective
international cooperation in combating trafficking in
persons that integrates a victim approach and humanrights dimension with a law-enforcement perspective.
As a co-facilitator in the process of drafting the Global
Plan of Action on Trafficking in Persons, it was for me
extremely significant and gratifying to be able to
integrate that dimension into the text adopted by the
General Assembly almost one year ago (General

12

Assembly resolution 64/293). The protection of victims
should always be a central element in our
anti-trafficking efforts at the national, regional and
international levels. In that context, the establishment
of a trust fund for victims was a natural and
indispensable outcome of the negotiations.
In conclusion, let me add that Portugal has been
actively engaged in efforts to counter international
crime. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
active contribution of my country in the fight against
drug trafficking and related criminal activities in the
West African region. We will continue our engagement,
aiming at a more active role by the Council in
addressing international organized crime in its different
components and in its relation to peace and security.
With that in mind, reports and briefings by UNODC
such as this one are particularly useful, and we would
expect the Council to be regularly updated on the
activities undertaken by the Office in this important
area of work.
Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to join others
in thanking Mr. Fedotov for his insightful briefing. We
recognize the important role and the work performed
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for the development of effective strategies
and measures to reduce the detrimental impact of illicit
drugs on the health, social well-being and safety of
people across the world. The briefing has clearly
shown that organized crime and drug trafficking can
have a major impact on regional and international
peace and security.
We share the global concern about the detrimental
impact that drug abuse and drug trafficking have on the
political, social and economic stability of societies,
particularly in West Africa, but also in parts of
America, Central Asia and Europe. Countering these
drug-related threats remains one of the main objectives
of UNODC. Many countries lack efficient capacities
for effectively countering and preventing the
trafficking and use of illicit drugs. The work of
UNODC in the field of institutional capacity-building
and assistance for States to improve the skills and
knowledge of national authorities in all areas of drug
control is essential and deserves our full support.
Germany is concerned about violent activities by
illegal armed groups and criminals involved in the drug
trade, in some cases linked to terrorist activities. These
threaten local populations as well as security forces;

11-38700

S/PV.6565

they undermine State authority; they also threaten to
undermine some of our joint efforts in building peace,
such as in Afghanistan, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra
Leone.
Recognizing that post-conflict areas are the most
vulnerable, we are convinced that the fight against
organized crime and drug trafficking is also an
important factor in peacebuilding efforts. We
underscore the crucial role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in that context.
Germany welcomes recent initiatives in Central
America to combat organized crime and violence on a
regional and multinational level by staging the
International Conference of Support for the Central
American Integration System in Guatemala City a few
days ago. We hope that the implementation of the
newly presented security strategy for Central America
will successfully contribute to reducing the threats of
organized crime, corruption and impunity on all levels.
Together with our European Union partners, we
support this and other regional and international
mechanisms and frameworks for fighting drug
trafficking and organized crime, including Group of
Eight initiatives. Furthermore, Germany also welcomes
cooperation between United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes and other regional and international
organizations, such as UNODC cooperation with the
United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
also wish to thank Executive Director Fedotov for his
briefing. Drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime seriously endanger the economic development
and social order of all countries and constitute a
common challenge facing the international community.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) has done a lot of work in combating drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, for
which China expresses its appreciation.
Over recent years, the international community
has achieved remarkable progress in its drug control
efforts. However, the drug issue in the world is still
rampant and drug production remains at a high level.
At the same time, drug production and smuggling are
increasingly interwoven with funding for international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. In
countries such as Afghanistan and in West Africa the
issue of drugs has become an important element

11-38700

affecting security and stability. I wish to emphasize
three points.
First, the international community should
implement a comprehensive and balanced drug control
strategy. It is imperative to strictly tackle the illicit
drug supply, on the one hand, and to effectively reduce
the demand for illicit drugs, on the other. Drugconsuming countries, production countries and
countries of transit should take on their responsibilities
in earnest. Developed countries should help developing
countries, which are severely affected by drugs, and
should promote alternative economies and provide the
necessary financial and technical support in this regard.
Secondly, in preventing conflicts and building
peace, both the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission should pay close attention to the impact of
the drug issue. In supporting countries in conflict or
emerging from conflict in their drug control efforts, the
international community should fully respect the drug
control strategy independently formulated by the
countries concerned. China welcomes the participation
of UNODC in the relevant discussions with the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Thirdly, drug control efforts require better
coordination and coherence among countries and
international organizations, which should bring into
full play their advantages and expertise. China
welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
system task force on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, which can consolidate the resources in
the United Nations system so as to work in synergy.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon): I would like to thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing and for his
efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking and
transnational crime. As noted in the World
Development Report 2011, drugs connect some of the
wealthiest and poorest areas of the world in a web of
violence, showing that many solutions to violence
require a global perspective. Indeed, transnational
crime and drug trafficking continue to expand an
extensive shadow economy that has a global reach.
Illicit drug trafficking fuels the traffic in arms and
money laundering, generates violence and corruption
and in many cases is used to finance acts of terrorism.
Criminal groups undermine State authority and the rule
of law and put additional strains on States with porous
borders and weak institutions. Transnational organized

13

S/PV.6565

crime and drug trafficking thereby produce a negative
impact on peace, security and development.

prevention
strategies,
peacebuilding support.

At the institutional level, the fight against the
scourge of drugs requires universal adherence to the
relevant international conventions and their effective
implementation. It also demands sustained political
will and firm commitment by Member States. As noted
in the UNODC annual report, Governments and aid
agencies must invest more in development, productive
employment and increased security. Building resilient
institutions and strengthening the rule of law are also
essential, hence the need to strengthen capacitybuilding mechanisms for rule of law assistance within
the United Nations.

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov for his
briefing today and his able leadership of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

However crucial national strategies are, the
transnational nature of the threat means that no country
can face it alone. An effective response requires a
comprehensive international approach based on shared
responsibility. Special attention should be devoted to
efficient modes of collaboration between countries of
origin, transit and destination. States need to build
capacity, share information, provide mutual legal
assistance, build consensus on cross-border issues and
carry out joint operations aimed at disrupting
trafficking routes. We share the views of Mr. Fedotov
concerning the need to strengthen international
collaboration and build regional capacity in that regard.
National, regional and international actions and
strategies to combat drug trafficking and organized
crime must be well coordinated and comprehensive so
as to ensure that the actions taken to reduce supply and
demand are mutually reinforcing.
We commend the role played by the UNODC, the
International Narcotics Control Board and other
relevant United Nations organs and agencies in the
fight against drug trafficking and transnational crime
and encourage them to strengthen their cooperation
with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations.
Finally, we believe that the establishment by the
UNODC and the Department of Political Affairs of the
United Nations system task force on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking is a good first
step towards mainstreaming responses to drug
trafficking and organized crime into the broader United
Nations security and development agenda. We look
forward to the inclusion of these issues in conflict-

14

conflict

analyses

and

Organized crime represents a threat to democracy,
the rule of law, human rights, stability and social and
economic development. The correlation between
organized crime, human trafficking, drug trafficking
and corruption is a global challenge that requires a
joint, efficient response, as criminal networks continue
to grow rapidly, transcending national and regional
borders.
The tentacles of organized crime reach deep into
society and spread out across borders. Obviously, no
country can stand alone in carrying out this fight. It
must be fought on the domestic and international front.
No country is immune to crime or corruption, but
societies in transition are more vulnerable to these
threats.
It is a fact that criminal networks prosper in an
unstable and underdeveloped environment that is
vulnerable to corruption and money laundering through
violence, arms and drug or human trafficking. In such
contexts, countries must first adopt a proactive
approach aimed at developing an institutional
framework, implementing responsive measures to halt
criminal activities. Nor should measures to deter
criminality be neglected.
On a broader scale, countries must share
responsibility for fighting crime at the regional and
international levels, especially drug trafficking, as it
has the greatest impact on peace and security. In this
regard, we welcome the cooperation of Member States
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the International Narcotics Control Board.
We would like to underscore the devastating
linkage between drug trafficking and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and explosive and
related materials. It is clear that the resulting
widespread effects cause violence, destabilization and
conflict. There is a need to increase global efforts to
create effective instruments and mechanisms to deal
with crimes related to those issues, whose destructive
effects persist in all countries.

11-38700

S/PV.6565

Bosnia and Herzegovina is determined to develop
and strengthen our legislative, judicial and executive
State capacities and coordinate those related activities
with our neighbouring countries and with international
organizations that are fighting crime. We have adopted
and are currently implementing a strategy to fight
organized crime for the 2009-2012 period. That
document outlines objectives and measures to fight all
forms of crime, with a specific focus on the aspect of
corruption.
In conclusion, I wish to point out that the fight
against organized crime is a perpetual one. Therefore,
we must strengthen our efforts to implement preventive
action and strengthen institutional frameworks and the
rule of law through cooperation among Member States,
the United Nations and other international
organizations.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Gabonese presidency for having convened this debate
and, more broadly, to use Mr. Fedotov’s expression, for
highlighting the issue of drug trafficking and organized
crime as a factor leading to emerging and continued
conflict. It is important that the Security Council
monitor closely developments related to this threat.
I thank the Executive Director for his briefing,
which has shed light on the impact of drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime on international
peace and security. The 2011 World Drug Report,
which was presented yesterday, reminds us once again
that this is a global threat.
Since the last meeting of the Council on this topic
in February 2010 (S/PV.6277), a number of elements
have compounded our fears. Our analysis of the impact
of drug trafficking and organized crime on
international peace and security has deepened, and
credit for that, it must be stressed, is due to, inter alia,
the work being carried out by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The report
entitled The Globalization of Crime: A Transnational
Organized Crime Threat Assessment, which was
published during the special high-level meeting of the
General Assembly of June 2010 (see A/64/PV.96 and
A/64/PV.97), showed precisely how drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime threaten governance
and the stability of States.
The income from drug trafficking is a form of
revenue for armed groups which, as we all know,

11-38700

finances criminal networks that are involved with
various types of illicit trafficking. Some of those
criminal organizations have — as many speakers have
noted — acquired operational capacities that often
greatly surpass the law-enforcement capacities of the
affected countries. The resulting corruption and
violence undermine States’ authority, especially those
that are most vulnerable.
Unfortunately, the facts have confirmed those
analyses. The Security Council has again expressed its
deep concern about the continued increase in drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime in
Guinea-Bissau. Concerning Afghanistan, we have once
again called for strengthened international and regional
cooperation to address the threat that heroin trafficking
is posing to the international community as a whole.
There is a further concrete example, which was
seen in the conflict experienced by Kyrgyzstan in June
2010 and to which Mr. Fedotov referred. The conflict,
which claimed hundreds of lives and resulted in
thousands of internally displaced persons, had many
causes. But it is clear that one of those causes was
undoubtedly the clashes between various drugtrafficking networks. In this context, it is essential, as
stated by the Council in its presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/4) of 24 February 2010, that we pay
greater attention to cross-cutting threats, both in our
assessment of threats and our response strategies.
Here, France would like to pay tribute and to
welcome the setting up by the Secretary-General of a
working group on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, chaired by the UNODC and the
Department of Political Affairs. This is an instrument
that appears highly relevant in connection with a
comprehensive examination of policies on crosscutting threats, as part and parcel of United Nations
action in that context.
The threat is all the greater because we are facing
a changing and manifold threat. Criminal groups are
able to adapt easily. They have boundless imagination
and can always find new routes and new methods of
trafficking. If we do not want drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime to always be one step
ahead of law enforcement agencies, we must
strengthen cooperation between States at all possible
levels. That is the goal of the initiative that France
launched within the framework of its Group of Eight
(G-8) presidency, convening a meeting in Paris on

15

S/PV.6565

10 May with the participation of 22 ministers from
Europe, America and Africa responsible for combating
drugs, to deal with the fight against trans-Atlantic
cocaine trafficking. That ministerial meeting revealed a
convergence of views on the analysis and the thinking
on the means. The talks opened with the adoption of a
plan of action that led us to hope to be able to act more
consistently. I should like to refer to some elements of
the plan.
First is to improve intelligence capacity by
strengthening sharing and exchanges of information
among States on criminal networks, which know no
boundaries. The second element is to strengthen
maritime cooperation to facilitate the interception of
drug cargoes. The third element, which the Executive
Director also underscored, is to further strengthen
criminal justice mechanisms so that no one can exploit
lawless areas as a rear base for criminal networks. The
final element is to confiscate proceeds so as to deprive
drug traffickers of the product of their crimes.
The issues of drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime are dealt with by various United
Nations bodies, including the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice and, more recently, the
Peacebuilding Commission. Each body has a role to
play against a phenomenon that clearly affects the
economy, society and health. But we should never
underestimate the security aspect, and hence the role of
the Security Council. We would like the Council to
remain seized of the issue and for the Executive
Director of UNODC to present regular briefings.
Before concluding, I would like more generally to
express our gratitude to Mr. Fedotov for UNODC’s
multifaceted work in very important areas, such as
combating human trafficking, but also strengthening
the national capacities of States that have to fight
piracy. We appreciate that work and the dynamism of
his team here in New York.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like in to particularly thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting, as well to
express my gratitude for the interesting briefing by
Ambassador Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
Transnational organized crime in its various
forms has a global dimension. It generates billions of

16

dollars that give rise to violence and corruption,
affecting the entire international community.
Combating it requires the allocation of enormous
human and financial resources that otherwise could be
invested in development and the well-being of the
population.
According to the information provided by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, most flows
stemming from transnational organized crime occur
between continents. With regard to human trafficking,
the number of nationalities of the victims found in
Europe has increased, while in the trafficking in
migrants the greatest flows are the movement of
workers from Latin America to North America and
from Africa to Europe. UNODC estimates indicate that
human trafficking in Europe generates $3 billion a
year, while illicit trafficking in migrants from Latin
America to North America produces some $7 billion.
For its part, illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons occurs in all regions of the world, but it
is concentrated primarily in areas affected by armed
conflict, organized crime and widespread violence.
Although the value of the illicit trade is a small
fraction of the legal trade — approximately
$53 million per year — it has an incalculable toll on
human lives throughout the world.
That backdrop underscores the need to adopt
effective measures and mechanisms in order to
strengthen international cooperation and coordination
among States against transnational organized crime.
The adoption of the Palermo Convention was a great
step forward that highlighted States’ acknowledgement
of the severity of the threats posed by crime. That
important instrument was innovative in the juridical
sphere, not only in codifying crimes such as
participation in an organized criminal group and the
obstruction of justice, but also in defining the features
of money laundering and its related crimes. More
relevant, the Convention established international
cooperation as the main goal and placed particular
importance on mutual assistance in the criminal sphere,
such as in the area of extradition.
With regard to trafficking in illicit drugs, which is
another form of organized crime, the international
community has an international legislative framework
in place that has been consistently strengthened since
the second half of the past century. In addition to those
instruments, we must effectively apply shared

11-38700

S/PV.6565

responsibility as a guiding principle in the
comprehensive and balanced fight against the global
problem of drugs in all its aspects through international
cooperation.
My delegation is concerned about the attitude of
some in disregarding the agreements reached within
the General Assembly on the actual definition of the
global problem of drugs as a general concept that
includes aspects linked to the supply of illicit drugs,
both natural and synthetic, trafficking in their
precursors, demand and related crimes. That trend
represents a backward step in the commitment adopted
in 1998 by heads of State and Government at the
General Assembly, and reaffirmed during the highlevel segment of the 522nd session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs in 2009.
The relationship among the various forms of
organized crime, including illicit trafficking in drugs
and their precursors, money laundering, the illicit
traffic in arms and corruption, is not a new
phenomenon. However, those links require the
international community to tackle all such involvement
and all such criminal activity. With that same resolve,
we can overcome it.
Moreover, the international legal framework for
combating organized crime also includes very
important instruments, such as the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. In that regard, the
Organization also needs a binding instrument to
develop mechanisms to improve monitoring of the
trade in small arms and light weapons, explosives,
related materials and munitions, and their marking and
tracing, and to prevent their transfer to armed non-State
actors.
Bearing in mind the fact that the SecretaryGeneral outlined in his report (S/2011/255) that the
trade in small arms is not well regulated and is the least
transparent of all the arms systems, it is essential that
we conclude negotiations on the arms trade treaty and
provide Member States with the tools to tackle this
crime, whose destructive effects persist on all
continents.
The scope and complexity of the phenomenon of
organized crime require the comprehensive and
coordinated action of the United Nations system and
the international community. We therefore need to
continue to favour the General Assembly as the forum

11-38700

for discussion and consensus building in order to tackle
all its aspects and challenges.
As part of that consistent response, in the context
of the issues under its consideration, the Security
Council plays an important role in supporting the
strengthening of the rule of law, in particular criminal
justice systems, in order to address organized crime,
which finds fertile ground in conflict and post-conflict
situations and which can threaten the stability of States
undergoing reconstruction. It is also vital to ensure
national capacity-building in order to guarantee
continuity in the functioning of judicial systems during
the transition and peace-building processes.
In that regard, in order to seek more consistent
and coordinated responses, we agree with Mr. Fedotov
that it is particularly important for the Security Council
to complement and contribute to the important work
being done by other United Nations bodies, since the
increase in organized crime can jeopardize progress in
stability, governance and institution-building in the
situations under the Council’s consideration.
In providing assistance to a country so that it can
emerge from conflict once and for all, we must take a
broad and comprehensive approach that includes, as an
essential element of crime prevention strategies,
measures to generate opportunities for sustainable
economic development so that people will turn away
from crime. This requires international cooperation.
We are convinced that the efforts of a single State
are not enough to combat such crimes and their
multidimensional and transnational nature. Different
kinds of crime cannot be addressed with isolated
efforts. We need strategic alliances so that we can
move forward together to achieve more secure
societies. The goal of the international community
must be the elimination of all forms of organized crime
through international cooperation.
For its part, Colombia reiterates its determination
to enhance measures for bilateral, regional and
multilateral cooperation that increase the effectiveness
of our efforts to confront the dynamic nature of this
global challenge.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassador Fedotov for his very informative briefing

17

S/PV.6565

and in congratulating him on the leadership that he has
provided at the head of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC). I welcome the recent
initiatives undertaken by Mr. Fedotov, which he
announced in his briefing, namely, the start of the work
of the task force on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking.
Gabon also welcomes the fact that, for several
years now, the Security Council has recognized the fact
that transnational organized crime and drug trafficking
are cross-cutting threats to international peace and
security. The activities of transnational organized crime
go far beyond mere drug trafficking, to include
activities having to do with migrants, trafficking in
human beings, money laundering and corruption. These
threats destabilize regions and fragile States and
undermine the efforts of the international community
aimed at development, post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding in fragile areas.
In developed countries, as elsewhere, this same
phenomenon leads to deterioration in the security
situation. It threatens democracies and weakens the
fabric of societies and their economies. This
phenomenon has been amplified as a result of
technological advances and open borders and markets,
and this has led to new opportunities for criminal
networks.
As a result, these problems must be dealt with in
a holistic matter. This will require, inter alia, joint
efforts and a strengthening of international cooperation
through exchanges of information and experience.
Assistance to strengthen the capacities of less
advantaged countries will be part of this effort.
International cooperation also means that focus
should be placed on regional efforts and on
strengthening the implementation of existing measures
to help prevent and suppress crime — measures
derived from current legal frameworks. I would
highlight in this respect the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances, the United Nations Convention against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.
I cannot conclude without renewing my country’s
support for the praiseworthy efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in combating the

18

cross-cutting threats that undermine peace and security
in several countries around the world. Gabon therefore
supports the response planned by UNODC as outlined
by Mr. Fedotov in his briefing.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov to respond to
the statements made by Council members.
Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): I would thank
you again, Mr. President, for taking the initiative of
organizing this very important Security Council
meeting for an assessment of the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in the
field of combating drugs and organized crime.
(spoke in English)
The Council’s evaluation of the work of UNODC
is very encouraging. I am very grateful to members for
their kind words, and I take these words as guidance.
They will be very useful to us in the future, but they
are also a credit of trust. I assure the Council that we in
UNODC will try to live up to the Council’s
expectations.
I would also like to thank, through the
representatives here, the Governments represented on
the Council for their support for UNODC, including
financial support. Indeed, our financial situation is not
easy. We depend mostly on voluntary contributions
from Member States. But we are also grateful to our
donors and contributors for their support of our
activities, which are very important and very relevant
in many parts of the world. In parallel with working on
our governance and financial reform, we will continue
to rely on voluntary contributions in the foreseeable
future. That is a fact of life.
I will not comment on the statements made today,
but would simply like to address a few points.
First of all, on drugs, I was indeed encouraged by
the idea prevailing in the Security Council that to deal
with drugs we need to follow a balanced approach, to
address both supply reduction and demand reduction.
Also, we should not forget the victims of drug
addiction as we continue to consider the fight against
illicit drug trafficking as an important issue. They
require our support and our help. We need to help them
to recover and we need to be compassionate and

11-38700

S/PV.6565

understanding with regard to their situation. They are
sick people, and they need to be treated as such.
But the real criminals, of course, are drug lords.
In that regard, we need to continue to work very
actively, and even in a more aggressive way, especially
to prevent new ways for new drugs to capture new
markets in different parts of the world.
On human trafficking, just a year ago the General
Assembly adopted the United Nations Global Plan of
Action against Trafficking in Persons (General
Assembly resolution 64/293). I would like, through the
representative of Portugal, to once again convey our
appreciation to her Permanent Representative, who was
very instrumental in reaching agreement on the Plan.
I can report to the Council that, since then, we
have started work. In spite of the scarce resources we
have in the trust fund, we were able to launch a small
facility grant programme a few months ago in London.
I hope that, in a few weeks, we will start to help
victims of human trafficking, especially women and
children,
through
eligible
non-governmental
organizations. That will be the first practical result of
the resolution and the Global Plan of Action. As
members will be able to note, in just one year we have
seen practical and tangible results from our efforts, and
now we have agreed policies.
On regional organizations, we are of course
working with all regional organizations and
arrangements in many areas, including in Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries. We look forward to
continued useful coordination of our efforts with them.
It is very encouraging that the peer review
mechanism of the United Nations Convention against

Corruption is working well and that the mechanism
allows for the Convention to be implemented in a more
meaningful way.
I hope that the States parties to the Palermo
Convention — the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime — will be able to come up with the
same review mechanism, which would enhance the
possibility of the implementation of this and other
important international legal instruments.
Finally, I would like to assure the Council that
whenever it asks me to come back and brief it, I am at
its disposal. Members should not forget that while in
recent years UNODC has developed skills related to
acting as a development agency — helping people in
different parts of the world through our network of
regional and country offices — basically, legally
speaking, we are another department of the United
Nations Secretariat. We are not different from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations or the
Department of Political Affairs, so it is only natural
that a United Nations department should come to brief
the Security Council.
(spoke in French)
Once again, I should like to assure the presidency
of the Council that UNODC will remain available to
the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Fedotov for his comments and his
concluding remarks.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

11-38700

19
