S/2020/373

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 May 2020
Original: English

Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2391
(2017), in which the Council requested me, in close coordination with the States
members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) – Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger – and the African Union, to report on the activities of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. It provides an update on progress made
in the operationalization of the Joint Force since my report of 11 November 2019
(S/2019/868), including international support for the Force, the implementation of the
technical agreement signed between the United Nations, the European Union and G5
Sahel States in February 2018, challenges encountered by the Force and the
implementation by the G5 Sahel States of a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework.

II. Political, security and humanitarian developments in
the Sahel
2.
The reporting period was marked by a deterioration in the security situation in
Mali and the Sahel region, characterized by a rise in increasingly complex terrorist
attacks, primarily targeting the armed and security forces. Higher rates of civilian
casualties were also recorded. According to preliminary reports, terrorist groups are
taking advantage of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to intensify their
attacks and to challenge State authority throughout the subregion, especially in the
Liptako-Gourma triangle. There is also evidence of increased coordination and
cooperation between some of the terrorist groups operating throughout the Sahel,
from Mauritania to the Lake Chad basin. During the period, the desire of such groups
to extend their area of influence also fuelled conflict over resources with other groups,
including between Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara.
3.
In Mali, the reporting period was marked by a series of deadly attacks against
the Malian armed forces, including in Indelimane, Ménaka Region, on 1 November
and in Tabankort, Ménaka Region, on 18 November. In an attack on a Malian armed
forces position by unidentified assailants in Tarkint, Gao Region, on 19 March, 29
soldiers were killed. On 6 April, a Malian armed forces camp was attacked in the

20-06149 (E)

120520

*2006149*

S/2020/373

village of Bamba, Bourem Cercle, Gao Region, and 25 soldiers were killed.
Intercommunal violence continued to claim civilian casualties in central Mali. In
response to the increase in attacks, the Malian armed forces launched Operation
Maliko in February 2020, with the objective of restoring State authority across the
country.
4.
On 10 December, 71 members of the Niger armed forces were killed in a terrorist
attack on a military base in I-n-Atès, which was later claimed by Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara. On 25 December, near Sanam, in Tillabéri Region, another 14 soldiers
were killed by armed militants. On 9 January, a large-scale attack targeting the
Chinagodrar military post, also in Tillabéri Region, left 89 soldiers dead.
5.
In Burkina Faso, the armed forces continued to be targeted by terrorist groups.
In the east of the country, the number of attacks and incursions by presumed elements
of Islamic State in the Greater Sahara from the Niger increased, targeting both
civilians and the armed and security forces. On 24 December, unidentified assailants
launched an attack on the military camp in Aribinda, Soum Province, during which at
least 7 soldiers and at least 35 civilians were killed. The armed forces managed to
repel several attacks and seize a large number of weapons and narcotics in the past
weeks, indicating that the illicit economy, transnational organized crime and
trafficking routes continued to remain important incen tives and lucrative sources of
revenue for terrorist groups. In an unprecedented move, on 21 January, the National
Assembly unanimously adopted a bill to authorize the recruitment and arming of
civilian volunteers by the defence and security forces.
6.
Attacks on the security forces resulted in the withdrawal of a State presence
from the areas concerned and a further deterioration in the humanitarian situation. In
Burkina Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Guinea, Mali, the Niger and Senegal, 14.7 million
people were in need of humanitarian assistance by 1 May. By March 2020, over
1.4 million people were internally displaced across the five G5 Sahel countries. The
most significant rise was seen in Burkina Faso, where over 780,000 people were
displaced, compared with 44,000 in 2018.
7.
While these trends are alarming, the Joint Force’s operational tempo increased
throughout the reporting period. For the first time since its establishment, it was able
to simultaneously carry out and plan operations. In addition, operatio ns increased in
scale and duration, and several regional and international security initiatives were
launched, aimed at supporting the Force and intensifying counter-terrorism efforts in
the region.

A.

Efforts to address security challenges in the Sahel
8.
On 15 December, following the attack in I-n-Atès, the fourth extraordinary
session of the Conference of Heads of State of the G5 Sahel was convened in Niamey.
The Heads of State expressed profound concern about the increase in the number of
terrorist attacks and paid tribute to the victims. They called upon the Security Council
to consider the request by the G5 Sahel to place the Joint Force under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations and to strengthen the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), while
urging the international community to consider a plan modelled on the Marshall Plan
to support development in the Sahel. Among other measures, the Heads of State
extended the mandate of the Force Commander, General Oumarou Namata Gazama
of the Niger, from one to two years and instructed the G5 Sahel Council of Ministers
and permanent secretariat to revise the strategic concept of operations.
9.
On 13 January, on the initiative of France, during an extraordinary summit held
in Pau, France, the Heads of State of Burkina Faso, Chad, France, Mali, Mauritania

2/12

20-06149

S/2020/373

and the Niger reaffirmed their shared determination to combat terrorist groups
operating in the Sahel. They paid tribute to the victims of terrorism and expressed
support for the continued military engagement of France and other international
forces to protect civilians, defend the sovereignty of the G5 Sahel States and prevent
the terrorist threat from spreading. They announced the creation of the Coalition for
the Sahel, an overarching international framework to coordinate efforts in the region.
The Coalition is open to any country willing to join. The framework is centred around
the following four pillars: efforts to combat terrorism; capacity-building for the
defence and security forces in the region; support for the re-establishment of a State
presence; and development assistance.
10. Under the first pillar of the Coalition for the Sahel, the Heads of State also
announced the creation of a joint command mechanism for all military forces
conducting counter-terrorism operations in the Liptako-Gourma triangle, including
the Joint Force, the Operation Barkhane forces led by France and Task Force Takuba,
a combined joint special operations forces task force for the Sahel, to coordinate and
plan joint activities. The mechanism includes a combined command post in Niamey,
co-located with the Force’s headquarters in Sector Centre, an intelligence fusion cell
in Niamey and a liaison office in N’Djamena within the Operation Barkhane
headquarters.
11. On 24 and 25 January, as instructed by the Conference of Heads of State, the
Defence and Security Committee of the G5 Sahel, a strategic governing body of the
Joint Force comprising the five national army chiefs of staff, met in Ouagadougou to
revise the Force’s strategic concept of operations. They agreed to extend the
maximum range for the right to hot pursuit, whereby armed forces of each G5 Sahel
State may pursue presumed terrorist elements across the borders of the neighbouring
States for up to 100 km. The limit had previously been set at 50 km. In addition,
troops under Force command are no longer limited to operating on their own national
territories and within their respective sectors, but are permitted, following a political
decision of the Governments concerned, to be deployed to different sectors in other
G5 Sahel States.
12. On 13 March, following that decision, Chad announced the deployment of a
Chadian armed forces battalion comprising 650 troops to the Niger in Sector Centre,
to reinforce the Joint Force’s efforts in the Liptako-Gourma triangle and to support
the Coalition for the Sahel. Following an attack by Boko Haram on the Chadian armed
forces on the Bohoma Peninsula on 23 March, during which at least 92 soldiers were
killed, the Chadian authorities indicated that the deployment of the contingent would
be delayed. From 31 March to 8 April, Chad conducted Operation “Wrath of Bohoma”
in the Lake Chad basin, reportedly resulting in the deaths of over 1,000 terrorists and
50 Chadian soldiers. After the conclusion of the operation, the Government reiterated
its commitment to regional counter-terrorism activities, including the Force and the
Coalition for the Sahel, as well as to MINUSMA.
13. On 23 and 24 February, the G5 Sahel convened the seventh ordinary session of
the Council of Ministers. It was decided that the permanent secretariat would be
transformed into an executive secretariat, led by an executive secretary, the former
Permanent Secretary, with increased administrative autonomy. A new a dministration
and finance directorate and four divisions (resilience, security and defence,
infrastructure and development, and governance) were established as part of the
reforms. Ministers for foreign affairs and ministers of defence condemned the upsurg e
in terrorist attacks in the region and called upon donors to honour the pledges of
financial support announced during the high-level conference on the Sahel held in
Brussels on 23 February 2018. They also reiterated the request for the Security
Council to authorize a mandate for the Joint Force under Chapter VII of the Charter,
which, in their view, would ensure sustainable financial support. The Alliance for the
20-06149

3/12

S/2020/373

Sahel, a development coalition set up in July 2017 on the initiative of France and
Germany and made up of 13 countries, donors and development agencies, held a
general assembly for all its members on the margins of the meeting, to foster
development cooperation and coordination in the G5 Sahel region.
14. On 25 February, the sixth annual summit of the G5 Sahel Heads of State was
convened in Nouakchott. The G5 Sahel presidency was transferred from the President
of Burkina Faso, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, to the President of Mauritania,
Mohamed Ould Cheikh Ghazouani.
15. On 28 April, Mr. Ghazouani and the President of the European Council, Charles
Michel, co-chaired a high-level videoconference between the European Union and
the G5 Sahel Heads of State on behalf of the G5 Sahel presidency. The high -level
meeting was also attended by the President of the European Commission, Ursula von
der Leyen, and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Josep Borrell, in the presence of the Deputy Secretary -General, Amina
Mohamed, and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat. Participants adopted a joint declaration, building upon the outcomes of the
summit held in Pau, in which they underlined their joint commitment to pursuing
efforts under the four pillars of the Coalition for the Sahel. The Europe an Union
announced an additional €194 million to support security, stability and resilience
programmes in the Sahel. The sum includes €112 million for strengthening the
security and defence capabilities of the G5 Sahel countries, while ensuring respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law, as well as re -establishing the
presence of the State and basic services throughout the territory. The remaining
amount of €82 million has been earmarked for development support.

B.

Other regional initiatives
16. At the twenty-third extraordinary summit of the West African Monetary and
Economic Union, held in Dakar on 4 December, Heads of State and Government
decided to grant $100 million in immediate support to the three G5 Sahel States most
exposed to terrorist threats: Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. At the fifty -sixth
ordinary session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), held in Abuja on 21 December, the
Authority approved an action plan to eradicate terrorism for the period 2020–2024. It
adopted a $2.3 billion budget, of which $1 billion is to be drawn from internal
resources and the remainder to be mobilized externally. Concerned about the growing
terrorist threat in the region, the Authority also reiterated calls for the Security
Council to grant a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter to the Joint Force. The
President of the Niger and Chair of the Authority, Mahamadou Issoufou, called for
enhanced capacities for the Force, including through the involvement of the
ECOWAS Standby Force and the support of the African Union.
17. At its thirty-third ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 9 and 10 February,
the Assembly of the African Union requested the African Union Commission to
develop, in consultation with the ministries of defence of the G5 Sahel countries and
the ECOWAS Commission, a framework for the possible deployment, under the
relevant provisions of the African Union Peace and Security Council protocol related
to the African Standby Force, of a regional counter-terrorism force composed of the
Multinational Joint Task Force and 3,000 additional troops for a six -month period.
The Assembly also instructed the Permanent Representatives Committee to explore
funding options to cover the costs of the deployment. A concept note is under
development for approval by the Peace and Security Council.

4/12

20-06149

S/2020/373

18. On 27 March, the Governments of Belgium, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, France,
Germany, Mali, the Netherlands, the Niger, Norway, Portugal, Sweden and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland issued a statement in which they
expressed support for the creation of a task force, integrated into the command of
Operation Barkhane, aimed at tackling terrorist groups in the Li ptako-Gourma
triangle. Known as Task Force Takuba, it will advise, assist and accompany the
Malian armed forces, in coordination with G5 Sahel partners and other international
actors on the ground. Its deployment has been delayed owing to the COVID -19
outbreak, but troops are expected to be deployed in 2020. In the statement, the
Governments welcomed the declared contributions by Belgium, Denmark, Estonia,
France, the Netherlands and Portugal, as well as the planned contribution by Sweden.

III. Operationalization of the Joint Force
A.

Military component
19. In January, the Malian armed forces reinforced their battalion deployed under
Joint Force command in Sector Centre with two additional companies, based in Tessit
and Boulekessi. On 13 March, Chad announced the deployment of a second battalion
under Force command to Sector Centre, but this was delayed (see para. 12). No
detailed figures were available with regard to the Force’s current troop strength,
which is estimated to be at least 85 per cent of its planned strength.
20. In December, the Government of Mali allocated land for the new headquarters
of the Joint Force in the vicinity of the airport in Bamako. The construction of
temporary accommodation and office buildings began on 1 April with MI NUSMA
support (see para. 41).
21. From October to February, the Joint Force conducted three operations in Sector
Centre: Operations Pagnali 2 and 3 in Mali and Operation Samparga 3 in the Niger.
They were conducted in coordination with Operations Bourgou 4 and 5 and Koufra
10 under Operation Barkhane.
22. Following the summit held in Pau, France, the joint command mechanism of the
Coalition for the Sahel was established in Niamey on 15 February, based at the Joint
Force’s headquarters for Sector Centre. It includes a forward command post of the
Force Commander, an Operation Barkhane detachment and an intelligence fusion cell.
The Force also deployed liaison officers to the headquarters of Operation Barkhane
in N’Djamena. The joint command mechanism facilitated coordination and planning
for the various operations conducted in March, namely Operations Sama (Joint
Force), Monclar (Operation Barkhane) and Almahou (Niger).
23. In close coordination with Operation Barkhane and national armed forces in the
Liptako-Gourma area, the Joint Force launched Operation Sam a on 3 March. In order
to facilitate coordination with MINUSMA, the Force deployed a liaison officer to the
Mission in Gao. The first phase of the operation, focused on the Gourma Region,
concluded at the end of March. During the operation, six hostages he ld by Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara were freed in Gargassa and Fererio, Burkina Faso, and
several members of the group were neutralized.
24. On 19 December, the European Union, the Joint Force and MINUSMA held an
extraordinary tripartite coordination meeting, during which the Force expressed
concerns regarding the limited efficiency of the current support model. It suggested
measures beyond the current legal framework provided by the Mission’s mandate and
the technical arrangement signed on 18 February 2018 to address shortcomings. The
measures included a request for MINUSMA to manage commercial contracts on

20-06149

5/12

S/2020/373

behalf of the Force in order to ensure the delivery of supplies (life support
consumables, lubricants and fuel) to the Force’s areas of operation outside Mali. In
addition, the Force requested MINUSMA to establish contracts on its behalf for
vertical construction work, including the temporary structures for its new
headquarters on land allocated by the Government of Mali in Bamako (see para. 41).
The European Union supported the requests and stressed its flexibility regarding the
use of funds already disbursed to MINUSMA. Such a step would require changes to
the mandate and the tripartite technical arrangement (see para. 45).
25. Owing to the COVID-19 outbreak, the Governments of Mali and Mauritania
decided to close their shared border. This led to the postponement of operations
planned in Sectors West and East, namely Operations Amane 3 and Deréa. The impact
of the pandemic on the ability of the Joint Force and international forces to conduct
operations in the coming months was difficult to ascertain at the time of writing and
will need to be carefully and continuously assessed.

B.

Police component
26. In December, MINUSMA, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
coordination with the Joint Force and the G5 Sahel executive secretariat, jointly
organized a workshop in Niamey, bringing together actors of the penal chain, including
special investigations units, prosecutors, the military, provosts and correction s officers,
from all G5 Sahel countries to identify challenges and propose recommendations
related to the operationalization of the Force’s police component. Following the
workshop, the executive secretariat and the Force, with the support of international
partners, began to develop a directive for the full operationalization of the component.
27. During the reporting period, the Joint Force deployed 26 provosts in two of its
three sectors: 13 in Sector West (Goma Coura) and 13 in Sector Centre (Boulekessi).
Support for the judicial police in each of the G5 Sahel States constitutes an additional
aspect of the operationalization of the police component. Given that there is no
overarching mandate relating to the operationalization, various actors continue to
support the judicial police in each State. Coordination and information -sharing
between G5 Sahel countries and donors therefore remains challenging.
28. In Mali, the Specialized Investigation Brigade on Terrorism and Transnational
Organized Crime was further operationalized, with the selection of a pool of 300
additional officers and the identification of a potential site for a satellite office in
Mopti, close to Sector Centre. MINUSMA, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, continued to provide technical support to the Specialized
Judicial Unit in building its investigative and prosecutorial capacity in close
coordination with the European Union and those entities supporting the
operationalization of the police component at the regional level.
29. Similarly, the Specialized Investigation Brigade on Terrorism and Transnational
Organized Crime of Burkina Faso scaled up its capacity from 20 to 30 officers,
including 2 women. Chad decided, by decree, to establish a satellite specialized
investigation office in Bol, Lake Region, in the vicinity of Sector East, thus ensuring
greater proximity between forces and investigators.
30. It has been challenging to track cases referred to the national judicial police by
the Joint Force, as G5 Sahel countries usually do not distinguish between cases
referred by armed forces acting under national command and those relating to
operations conducted under the Force.

6/12

20-06149

S/2020/373

C.

Human rights situation and implementation of the human rights
and international humanitarian law compliance framework of the
Joint Force
31. The MINUSMA and OHCHR field presences continued to monitor the human
rights situation in relation to counter-terrorism operations conducted by the Joint
Force. In Mali, the armed forces were implicated in a case of ill-treatment of a woman
and the burning of several houses in the village of Timé, Mopti Region, on
12 February as they searched for items allegedly stolen from a Joint Force camp in
Boulekessi in the context of an attack by extremist elements in September 2019. It
remains unclear whether during the incident elements of the Malian armed forces
acted under the command and control of the Joint Force or under a national command.
This is due, inter alia, to the lack of a distinctive insignia for elements serving under
the Force and a lack of communication, including the lack of civilian casualty tracking
capacity for command responsibilities regarding human rights violations during
operations.
32. In Mauritania, following the arrest of a former member of the Joint Force
accused of killing a civilian on 13 March during a Force operation in Nbeïket el
Ahouâch, a trial was scheduled for later in March before the Criminal Court of Néma.
However, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, all trials were suspended until further
notice. The State Prosecutor requested the maximum sentence. The death penalty still
exists in Mauritania but is never applied because of a moratorium in force since 1987.
33. During the reporting period, the Joint Force’s human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework was further consolidated with support from
OHCHR. At its ninth extraordinary meeting, held in O uagadougou on 24 and
25 January, the Defence and Security Committee of the G5 Sahel agreed on a gender sensitive approach to force generation efforts, taking into account the need for greater
participation of women in Force operations. Meanwhile, the Confe rence of the G5
Sahel Heads of State highlighted the need to develop a strategy for the protection of
civilians for the five countries was highlighted, with the objective of strengthening
the relationship between national forces, local authorities and civi lian populations.
34. In addition, OHCHR, in collaboration with other partners, continued to support
relevant G5 Sahel entities through the provision of capacity -building activities to
enhance the implementation of the compliance framework. In Niamey in N ovember,
OHCHR, in coordination with the Sahel Defence College and the Joint Force,
conducted a training-of-trainers course for 30 Niger army instructors (28 men and
2 women). Similar activities were scheduled to be conducted in Burkina Faso starting
at the end of March, and in Chad in May, for a total of 60 officers, but were postponed
owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. In February, OHCHR conducted the second
advanced course for the G5 Sahel on human rights and international humanitarian law
for military officers, legal advisers and chief provosts of the various battalions. A total
of 23 participants (20 men and 3 women) benefited from the course, which was held
in Nice, France, in collaboration with the International Institute of Humanitarian Law,
and was aimed at enhancing respect for human rights and humanitarian law while
countering terrorism.
35. In Niamey in December, OHCHR facilitated a regional workshop on human
rights monitoring and the protection of sources, victims and witnesses, in
collaboration with the G5 Sahel network of national human rights institutions and
civil society organizations. The workshop was focused on ways to improve social
cohesion, respect for human rights and civil-military relations.
36. In November and December, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), in collaboration with Alioune Blondin

20-06149

7/12

S/2020/373

Beye Peacekeeping School in Bamako, conducted national needs assessments on
gender and human rights capacity-building for security sector actors of the G5 Sahel
States. The assessments informed the development of a comprehensive training and
capacity-building package to be rolled out for security sector institutions in the
region. A total of 138 participants (43 of whom were women), including member s of
security and defence institutions and operational units and representatives of human
and women’s rights defenders and civil society organizations of the G5 Sahel States,
received training to increase their capacity, in the context of gender and human rights,
to prevent and combat violent extremism and terrorism in five national training
workshops held in each country. The efforts were aimed at enhancing the interface
between civil society organizations and relevant security sector institutions in the
region and promoting people-centred approaches to prevent and counter violent
extremism.
37. Under the same regional initiative, UN-Women carried out a study on
mainstreaming human rights and gender equality in the security sector in the context
of combating terrorism and violent extremism in the G5 Sahel States, which provided
information and recommendations on the application of laws and frameworks that
take into account gender and human rights in security responses in the G5 Sahel
countries and regionally.

IV. International support for the Joint Force
A.

Support from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali
Life support consumables
38. MINUSMA continued to provide logistical support to the Joint Force in the
framework of its mandate. The Mission received a quarterly support plan from the
Force for the period from October to December 2019, requesting support for all seven
battalions operating under Force command, through the provision of 34,800 combat
ration packs and 410,600 litres of fuel and lubricants, amounting to approximately
$1.21 million. The Mission responded positively and approved all requests following
a human rights due diligence policy risk assessment. However, owing to its limited
transport capabilities, the Force was able to collect only life support consumables
worth $241,415, which represents a collection and consumption rate of 19.9 per cent.
39. On 26 December, MINUSMA received the Joint Force’s quarterly support plan
for the period from January to March 2020, which included 57,500 combat ration
packs and 480,000 litres of fuel and lubricants, amounting to $1,785,442. The Mission
responded positively to the plan, including all specific requests, again after
undertaking a human rights due diligence policy risk assessment. The Force was,
however, in practice able to obtain support amounting to $756,505, which represents
a collection and consumption rate of 42.34 per cent.
40. As at 31 March, of the first allotment transferred by the European Union to
MINUSMA to support the Joint Force in line with the technical arrangement
($6.2 million), a total of $2,980,590 had been spent, for a rate of expenditure of 48 per
cent.
41. On 31 March, the G5 Sahel submitted its quarterly support plan for the p eriod
from April to June 2020. The pick-up locations for the items contained in the plan and
quantities per item are summarized in the table below.

8/12

20-06149

S/2020/373

Location

Combat
ration packs
(packs)

Fuel (l)

Water (l)

Oil 50 (l)

Grease (kg)

Coolant (l)

Bamako

40 500

593 700

–

7 300

780

840

Gao

2 500

40 000

–

1 000

120

120

–

–

64 000

–

120

120

43 000

633 700

64 000

8 300

1 020

1 080

Sévaré
Total

Engineering support
42. In December, the Joint Force requested support from MINUSMA to establish
temporary structures for its new headquarters on land allocated by the Government
of Mali in Bamako. Permanent structures will be erected by a European Union
contractor. The temporary structures would enable the Force’s leadership to relocate
to the new location immediately while the procurement process for the permanent
structure is under way. MINUSMA responded favourably to the request. A contract
was awarded to a commercial contractor on 30 March for work related to the project.
Work on the site began on 1 April and is projected to be completed within the coming
weeks.
Casualty evacuation and transport
43. MINUSMA performed one casualty evacuation during the reporting period, on
30 March. In addition, it provided transport for one G5 Sahel liaison officer, who was
transported on a MINUSMA flight from Bamako to Gao. He will help to handle
logistics and coordinate casualty evacuation requests for the G5 Sahel on Malian
territory.
Issues and challenges
44. To date, MINUSMA has responded favourably to 43 of the Joint Force’s 45
requests. On average, it processes support requests from the Force in less than 10
days, including human rights due diligence clearance. In order to ensur e the timely
processing of the Force’s requests, the Mission has made the arrangements necessary
to position life support at the pre-agreed collection points within 48 to 72 hours of
receipt of a request, while awaiting clearance regarding the human rights due
diligence policy.
45. Nevertheless, the Joint Force’s limited logistical, transport and storage
capabilities highlight the limits of the current support model. Although MINUSMA
has made efforts to prepare and make available life support at its main op erating bases
in response to requests from the Force, the latter has often been unable to collect
deliveries or has been able to collect only a portion of the supplies requested. Given
the low collection and consumption rate, the Mission has also had to ma ke
arrangements to return uncollected ration packs to its warehouses before they reached
their expiration date and to avoid waste, as rations are distributed on a first -in, firstout basis. This has made planning challenging. Following a request by the For ce and
in order to facilitate collection, MINUSMA agreed in February to position deliveries
within bases closer to the Force’s area of operations, namely in Ansongo and
Douentza. In accordance with the technical arrangement, and on the condition that it
would neither delay nor have a negative impact on the Mission’s capacity to deliver
on its core mandated tasks or on its supply chains or other resources, MINUSMA
could assess the possibility of delivering life support consumables to other locations
in Mali jointly agreed upon with the Force.

20-06149

9/12

S/2020/373

46. Following the tripartite meeting held on 19 December referred to in paragraph
24, and at the request of the Joint Force and the European Union, the United Nations
explored the possibility of delivering life support, through external contractors in the
G5 Sahel countries, directly to each of the Force’s battalions. However, given that the
Security Council stipulated in paragraph 39 of its resolution 2480 (2019) that life
support consumables could be provided by MINUSMA to Force contingents operating
outside Mali on the condition that the Force or other partners assumed responsibility
for ensuring delivery to their respective areas of operations when outside Malian
territory, and given that the resolution excludes the use of commercial entities, such
a step would require changes to the mandate and subsequently the tripartite technical
arrangement. Beyond such legal and technical considerations, the impact on the
Mission’s ability to implement its two strategic priorities would need to be carefully
assessed.

B.

Multilateral support
47. At the international high-level conference on the Sahel, held in 2018, the
European Union, its member States and other countries pledged €88 million in
support of the Joint Force, in addition to previous contributions, bringing all pledges
received to date to approximately €431.6 million.
48. The European Union and some of its member States continued to support the
operationalization of the Joint Force, including through a contribution of
€183.2 million for the provision of equipment, services and infrastructure to the Force
through Expertise France. During the reporting period, urgently required
telecommunications equipment was delivered to the Force, as were 46 armoured
vehicles and counter-improvised-explosive equipment, along with training on the use
and maintenance of the vehicles and equipment.

V. Resource mobilization and coordination efforts:
coordination hub, trust fund for the Joint Force and
support committee
49. The most recent plenary session of the European Union coordination hub was
held in Brussels on 17 December. It marked the official transfer of the hub from
Brussels to Nouakchott, as previously agreed. In order to facilitate the transition, the
regional advisory coordination cell of the European Union in Nouakchott will provide
assistance to the support committee of the trust fund for the Joint Force, which now
manages the hub.
50. In order to keep donors informed of the operationalization of the Joint Force, it
was agreed that the support committee would present the results of its coordination
work in Brussels every six months. The first presentation had been scheduled for
26 May, but, owing to the COVID-19 outbreak, was postponed to the second half of
2020.

VI.

Observations
51. I am deeply concerned about the devastating surge in the number of terrorist
attacks targeting civilians and security forces in the Sahel region. The intensifying
violence along community lines, with alarming humanitarian consequences, is also of
great concern. In Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, the number of people who have
died in terrorist attacks has increased five-fold since 2016, with more than 4,000

10/12

20-06149

S/2020/373

deaths reported in 2019 alone, compared with an estimated 770 in 2016. The mounting
number of displaced persons is equally disturbing. In Burkina Faso alone, it has
increased ten-fold, to about 500,000, in addition to the 25,000 who have sought refuge
in neighbouring countries. The dire situation in the region is further compounded by
the spread of COVID-19 in Africa, with terrorist groups exploiting it for both
propaganda and action purposes, which has the potential to have a grave impact on
the region.
52. Owing to the convergence of global security, climate and COVID -19 threats in
the region, compounded by complex local dynamics, exceptional solidarity is
required at the international, regional and national levels. Governments, local actors,
regional organizations and the international community are mobilizing throughout
West Africa and the Sahel to respond to terrorism and violent extremism. A robust,
coherent and integrated approach to security, humanitarian and development
challenges is needed to reverse current negative trends in the Sahel in general and in
Mali in particular. I welcome the renewed commitment made by the Heads of State
of the G5 Sahel and the President of France at their summit in Pau and at the sixth
Conference of Heads of State of the G5 Sahel in Nouakchott to join forces to counter
terrorism, curb organized crime and tackle the roo t causes of instability. The
establishment of the Coalition for the Sahel to coordinate international engagement
is an important step to strengthen coordination among key actors in the Sahel. The
European Union remains a key partner, and its continued supp ort will remain pivotal
to ensure the full operationalization of the Joint Force. However, any effective
response in the Sahel requires the commitment of the wider subregion. In that context,
I welcome the adoption on 21 December of an action plan to eradi cate terrorism for
the period 2020–2024 by the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS.
53. It takes a variety of actors to confront the daunting challenges in the region, and
thus there is a need for stronger coordination between forces and clarity with regard
to command and control. I call upon all partners to take urgent steps to enhance
coordination, information exchange and, where applicable, mutual support.
Transparency is the keystone of any successful and mutually beneficial partnershi p,
and I urge all stakeholders to work together to ensure a coherent and coordinated
response. This will also be important to gain the trust of local populations. I remain
grateful to all donors who have contributed generously to the trust fund for the Joi nt
Force and I encourage others to follow suit. My gratitude goes also to my Special
Representative for Mali, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, and MINUSMA staff and
personnel. They have made every effort to respond swiftly and favourably to all
requests for support from the Force with maximum flexibility and in compliance with
their mandate and the human rights due diligence policy, while at the same time
implementing a range of mandated activities and supporting the COVID -19 response.
This flexibility has been particularly notable in the Mission’s efforts to ensure the
supply of support for the Force in areas such as Sévaré, near Boulekessi, and Ménaka,
near the tri-border area. I should also like to underscore the critical role that
MINUSMA continues to play in support of the peace process in Mali and the
stabilization of centre of the country, both of which are prerequisites for lasting peace
and stability in the region.
54. The increase in the operational tempo of the Joint Force is encouraging. I pay
tribute to the efforts and sacrifices of its personnel and all other security forces who
continue to operate under extremely difficult circumstances and at great personal risk.
The Force remains a vital part of a series of regional and international security
responses to address extremist armed groups in the region, along with other cross border challenges, including trafficking in persons, illicit goods, weapons and drugs;
migration; and displacement. The complementarity and partnership of current
20-06149

11/12

S/2020/373

mechanisms are critical, as the Force alone cannot secure the Sahel. In that regard, I
welcome the Force’s partnership with French forces and the creation of Task Force
Takuba, which will deploy European special forces as part of Operation Barkhane.
The decision of the African Union to develop a framework for the possible
deployment of a regional counter-terrorism force, composed of the Multinational
Joint Task Force and 3,000 additional troops, attests to the commitment of the African
Union to stepping up its contribution to combating terrorism in the Sahel. In that
context, it will be important to enhance existing joint security mechanisms, such as
the Joint Force and the Multinational Joint Task Force of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission.
55. Since the establishment of the Joint Force, I have advocated an ambitious
mandate and the provision of predictable and sustained funding for it. I have taken
note of its concerns regarding the limited efficiency of the current support model and
the difficulties that its contingents operating outside Mali are facing in collecting life
support consumables provided by MINUSMA at the designated collection points in
Mali. As requested by the Security Council, my next report on MINUSMA will
provide an assessment of the implementation of the provisions of paragraph 13 of
resolution 2391 (2017) and related challenges, as well as options on the way forward.
56. I commend the G5 Sahel States on the steps taken to adhere to the human rights
and international humanitarian law compliance framework, which is a critical tool
and an innovative approach. Adherence to the framework is vital to ensuring that
measures to prevent and counter violent extremism are respectful of human rights. If
counter-terrorism operations compound the fear and divisiveness that turn people
against one another, they risk inadvertently undermining one of humanity’s most
effective defences. I reiterate my call for timely investigations into all allegations of
violations by units of the Joint Force. Such investigations will contribute to
strengthening the Force’s credibility and its acceptance by populations. In an
increasingly complex environment, respect for humanitarian principles is equally
essential. I urge Governments, State and non-State armed groups and other
stakeholders to uphold their obligations under international humanitarian law and to
ensure unimpeded humanitarian access to populations most in need.

12/12

20-06149
