S/2013/457

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 31 July 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Further to my latest report to the Security Council concerning the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2013/381), I hereby request the
Council to consider the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which is due to expire on 31 August 2013. In a letter dated
12 July 2013 addressed to me, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon requested
that the Council extend the mandate of UNIFIL for a further period of one year,
without amendment.
UNIFIL continues to play a crucial role in ensuring peace and stability in
southern Lebanon, as well as full respect for the Blue Line by both Lebanon and
Israel. In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL continues to monitor the cessation of
hostilities and to assist the Lebanese Armed Forces in taking steps towards the
establishment, between the Blue Line and the Litani River, of an area free of any
unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons. UNIFIL remains engaged with
the parties on the outstanding issue of northern Ghajar and continues to focus on all
violations of resolution 1701 (2006), including ground and air violations. UNIFIL
also takes all necessary action within its capabilities to ensure that its area of
operations is not utilized for hostile activities of any kind. The UNIFIL Maritime
Task Force continues to carry out its dual mandate of conducting maritime
interdiction operations in the area of maritime operations and training Lebanese
navy personnel.
Efforts are ongoing to ensure a comprehensive approach to the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) that integrates the endeavours of UNIFIL, the Office of
the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the United Nations country
team; to further involve the Government of Lebanon in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006); and to further the strategic dialogue with, and increase the
capacity of, the Lebanese Armed Forces. The latter is intended to facilitate the
gradual assumption by the Lebanese Armed Forces of effective and sustainable
security control of the UNIFIL area of operations and Lebanese territorial waters, as
a key element in supporting moves towards a permanent ceasefire.
In a recent statement (S/PRST/2013/9), the President of the Security Council,
speaking on behalf of the Council, highlighted the impact of the Syrian crisis on the
stability and security of Lebanon and stressed the crucial role played by the
Lebanese Armed Forces in responding to new security challenges, characterizing
them as a central pillar of the country’s stability. I underline the Council’s call for
increased international support for the Lebanese Armed Forces, in response to the
13-41471 (E) 010813

*1341471*

S/2013/457

latter’s recently-launched capabilities development plan as well as in the context of
the strategic dialogue between the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL.
Cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces on land and at
sea continues to be essential for the implementation of the mandate of UNIFIL.
Despite the temporary redeployment of some units of the Lebanese Armed Forces
from the South Litani Sector to elsewhere in the country, a substantial number of
coordinated operational activities between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
continue to be conducted. UNIFIL has addressed the decreased physical presence of
the Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL area of operations by increasing its
operational activities. The current strength of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the
UNIFIL area of operations stands at approximately two brigades.
The liaison and coordination arrangements of UNIFIL with the parties,
including the tripartite mechanism, have facilitated a number of constructive and
pragmatic measures. UNIFIL continues to build on its efforts to promote practical
arrangements on the ground and understanding between the Lebanese Armed Forces
and the Israel Defense Forces in order to further stabilize the situation along the
Blue Line, to remove pretexts and possible points of friction and to prevent future
incidents and build trust.
The process of visibly marking the Blue Line is proceeding with the marking
of non-contentious points. The parties are continuing to give their full support to
Blue Line marking as an essential confidence-building measure.
UNIFIL has continued to ensure that the tripartite mechanism is as flexible as
possible and enables the parties to discuss a wider range of issues. In this regard, the
parties have agreed to discuss maritime security issues through the tripartite
mechanism.
There has been no progress in the establishment of a UNIFIL office in Tel Aviv.
The overall attitude of the local population towards UNIFIL remains positive.
This notwithstanding, incidents of unfriendly behaviour towards UNIFIL patrols and
personnel and freedom of movement restrictions occasionally occur. UNIFIL will
continue to work closely with the Lebanese authorities, with the aim of minimizing
the occurrence of such incidents.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL and the security and safety of its
personnel are integral to the effective execution of its tasks. Primary responsibility
for ensuring the freedom of movement of UNIFIL personnel in the area of
operations lies with the Lebanese authorities.
The total number of military personnel, as at 15 July 2013, stands at 10,640.
The UNIFIL civilian component numbers 346 international and 658 national staff.
I am grateful to the 37 troop-contributing countries that make up UNIFIL for
their ongoing commitment. This commitment, coupled with the development of a
strategic partnership with the Lebanese Armed Forces, has made possible the
successful implementation of several key aspects of resolution 1701 (2006).
However, as the UNIFIL mandate approaches its expiration date, it is clear that
more work needs to be done.
I would also like to express my appreciation to the UNIFIL Force Commander
and Head of Mission, Major General Paolo Serra, and to all the military and civilian
personnel of UNIFIL, for the work that they are doing in southern Lebanon in the
service of peace.

2

13-41471

S/2013/457

Regarding the financial aspects of UNIFIL, by its resolution 67/279, the
General Assembly appropriated to the Special Account for UNIFIL the amount of
$492.6 million gross for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July
2013 to 30 June 2014. Should the Council decide to extend the mandate of UNIFIL
beyond 31 August 2013, the cost of maintaining the Force will be limited to the
amounts approved by the Assembly.
As at 30 June 2013, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNIFIL amounted to $35.6 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to $1,246.7 million. As at
22 July 2013, amounts owed to the Member States that contribute the troops that
make up UNIFIL totalled $12.7 million. Reimbursements of troop and contingentowned equipment costs have been made for the periods up to 31 May 2013 and
31 March 2013, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.
I am pleased to report that on 1 July 2013, UNIFIL successfully launched the
pilot deployment of the Umoja solution. By piloting the implementation of this
globally integrated system, UNIFIL has significantly contributed to my five-year
action agenda to share financial, human and physical resources, knowledge and
information technology more effectively throughout the Secretariat, thereby
allowing for high-quality and cost-effective service delivery in support of mandate
accomplishment.
With the above information in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the
mandate of UNIFIL for a further period of 12 months, until 31 August 2014.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

13-41471

3
