Distr.
GENERAL
S/25693
29 April 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland:
draft resolution

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming that the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) should be considered every six months,
Noting the recent communication from the Government of Cyprus to the
Secretary-General (S/25647**),
Stressing the importance it attaches to the achievement of early progress
towards a political settlement in Cyprus, and also to the implementation of
confidence-building measures,
Reiterating in particular its call to both sides to cooperate with UNFICYP
in order to extend the unmanning agreement of 1989 to all areas of the United
Nations-controlled Buffer Zone where the two sides are in close proximity to
each other,
Reaffirming that the present status quo is not acceptable, and concerned
that the United Nations should not be entering into open-ended peace-keeping
commitments,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus (S/25492);
2.
Expresses its appreciation for past voluntary contributions to UNFICYP
and for those that have recently been offered for the future;
3.
Decides that, with effect from the next extension of UNFICYP’s mandate
on or before 15 June 1993 the costs of the Force should be treated as expenses
of the Organization under Article 17 (2) of the Charter of the United Nations;
4.
Decides also that UNFICYP should be restructured as a first step on
the basis of the proposal in paragraphs 16-19 of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/25492), with the addition of a limited number of observers for reconnaissance
and with a view to further restructuring in the light of the reassessment
referred to in paragraph 5 below;
93-27412 (E)

110593

/...

S/25693
English
Page 2

5.
Decides to conduct a comprehensive reassessment of UNFICYP, to include
the implications for the Force of progress on confidence-building measures and
towards a political settlement, additional to the regular six monthly
consideration of the extension of the Force’s mandate provided for in its
earlier relevant resolutions, at the latest one year after the adoption of this
resolution;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report one month before
that reassessment, to cover all aspects of the situation, including
confidence-building measures, progress in political negotiations and possible
progressive steps towards an observer force based on the proposal described in
paragraph 12 of the Secretary-General’s report (S/25492);
7.
Invites the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to implement
this resolution.

-----
