S/2020/1109

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 13 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the United Nations World Food
Programme; and Mr. Omer Badokhon, Founder and Executive Director of Solutions
for Sustainable Society; as well as the statements delivered by the representatives
of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia,
the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa,
Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on the
“The situation in the Middle East (Yemen)” convened on Wednesday, 11 November
2020. A statement was also delivered by the representative of Yemen.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-15326 (E) 181120 161220

*2015326*

S/2020/1109

Annex I
Statement by the United Nations Special Envoy for Yemen,
Martin Griffiths
I thank the President of the Security Council for this opportunity to update
the Council.
As Council members are well aware, I have been mediating the text of a joint
declaration for many months. I have been carrying out discussions virtually and,
when practical, shuttling between the parties. It has been a painstaking process,
which has faced many challenges along the way. The parties have remained engaged
throughout. But it is immensely frustrating to the Yemeni people that they have
not yet been able to agree on a final text. I thank the Security Council again for its
steadfast support for the achievement of an urgent agreement on the joint declaration,
most recently through its press statement of 16 October (SC/14329).
There is an often-repeated maxim in conflicts around the world that the parties
involved must take ownership of the solution for it to be workable and for peace to
be sustained. Yemen is no exception to this maxim. The conflict is between the
Yemeni parties. Only serious and deliberate commitments by their leaders can bring
this conflict to a close. It is now time for them to take the final decisions required to
bring the negotiations on the joint declaration to fruition.
I have been moving back and forth between the parties in search of finality on
the joint declaration for several weeks. The same challenges have been coming up
repeatedly, particularly with regard to economic and humanitarian measures. I have
been working with each party to find solutions. But in the end, I am the mediator and
not the negotiator. The parties negotiate with each other, and not with me.
I am struck by the example of the meeting recently held in Switzerland on the
release of prisoners and detainees. In that case, with all due care for coronavirusdisease protocols, we were able to bring the two parties to meet and successfully
produce a result that gave hope to many Yemenis. I am becoming convinced that
perhaps this is what is needed in the joint declaration: an opportunity for the parties
to explain their positions to each other and together reach the compromises needed.
I shall be discussing this and other options with the parties.
No doubt the issues in the joint declaration are among the most challenging
and fundamental to the politics of this conflict and the situation on the ground. This
cannot be underestimated. But the parties know the issues well. They have been over
this ground many times. With determination I believe that they can reach an agreed
path towards an end to this conflict.
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.8770), the violence on the front lines
has not been as intense as in previous months. This is positive, but by no means a
source of great comfort. I am deeply concerned by the periodic spikes in violence
between the parties in Ma’rib and Taiz, and the recent escalation in attacks on Saudi
territory. I hope that these spikes do not herald a return to the widespread violence
of earlier this year. Several locations have experienced shootings and shelling that
destroyed homes, schools, hospitals and places of worship. Once again, I call on the
parties to uphold their obligations under international law to protect civilian lives
and infrastructure.
My colleague Lieutenant General Guha has told me that the situation in
Al-Hudaydah has become calmer, but the tensions between the parties persist. The
United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement has continued its efforts
to reactivate the Redeployment Coordination Committee and other joint mechanisms
to further cooperation between the parties in accordance with the Al-Hudaydah
2/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

agreement. Overall, I must underline that there is no better option than a ceasefire,
combined with a return to the political process, for the parties to create stability
on the front lines. That is what they can bring to the Yemeni people through the
joint declaration.
I turn now to the vexed issue of the FSO SAFER tanker, whose solution is long
overdue. Discussions with Ansar Allah have been far slower than an issue of this
urgency and magnitude requires. The United Nations has been trying to negotiate
access for months for the expert mission to conduct an assessment of the condition
of the vessel, apply essential repairs and formulate recommendations on what is
required to avoid a spill. Although discussions have been constructive, we have
yet to receive the approvals needed for the mission. Given what is at stake, it is of
the utmost importance that Ansar Allah give the United Nations the green light
to proceed.
As the conflict in Yemen has become prolonged, broader stability has become
an ever-more pressing concern, not least in the southern governorates. One year ago,
the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council signed the Riyadh
agreement under the auspices of Saudi Arabia. This gave us all hope of greater
stability in the southern governorates, improved functioning of State institutions and
the prospect of genuine political cooperation between the signatories. I call on the
parties to swiftly implement the agreement, as Yemen needs the agreement to work,
and so does the peace process.
The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) has rightly intensified the
attention to women’s participation in Yemen. I am continually amazed by women’s
courage and their determination to end the war and build peace in Yemen. To mark
the anniversary, my Office and UN-Women convened a meeting of 30 Yemeni
women leaders, along with international partners. The Yemeni women emphasized
the importance of resuming negotiations, ending the war and enhancing women’s
political participation and representation and protection from political and genderbased violence. These ideas are not just good for Yemeni women; they are good ideas
for all Yemenis. To ensure that these ideas become central to the negotiations, we
need to see women represented in their delegations. All of us in our different ways
can help to make this happen.
And so, Yemen is at a point of decision, not for the first time and certainly
not for the last time. As we will be hearing from Mark Lowcock and David Beasley,
the plight of its people demands nothing less than a firm bet on peace, ending the
shooting war, opening up the country and resuming the search for an inclusive
political solution. It is that simple and that important.

20-153263/40

S/2020/1109

Annex II

Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
The most urgent task in Yemen today is to prevent widespread famine.
The data released last week have again confirmed that the risk is growing. As the
Security Council will hear from David Beasley, malnutrition has never been worse.
In some parts of the country, one child in four is now acutely malnourished. Words
such as “acutely malnourished”, “food insecurity” and “excess mortality” are
dispassionate, neutral, technical terms that obscure the horrors inflicted on the body
and on the soul by famine.
So how do the people, the actual human beings, whom we describe in those
technical terms actually experience them? With no food, the body’s metabolism
slows down to preserve energy for its vital organs. Hungry and weak, people often
become fatigued, irritable and confused. The immune system loses strength. As
they starve, people, especially children, are therefore likelier to fall sick or die from
diseases that they may have otherwise resisted. There is no shortage of diseases in
Yemen that will prey on those weakened immune systems. They include cholera, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), other respiratory infections and illnesses such as
malaria, dengue and diphtheria.
For those who manage to escape disease but still find nothing to eat, their vital
organs will start to wither and then fail. Eventually, the body starts to devour its own
muscles, including the heart. Many will experience hallucinations and convulsions
before the heart finally stops. It is a terrible, agonizing and humiliating death, and
it is particularly cruel in a world, such as ours, where there is in fact more than
enough food for everyone. It is the fate that the world has left hanging over millions
of Yemeni men, women and especially children.
The Nobel Prize winner Amartya Sen wrote decades ago that the history of
famines is “full of blood-boiling tales of callousness and malevolence”. In other
words, people who could stop famines simply chose not to. That too is the case
in Yemen today. Yemenis are not “going hungry”. They are being starved. All of
us — parties to the conflict, Security Council members, donors, humanitarian
organizations and others — should do everything that we can to stop that. Time is
running out.
We prevented famine two years ago. To do so again, the world must act now
on the five issues on which I will brief the Council again today: first, the protection
of civilians; secondly, humanitarian access; thirdly, funding for the aid operation;
fourthly, the economy; and, fifthly, progress towards peace.
The first issue is the protection of civilians. Fighting continues along 48 front
lines across the country, with the fiercest clashes occurring recently in Ma’rib,
Al-Jawf, Taiz and Al-Dhale’e. The prospects of further escalation in Ma’rib, where
1 million displaced people are living, or renewed clashes in Al-Hudaydah, whose
port is a lifeline for millions in the north, remain deeply concerning.
A nationwide ceasefire, as we have long advocated, would go a long way
towards protecting civilians. It would also help to stop the slide towards famine, as
the data confirm that the worst hunger is in conflict-affected areas. The SecretaryGeneral called for a global ceasefire in the face of COVID-19 in March — a call that
he then reiterated specifically for Yemen.
The second issue is safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. We recently
saw two disturbing attacks against humanitarian staff. On 19 October, a Turkish
Red Crescent worker was shot and seriously injured in Aden. On 2 November, a
grenade was thrown at an aid agency compound, also in Aden. We strongly condemn
those attacks.

4/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

We are also concerned by the delays and administrative constraints that
humanitarian agencies are increasingly facing in some parts of the south. In the
north, restrictions have been substantially more severe.
There has been important progress on some of the problems, including
assessments and project approvals. On Sunday, a long-planned pilot finally began
in Sana’a to introduce the biometric registration of emergency food aid recipients.
David Beasley will talk more about that. Those are important steps, but much more
remains to be done. Tomorrow, senior donor and agency officials, convened by
Sweden and the European Union, will meet to review developments and to plan for
the future.
The Council will also be expecting me to update members on the FSO Safer
tanker. We are yet to receive official approval for the assessment and the initial
repair mission. After several more rounds of extensive discussions, the Ansar Allah
authorities continue to indicate that they will approve the mission.
My third point is funding for the humanitarian response. With seven weeks
left in the year, our response plan has received $1.5 billion, or about 45 per cent
of requirements. At this time last year, we had received twice as much — almost
$3 billion.
David Beasley will give Council members more detail on the implications
for emergency food aid. Beyond that, 9 million Yemenis could lose access to basic
health services, and the treatment of more than half a million malnourished children
could stop.
More money for the aid operation is the quickest and most efficient way to
support famine prevention efforts right now. So, I implore donors to fulfil outstanding
pledges and to increase their support. More than $200 million in pledges this year,
including new funding announced in September, has still not been paid.
The fourth issue is Yemen’s economic decline, which is exacerbating the risk
of famine. Yemen’s currency continues to lose value. In the south, the exchange
rate is hovering around 840 rials to the United States dollar — the lowest rate in
its history. The Government is unable to defend the currency or subsidize imports
because it lacks the foreign-currency reserves.
Essential fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah also remain far below the
requirements as a result of the still unresolved political dispute between the
Government and the Ansar Allah authorities over revenue management. That dispute
prompted the Government to suspend commercial fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah
in June, although the Government has also allowed some vessels through on an
exceptional basis, and fuel imports through other ports have reportedly increased.
The parties must work with Martin Griffiths’s team to resolve the underlying
fuel dispute.
Our immediate message on the economy therefore remains the same. Yemen’s
partners must provide a regular supply of foreign exchange to stave off the worst
economic collapse and the famine that would follow.
My final point is progress towards peace. Martin Griffiths just briefed the
Council on the status of the joint declaration and its humanitarian and economic
confidence-building measures. Many of those measures, including a nationwide
ceasefire, resuming salary payments and reopening the Sana’a airport, could be
game-changers, especially if they come along with more money for the relief effort.
In conclusion, when I think about what famine would mean, I am at a loss to
understand why more is not being done to prevent it.

20-153265/40

S/2020/1109

Annex III
Statement by the Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
David Beasley
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this briefing on the worsening
crisis in Yemen.
Forgive me for speaking bluntly, but I want to make sure that no one is
left with any doubt about the scale of the humanitarian disaster now confronting
this nation. We are on a countdown to catastrophe in Yemen. The people have
already been ravaged by years of conflict-fuelled hunger and malnutrition. A toxic
combination of surging violence, a deepening economic and currency collapse and
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is now ratcheting up their misery to a completely
new level.
The world must open its eyes to this unfolding humanitarian disaster before
it is too late. If we choose to look away, Yemen will be plunged into a devastating
famine within a few short months.
The truth is that we have been here before. I briefed the Security Council
on Yemen in 2018 (see S/PV.8213 and S/PV.8404) and 2019 (see S/PV.8551 and
S/PV.8578). I know Mark Lowcock has done the same. We have sounded the alarm
about Yemen time and time again.
In November 2018 (see S/PV.8404), I warned of the horrors that innocent
civilians were forced to endure. Today their suffering is more pitiful than ever. I
highlighted the deepening economic crisis caused by the collapse in the value of the
Yemeni rial. Then it was 720 rials to the dollar. It was 215 before the war started —
already one of the poorest nations on the face of the planet. Today it is worth even
less — 844 rials to the dollar. And there are predictions that it could soon crash to
more than 1,000 rials to the dollar.
I warned that 12 million people were one step away from famine. I ended my
briefing to the Security Council by begging for the resources to avoid imminent
famine. Donors responded to our call and stepped up with new funding. Thankfully,
we were able to pull Yemen back from the brink.
But, in the two years since, so much of our good work has been wiped out.
And, once again, famine is knocking at the door. Let me tell members in part why.
We are back in this situation because we have been forced to waste so much time.
Since 2018, our people have spent countless days, weeks and months negotiating
with the Ansar Allah authorities for access to the areas that they control and for
permission to set up the monitoring systems that donors rightly expect in return
for their taxpayer dollars. Instead of being able to focus on getting life-saving food
assistance to the people who desperately need it, we have spent the past two years
trying to overcome those unnecessary obstructions.
Even worse, the endless delays caused major donors to lose confidence that
their funds would get to the right people, and contributions were reduced. We had
clearly explained to the Ansar Allah authorities that, with all the increased demands
around the world due to COVID-19, this was no time to play games. As a result, in
April, we were forced to cut the rations to 9 million people living in areas controlled
by the Ansar Allah authorities. Each family now receives a full ration every two
months instead of every month. It breaks my heart.
However, let me give a glimmer of good news. I am grateful that, on Sunday,
we finally had a breakthrough when we were able to start the biometric registration
of beneficiaries in Sana’a city. It is an important milestone but one that we should
6/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

have reached two years ago. However, let me emphasize that this is merely a pilot of
150,000 people.
I hope that this marks the start of a new chapter of cooperation among all
parties in Yemen, one that allows us to scale up and roll out biometric registration
in Ansar Allah-controlled areas as quickly as possible so as to give donors the
confidence to provide fresh funds.
This is also a critical first step in fixing the severe economic liquidity crisis,
which threatens to finally break the back of the Yemeni people. We need to stabilize
the Yemeni rial at around 550 rials to the dollar in order to restore food prices to
some level of affordability.
If we can scale up the biometric registration and restore donors’ confidence,
we can start getting money back into the hands of the Yemeni people. We believe
that we could distribute up to $0.5 billion in cash/liquidity and vouchers into the
marketplace through beneficiaries in 2021. That would stabilize the currency and get
the economy moving again.
However, Ansar Allah needs to show that it is willing to help us, and they
can do that by meeting the seven preconditions set by donors in February. Of those
seven, five have still not been met, although we are slowly making progress on all
of them.
Quite frankly, these are things that should be resolved in hours or days, not
weeks, months and years. And we are asking for nothing exceptional or new, but
just to implement, as we do all over the world. Why would anyone stand in the way?
I truly hope that the Ansar Allah authorities will now continue to work with us to
meet these criteria and to play their part so that we can raise the funds that will, quite
literally, mean the difference between life and death for millions.
We are running out of time. The war now rages across more than 40 front
lines. Yemen’s foreign-currency reserves, which were boosted with $2 billion in
2018 to allow the country to import food and fuel, are almost down to zero again. As
a result, the cost of basic foods has skyrocketed.
The impact on food security has been devastating. Before COVID-19,
analysis found the number of people facing severe food insecurity was expected
to exceed 17 million people in 2020. Further analysis in southern districts in July
predicted that acute food insecurity would rise sharply — from 25 per cent of the
population to 40 per cent by the end of the year. That is 3.2 million people of the
7.9 million surveyed.
The latest internal analysis of the World Food Programme now tells us that
famine is a real and dangerous possibility. The warning lights are flashing, and they
are not flashing yellow. They are flashing red.
We cannot wait for a formal declaration of famine to act. We have to stop
waiting for the crisis to reach boiling point and then doing just enough to pull it back
from the brink. It is time to stop with the band-aid solutions.
We need the authorities to continue working with us and to cooperate with
efforts to restore donors’ confidence. We also need a comprehensive, funded plan
to avert the famines glaring us in the face, stabilize the shattered economy, support
longer-term development and, above all, bring pressure to bear on the warring parties
to silence the guns and make peace.
Today I am therefore calling on all our major donors to step up with additional
funds to avoid the looming famine in Yemen. To restore rations to all beneficiaries
and resume other activities, such as specialized nutrition support to children and
20-153267/40

S/2020/1109

nursing mothers, we require $2.6 billion for the whole of 2021. At a bare minimum,
to avert famine in 2021, we need $1.9 billion. We cannot nickel and dime this to
death. We have to move now, or people are going to die.
Amid the darkness that threatens to overwhelm Yemen, I ask the Security
Council to give the people of this nation a glimmer of hope. I urge Council members
not to turn their backs on them. Listen to the alarm that Mark Lowcock and I are
sounding before it is too late. Seize the brief opportunity we have to avoid the famine
that is already gaining a foothold in parts of Yemen. But do it today, because time is
fast running out.

8/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex IV
Statement by the founder and Executive Director of Solutions for
Sustainable Society, Omer Badokhon
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank you for providing an opportunity for a
young activist in the area of the environment and sustainable development to speak
before the Security Council.
It is with great pain that I address you today. For a broad swathe of the
population, who are embroiled in the conflict and its harsh effects, environmental
protection and the right to development and a good life have become a luxury, a
secondary consideration.
I am speaking from the shore of the Arabian sea, which has seen 10 tropical
storms, including five hurricanes, in the last five years alone. Because of very limited
capacities, the rain and floods, once rare, claimed dozens of innocent lives. Only in
recent years have we seen climate events of such intensity. They are an alarming
sign for a country whose crumbling infrastructure will not bear up if such severe
disasters keep happening at the same rate.
Everyone is aware that the conflict has taken a growing toll on the environment
and human development in Yemen. The reports of United Nations bodies and agencies,
including the United Nations Development Programme, indicate that if the war ends
in 2022, development gains will have been scaled back by some 26 years — virtually
a whole generation. If it lasts until 2030, four decades will have been wiped out.
The organization Solutions for Sustainable Societies, which I lead, is staffed
only by youths under the age of 30 who believe that, in view of the current conflict,
the Sustainable Development Goals can be achieved only by making peace and
improving the way we live by building a circular, green economy focused on
sustainable consumption and production, in which young people should be empowered
to play a pivotal role. There should be a move towards agricultural development and
a coordinated use of clean energy products, and other solutions to develop the way
we live and help local consumers to save time and money.
Only a week ago, on 6 November, the world marked the International Day
for Preventing the Exploitation of the Environment in War and Armed Conflict.
Before this forum, I would like to take this opportunity to call once again on all
parties to refrain from exploiting the Yemeni environment and biodiverse zones to
fuel conflict. The environment is all too often an unintended casualty. This often
happens in Yemen, where the ecosystem has faced numerous disruptions because of
a conflict in which the parties have been mired for several years.
Agricultural land has dried up, harvests have failed, sources of fresh water
have been polluted, and rare wild animals have been driven to extinction owing
to the conflict, in the absence of Government oversight. Ibex and rare gazelles are
being hunted in growing numbers. The Arabian leopard, an endangered species,
is being hunted indiscriminately; if the situation is not brought under control, it
could very soon be driven to extinction. Continuing conflict and war have created
an environment where indiscriminate hunting can thrive, and many rare species in
Yemen are threatened with extinction.
Yemen also faces a considerable threat from illegal logging. Firewood is used
for cooking in the absence of household cooking gas, which has doubled in price and
is now unaffordable for much of the population, especially in rural areas.
20-153269/40

S/2020/1109

In 2017, we put forward the Vital Gas for All initiative to empower local people
to convert their organic waste, especially goat and cow dung and food scraps into
organic that could be used for cooking, something that would take the pressure off the
country’s scarce green cover, reduce illegal logging and provide an alternative, clean
source of energy to replace wood. We hope to receive support for that development
effort and others like it, whose primary purpose is to protect the environment.
No discussion of the environmental situation in Yemen would be complete
without mentioning the abandoned oil tanker FSO SAFER, which is anchored in the
Red Sea near the coast of Hudaydah governorate with a cargo of some 1,100,000
barrels of crude oil, or some 150,000 tons. The hull is decaying and corroding. A
pipe has been pierced, causing seawater to leak into the engine room.
The FSO SAFER can only be described as a ticking time bomb threatening
marine life in wide area of the Red Sea. This is an alarming issue; the potential
effects are incalculable, not only for fishing but for life along the nearby coast.
As an environmental activist, and as a young person, I urge the members of
the Security Council to use all their power to press for a lasting peace in Yemen, for
the sake of humankind and the environment. The suffering of Yemenis and of the
Yemeni environment will not end until the war does. The following urgent measures
are also needed in order to protect the environment.
Action should be taken to prevent the exploitation of the environment as
a bargaining chip, as is happening with the FSO SAFER. The tanker needs to be
emptied urgently before a disaster can happen, and comprehensive inspection and
maintenance need to be undertaken. The humanitarian intervention in the area of
green technology, including the conversion of waste to energy, should be expanded,
and an investment should be made in solar energy, which has proved to be an effective
source of sustainable energy for Yemenis in the current crisis.
The Security Council still has an opportunity to protect this planet, put a stop
to the bloodshed and safeguard nature and the environment, provided that it has the
goodwill and the strength of resolve. What is possible today might not be possible
tomorrow. We hope that you will move and act fast.

10/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their interesting briefings.
I will focus on three issues today: the joint declaration and the need for political
progress, the follow-up to the recent prisoner exchange, and the catastrophic impact
of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen on children.
Nearly a month has passed since our last meeting on Yemen (see S/PV.8770)
and yet virtually no progress has been made. Unlike last month, there has been no
further escalation of violence, but fighting continues, in Ma’rib, Al-Hudaydah and
other places. The Yemeni people continue to suffer every day.
Last week was the first anniversary of the signing of the Riyadh agreement.
Its implementation remains far too limited.
During his briefing in October, Special Envoy Griffiths seemed to show
some optimism about a possible meeting of the parties to finally agree on the joint
declaration. However, for this to happen, all parties must show a genuine willingness
to sit around the table and talk. Today, this still does not seem to be the case.
I must repeat myself: only dialogue can end the war and resolve the deep
differences in Yemen. We urge all actors to re-engage in peace talks under the
auspices of the United Nations. It goes without saying that Special Envoy Griffiths
continues to have our full support.
Belgium is pleased to note that the agreement on the exchange of a large
group of prisoners has been fully implemented. We once again commend the
International Committee of the Red Cross for the crucial role it played in negotiating
and implementing the agreement. This prisoner exchange is one tool for building
confidence between the parties. We clearly need more of these tools. We hope that
other similar agreements will be made possible in the near future.
In my third and final point, I would like to address, once again, the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen.
While the conflict continues, the humanitarian situation is worsening. Years
of conflict, economic decline and the coronavirus disease have made Yemen one of
the worst places to live on this planet. This is especially true for children.
A recent joint analysis by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, UNICEF and the World Food Programme revealed that in some
areas of Yemen, more than one in five children suffer from acute malnutrition. It
is no coincidence that one of the highest figures was found in the Al-Hudaydah
lowlands: 27 per cent of children there have an acute need for basic food.
Children suffer from acute malnutrition, as do mothers — a quarter of a million
pregnant and lactating women in Yemen need treatment for malnutrition. According
to Lise Grande, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for Yemen, we are approaching an
irreversible situation and risk losing an entire generation of young children.
Additional funds are needed to address this humanitarian disaster. In this
respect, the European Union and its member States are assuming their responsibility.
Tomorrow, the European Commission’s Humanitarian Aid Office will convene
20-1532611/40

S/2020/1109

with Sweden a second meeting of humanitarian and development actors on the
humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Following a first meeting in February, it will again
address the issue of funding and humanitarian access. I am equally proud to inform
the Council that Belgium has contributed more than $30 million this year to the core
funding of the Nobel Peace Prize-winning World Food Programme.
But what is most needed is to urgently put an end to the fighting and the war.
The parties to the conflict and those who support them bear a grave responsibility.
We urge them to lay down their arms and finally put the people of Yemen ahead of
their own narrow interests.

12/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English and Chinese]
I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock, Executive Director Beasley and Mr. Badokhon for their briefings.
Undoubtedly, the urgency of resolving the Yemeni issue is increasing. China
has always supported the political settlement of the Yemeni issue and the United
Nations-led peace process. We have played a constructive role in this regard to
actively push parties to bridge differences and build consensus. Today, I would like
to highlight the following points.
First, force cannot solve any problem and the hostilities must stop as soon as
possible. The past month has seen signs of stability in the southern part of Yemen,
but also some conflicts in the north, which brought challenges to the overall security
situation in the country. At the same time, China is concerned about the recent
drone attacks against Saudi Arabia. A political settlement is the only way out of the
Yemeni issue. We call on all parties in Yemen to heed the appeal for a ceasefire by
the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy, respond to the people’s aspiration for
a happy and stable life, stop the use of force and restore peace, stability and order
in Yemen at an early date. In that regard, the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement should continue performing its duty of monitoring the
ceasefire and ensuring the operation of the Al-Hudaydah port.
Secondly, it is imperative to prioritize the interests of the country and its people
and speed up political negotiations. The Stockholm Agreement has been signed for
almost two years and the Riyadh agreement has been signed for one year. All parties
should fulfil their commitments and effectively implement those agreements and
relevant Council resolutions. Recently, the Yemeni Government and the Southern
Transitional Council have been engaged in close consultations. Regional countries
like Saudi Arabia have actively carried out mediation. Important progress has been
made in the formation of a new government. China welcomes all this and hopes that
a new Government will be formed soon and military and security arrangements
be implemented. We also encourage all Yemeni parties to maintain dialogue, take
more confidence-building measures based on the prisoner exchange arrangements
and support the Special Envoy’s mediation, so as to advance the process of political
settlement. In this process, Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity must be fully defended and respected.
Thirdly, there should be extensive inclusive dialogue to promote peace and
stability in the Gulf region. China firmly supports the efforts of Gulf countries
to safeguard national sovereignty and security and promote the easing of regional
tensions. On Monday, State Councillor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi attended a
China-Gulf Cooperation Council ministerial video conference, in which he once
again called on all parties concerned to resolve regional hotspot issues by political
means and through dialogue and negotiation. His appeal was unanimously endorsed
by the ministers of the Gulf countries. We call on the international community and
the Gulf countries to work together to build a platform of dialogue for regional
security, continue to accumulate political trust to resolve differences and conflicts
and strive to eliminate the root causes of conflict with a view to maintaining peace
and stability in the region.
Fourthly, we must strive to ease the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, putting people
at the centre. The briefings by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive
20-1532613/40

S/2020/1109

Director Beasley were deeply disturbing. The worsening humanitarian situation in
Yemen is affecting people’s all aspects of people’s lives. We must be particularly
vigilant about issues of famine, child malnutrition and the coronavirus disease. The
international community, especially the donor countries, should provide sufficient
funds to the humanitarian response plan and substantially increase humanitarian
assistance to the Yemeni people to prevent famine and fight the pandemic.
China and Yemen have a tradition of friendship. China has been providing
Yemen with humanitarian assistance, including food and medical equipment, for
a long time. China recently donated testing kits, personal protection equipment
and medical masks to help Yemen fight against the pandemic. We will continue
providing assistance within our capabilities.
China is also concerned about the lack of progress with the issue of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. We call for immediate action to grant access to the United Nations
technical team as soon as possible to avert catastrophe, protect the environment in
this region and safeguard the safety of international waterways.

14/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
Before I deliver my statement, I would like us to take a moment to reflect on
what Mark Lowcock said: “Yemenis are not ‘going hungry’. They are being starved.”
(see annex II) I also want to congratulate David Beasley on receiving the Nobel
Peace Prize. The Dominican Republic is not the World Food Programme’s (WFP)
biggest donor, but it is for sure its biggest supporter.
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to thank Martin Griffiths, Mark Lowcock, David Beasley and
Omer Badokhon for their briefings.
At the outset, it is good to emphasize that the progress on the ground is
important and welcome. The prisoner exchange that took place last month, the
news about the possible composition of a new Yemeni Government and the start of
biometric registration of humanitarian assistance beneficiaries are steps that show
us some light in the middle of a tunnel that has been very dark for too many years.
However, despite this good news, as our briefers have noted, the situation in
Yemen is critical.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations-WFP early
warning analysis of focal points of acute food insecurity in Yemen warns us that
the expansion of the conflict coupled with the issue of access to humanitarian
assistance, the deepening of the economic crisis and the increase in food prices
could further exacerbate an already critical food security situation, particularly in
the governorates of Al-Jawf, Ma’rib, Amran and Al-Mahwit, where a significant part
of the population depends exclusively on humanitarian assistance for its survival.
And thanks to the most recent analysis of the Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification of acute malnutrition, we know that acute malnutrition rates among
children under five are the highest ever recorded in some parts of Yemen.
Faced with this situation, the international community has the collective
responsibility to act. Otherwise, the risk that a number of United Nations programmes
will close their operations from January due to a lack of financing will have
unimaginable consequences for the future of millions of people. That is why donor
countries having pledged but not yet disbursed funds to alleviate the situation must
do so with greater urgency. At the same time, we must step up flexible, multi-year
humanitarian financing, as well as support and promote early recovery programmes,
while ensuring that immediate needs are met.
It is important to look to the future, because if we do not solve the humanitarian
crisis, the people and youth of Yemen will not have the strength to rebuild their
country when the long-awaited peace arrives.
At the same time, the economic and health crises also deserve mention,
because apart from the conflict, they negatively impact the humanitarian situation.
We are referring in particular to the coronavirus disease and the threat of a second
wave outbreak of the virus in Yemen, where the health system is on the verge
of collapse.
We must not let hunger, conflict and the combination of these factors —
or worse still, inaction on our part — undermine the future of millions of
innocent Yemenis.
20-1532615/40

S/2020/1109

Among other urgent measures, we recommend providing an economic rescue
package for Yemen; promoting income from remittances by creating transfer
channels and reducing remittance fees; achieving a long-term agreement for fuel
and commercial imports and negotiating an agreement among all parties to establish
a centralized and technocratic management plan for the Central Bank of Yemen to
address conflicting monetary and fiscal policies.
It seems that Yemen is a case of one step forward, two steps back. Lasting
peace cannot be attained in this way. The solution is in our hands. Together we can
change the course of the situation in Yemen, for the benefit of the Yemeni people,
who so yearn for peace.

16/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and Executive Director Beasley for their briefings. I also look forward the
presentation by Mr. Badokhon.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the exchange of over 1,000 prisoners
between the Government and the Houthis in mid-October. I commend the successful
negotiations lead by the team of Special Envoy Griffiths and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. This was an important moment of hope in the midst of
this prolonged crisis.
We call on the Houthi authorities also to unconditionally release the four
remaining journalists who have been arbitrarily detained and are facing the death
penalty. In this context, we remind all parties of their responsibility to comply with
their obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian
law and to ensure accountability for all violations and abuses.
The prisoner exchange was an important humanitarian measure that,
hopefully, will also help build confidence between the parties in order to finally
reach an agreement on the joint declaration. We reiterate our call on the parties for an
immediate nationwide ceasefire and to agree to the United Nations proposal, thereby
allowing for the meaningful resumption of peace talks, involving the full inclusion
of civil society, including women.
As we have just passed the one-year anniversary of the signing of the Riyadh
agreement, we reiterate our call on the Government and the Southern Transitional
Council to implement the remaining elements of the agreement, which is an essential
step, including on the path towards reaching a wider peace.
Unfortunately, the fighting on the key front lines has not decreased but resulted
in reportedly ever more civilian casualties. The targeting of civilian infrastructure,
like the recent shelling of a hospital in Taiz, contravenes international humanitarian
law and is completely unacceptable.
Besides the direct impacts and suffering, the hostilities are also the primary
reason for the worsening of the economic and humanitarian situation. It is most
worrisome to hear the reports by United Nations agencies that Yemen is again on
the brink of a food-security crisis and that acute malnutrition rates among children
under 5 are the highest ever.
We have noted that the funding situation of the humanitarian programmes
has slightly improved, although significant gaps remain. Estonia has contributed
to the World Food Programme in order to help alleviate the humanitarian situation.
However, in order to respond to the humanitarian situation, including the famine,
there is a need to strengthen Yemen’s economy and find a long-term solution to
ensure the import of fuel and commercial items through the ports.
We also stress the urgency of granting formal approval to the United Nations
mission to access the FSO SAFER oil tanker, as such a decision by the Houthis is
already long overdue.

20-1532617/40

S/2020/1109

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock, World Food Programme Executive Director
David Beasley and Omer Badokhon for their briefings.
It is high time we saw a political settlement for Yemen. There must be a
cessation of hostilities, and a new Government must be formed. De-escalation is
needed, and it must lead to a cessation of hostilities.
In the north, the level of tensions around Ma’rib and the resurgence of
tensions in Al-Hudaydah are concerning. The Yemeni parties must cease their
clashes and renounce any military option in the north and throughout the country.
In Al-Hudaydah, we call on the Yemeni parties to resume their talks within the
framework of the Redeployment Coordination Committee of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement in order to implement the Stockholm
Agreement and reduce tensions.
We also condemn Houthi attacks on Saudi territory, which threaten the
security of the Kingdom and the stability of the region.
A new Yemeni Government must be formed without delay. The Yemeni
political forces must implement the Riyadh agreement and validate the first
efforts to distribute ministerial portfolios. Once again, we welcome Saudi Arabia’s
efforts to facilitate the signing of that agreement and its implementation. That new
Government must find a comprehensive political solution. We call on the parties
to engage in good faith in the dialogue on the draft joint statement proposed by the
Special Envoy, to whom we reiterate our full support.
As Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley stated, the humanitarian situation continues
to worsen: the numbers speak for themselves. The spectre of famine is looming yet
again. We must therefore act collectively to avoid such a catastrophe. In that regard,
I would like to commend the outstanding work done by humanitarian actors, in
particular by the World Food Programme. Their fight against hunger in the world is
crucial, and they can count on France’s support.
We must not underestimate the risk of a second wave of coronavirus disease.
The consequences would be tragic.
We will not stop repeating it: all parties have the obligation to guarantee
humanitarian access. This issue will be the subject of particular attention at the
donors’ meeting on 12 November, under the co-chairmanship of the European Union
and Sweden. I would also like to recall that the protection of civilians must remain
an absolute priority.
Finally, it is essential to allow the inspection mission mandated by the
United Nations to have immediate access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We must
do everything possible to avoid a disaster, and this inspection has been delayed for
too long.
France will remain fully mobilized, along with the other stakeholders, to find
a political solution to the war in Yemen. And the French authorities will continue to
work towards a de-escalation throughout the region.

18/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
Our discussion today is basically a repeat performance. The joint declaration
has still not been adopted. We continue to see periodic spikes in violence, shelling
and bombing. So, we have to be realistic and say that progress is practically nonexistent. This is extremely frustrating. Nevertheless, we would encourage Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, to continue his work.
I admire his persistence. Please continue to build on the so-called airlift of hope on
the International Committee of the Red Cross-facilitated prisoner exchange.
I do not have much to add to what Mark Lowcock and David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme (WFP), said with regard to the
humanitarian situation. The population is being starved and the horrors inflicted by
famine abound. We cannot find the right words to react to that.
David Beasley talked about the countdown to a devastating famine. I thank
him for his frank portrayal of the situation. Let me also take this opportunity to
personally congratulate him and the WFP on receiving the Nobel Peace Prize. It is
very well deserved. Germany is proud to be the second-largest donor to the WFP. I
congratulate the WFP on getting the biometric data in Sana’a. We hope that the WFP
can continue its work based on the data.
I find it really unacceptable to hear about the bureaucratic hurdles. What the
Houthis have done in the past in terms of blackmailing donors and humanitarian
organizations is totally unacceptable. But it was also mentioned that there are
bureaucratic hurdles with regard to the Government and the Southern Transitional
Council. I would ask the Ambassador of Yemen to specifically address the criticism
being levied against the Government with regard to the bureaucratic hurdles to
humanitarian aid.
On humanitarian funding, Germany has fulfilled our commitment, and we
are the third-largest donor for Yemen. We have pledged and disbursed $148 million,
in addition to a $100 million to the WFP and the United Nations Office for Project
Services. All together, our humanitarian assistance, stabilization efforts and
development cooperation add up to $370 million. There are others that have not
complied with their commitments, particularly those in the region. I do not think it
is acceptable that a country like the United Arab Emirates, which is also involved
in the military conflict, has not committed to humanitarian aid this year. I would
also ask our colleague Kelly Craft, Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, with excellent relations to the United Arab Emirates, to please push them
to commit to the same level as they did last year.
Let me turn to Omer Badokhon, Founder and Executive Director of Solutions
for Sustainable Society, who said a dignified life is not possible in Yemen. I find
it wonderful that he has such ambitions for the country with regard to a circular
green economy, biogas, conservation of wildlife and timber. This is what we should
be talking about, but instead we have to talk about the dire humanitarian situation.
He said that young people have to play a role, and I would add the need to have the
participation of women. I thank Martin Lowcock for being steadfast on this. In his
negotiations on the joint declaration, women must be included.
During last month’s briefing (see S/PV.8770), Mark Lowcock said that the
Yemeni children were a testament of hope, citing the moving example of a school
in Taiz where the children keep going to school without any learning material.
Teachers continue to teach without having been paid for months, or even years. This
20-1532619/40

S/2020/1109

is an example of hope. Just last week, we read about three children being severely
injured by shelling, including a 6-year-old girl. The shelling happened precisely in
Taiz. Maybe the injured children were pupils of the school he mentioned, maybe not.
But these incidents show once more how horrifying the fighting and the ongoing
violations of international humanitarian law are and what consequences they have.
They literally killed the last remaining testament of hope for the country. The
fighting and, especially, the killing of civilians has to stop.

20/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock and David Beasley for their important updates,
and Omer Badokhon for his briefing.
It is sad that the conflict in Yemen has failed to improve, with the deteriorating
economy and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) proving a deadly combination. It
is inconceivable that the number of people facing acute food insecurity is expected
to exceed 17 million this year, up from 15 million in 2019.
Let me reiterate what my delegation has been saying in the past several
months. First, only through a political process can the Yemenis shape the future they
want and need. I completely agree with what Martin Lowcock said just now, that, at
the end of the day, those who have to negotiate are the parties concerned, and our
task is to create a conducive environment for that to happen. We encourage Martin
to continue to bring them together.
The option is there — through the three Special Envoy’s three proposals,
the parties can choose a different path for their people: a path without guns
and bloodshed.
The first step would be a nationwide ceasefire, accompanied by measures to
restore the economy. The next step should be the resumption of an inclusive political
process, with the participation of women and youth. Women are very important in
the peace process.
We know that this will take time, but the more protracted the conflict, the
more damage it will inflict and the greater the suffering of the people.
Indonesia therefore once again reiterates the importance for all to expeditiously
agree on the joint declaration and to resume dialogue on a comprehensive political
settlement, in line with the relevant resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015).
The full implementation of Riyadh agreement is also crucial for allowing a more
comprehensive political process. We therefore applaud the continuous efforts by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to mediate the process.
Secondly, the parties should exercise maximum restraint and protect civilians.
International humanitarian law was created to protect civilians in armed conflict.
This is an obligation for all the parties to an armed conflict, whoever and wherever
they are. The continuous attacks by the Houthis in civilian areas in the cities of
Ma’rib, Taiz and in Al-Hudaydah violate international humanitarian law and must be
condemned. We again urge the Houthis to stop targeting civilians and infrastructure.
They must reduce violence and thereby give space to measures that could support
the peace process.
Thirdly, access to humanitarian efforts should be improved. Restrictions
on the humanitarian workers in the biggest humanitarian operation in the world
is unacceptable.
With increased violence and COVID-19, humanitarian agencies already have
a very complicated job. They should be permitted to deliver the assistance to those
in need quickly and safely.
The five urgent priorities updated by Mark Lowcock are now extremely
urgent, as we no longer have the luxury of time. Mark Lowcock and David Beasley
gave a grim picture of what lies ahead for the children and population of Yemen, due
20-1532621/40

S/2020/1109

to famine leading to catastrophic scenario. We need to act now, with resources and
with political solutions. But, most important, the parties concerned must act to save
their peoples.
On the FSO SAFER oil tanker, it is regrettable that the United Nations repair
team is still denied access. We question whether there was ever any intention to
allow such access. In view of the dangers, my delegation again urges expeditious
access for the repair team.
In conclusion, I will not tire of repeating that the parties must take all
necessary measures, in a timely fashion, to prevent famine and the further suffering
of our Yemeni brothers and sisters. That is the responsibility of leaders. That is the
only way to restore to the people the hope and the future that belong to them.
To close, allow me to quote from Dwight Eisenhower’s Chance for Peace
speech, which is still relevant in the context of Yemen:
“Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies,
in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who
are cold and are not clothed”.

22/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
briefings on recent developments in the situation in Yemen. I also thank Mr. David
Beasley and Mr. Omer Badokhon for their presentations.
On 15 and 16 October, we welcomed with great satisfaction the exchange
of more than 1,000 detainees between the parties to the conflict in Yemen, thus
translating into reality the agreement reached at the end of September in Switzerland.
Those exchanges will be gravened in the memory of many Yemeni families, which
until then had been resigned and desperate but that were relieved to welcome their
loved ones after a long separation.
The Niger welcomes this progress, which represents an important milestone
in the process of the political settlement of the conflict in Yemen, and it encourages
the parties to maintain this positive momentum in order to take the additional step
necessary to lead to the signing of the joint declaration on a national ceasefire.
To achieve that objective, it is important that the parties maintain the mutual
trust that they have built and, beyond that, that they honour the commitments to
which they have previously subscribed. This is, moreover, an essential condition for
the continuation of negotiations and the relaunch of the political process, which has
been bogged down for several years.
The resolution of the crisis — and the parties to the conflict know this full
well — will not be achieved by military means but must be sought through dialogue
and negotiation; it must be political. That is why my delegation invites the international
community, regional actors and those members of the Council with influence on
the parties in conflict to redouble their efforts to achieve a rapprochement between
the parties and to encourage them to come to the negotiating table in order to lay
the foundations for the settlement of the conflict, which has already claimed so
many victims.
While positive developments have been registered at the political level, the
expected improvements in the humanitarian situation have been slow in materializing,
making life increasingly difficult for thousands of people. It should be emphasized
that the humanitarian crisis in Yemen is primarily human-caused; in particular, the
continued military campaigns in the country have contributed to the destruction of
basic infrastructure.
As the fighting goes on, the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate,
assuming intolerable proportions for the population, in particular given the combined
effect of factors such as the obstruction of humanitarian aid; the degradation of the
health system, destroyed by long years of war; the coronavirus disease pandemic;
food insecurity; the fuel crisis; floods; the sharp depreciation of the rial; the depletion
of the national reserves; and the international aid deficit.
On that last point, my delegation remains concerned about the reduction of
services in several health-care facilities, as well as the suspension of certain United
Nations assistance programmes on which several million people in Yemen depend.
That is why we appeal for greater international generosity to alleviate the suffering
of the Yemeni people.

20-1532623/40

S/2020/1109

We call on those countries that have announced their contributions, in particular
those in the region, to honour their commitments in order to ensure the continuity
of assistance programmes and avert any further loss of life. We urge the parties to
the conflict to show restraint by putting an end to the fighting, as the humanitarian
situation cannot improve significantly without a cessation of hostilities.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its concern over the
situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, on which inspection work has been slow to
start, even though the vessel’s state of advanced decay continues to expose Yemen as
well as the countries bordering the Red Sea to the serious threat of an environmental
disaster with incalculable consequences.
To avert a worst-case scenario, we call on the Houthis to show responsibility
and honour their commitments by issuing the necessary clearances to the United
Nations team tasked with inspecting the FSO SAFER tanker.

24/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and World Food Programme (WFP) Executive Director David Beasley
for their comprehensive overview of the situation in Yemen. We also listened very
carefully to Mr. Omer Badokhon.
We take this opportunity to congratulate the WFP, represented here today by
Director Beasley, on having been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. We will continue
to support the work of the WFP, including on the Yemeni track, in providing
humanitarian assistance on a non-discriminatory and unbiased basis.
We are closely monitoring the situation in Yemen, which is in the sixth
year of an acute internal political conflict, accompanied by an unprecedented
humanitarian disaster that requires an immediate response on the part of the
international community.
Many years of conflict have destroyed Yemen’s civilian infrastructure and
health-care system. Its people are starving and are deprived of basic medicines and
social protections; they need help. All of this is exacerbated by the coronavirus
pandemic. In that regard, we highly commend the courageous work of United Nations
humanitarian aid workers, and we deplore the fact that United Nations programmes
aimed at providing basic assistance to the Yemeni people have had to scale back their
activities because of insufficient funding.
Russia will continue to assist the people of Yemen, including through
United Nations entities. We call on donors, including those from the region, to
increase financial support. We would recall that humanitarian assistance to Yemen
coming from abroad must be distributed on a non-discriminatory basis among the
entire population.
It is clear from what we heard today that the humanitarian situation in Yemen
can be improved only through a combination of political and diplomatic efforts to
resolve the conflict. However, we note that efforts towards a political settlement
have stalled and that military activities are escalating in various parts of the country.
We note with regret that the parties still have not managed to sign a joint declaration
and that the implementation of the relevant agreements, including the Stockholm
Agreement and the Hodeidah Agreement, has not yielded the desired results.
That threatens to intensify the violence, which would benefit only extremists and
terrorists. We expect to see progress in the implementation of the Riyadh agreement,
which would launch an intra-Yemeni national dialogue.
We believe that there is still an opportunity to draw up arrangements, in
particular with regard to confidence-building measures, a nationwide ceasefire
and a relaunching of the intra-Yemeni negotiations. The exchange of prisoners and
detainees under the auspices of the International Committee of the Red Cross is
additional proof of this. The fact that such a large-scale humanitarian operation
could be conducted by the Yemeni parties shows that they are able not only to reach
compromise-based solutions to problems and differences but also to translate them
into reality.
Progress also can be achieved on the situation concerning the FSO SAFER
tanker. We call on all relevant parties, including the United Nations Office for Project

20-1532625/40

S/2020/1109

Services, to take into account one another’s interests and to act constructively in
order to devise solutions that are acceptable to all parties.
We have repeatedly expressed our position, which remains consistent and
unchanged, calling for a negotiated solution to the conflict in Yemen. In that regard,
we reiterate our full support for Martin Griffiths’s efforts to relaunch the political
process, develop confidence-building measures and ensure a comprehensive
ceasefire. The international community is united in its understanding that there can
be no military solution to the conflict in Yemen.
We call upon all parties to actively join in the mediation efforts made by
Mr. Griffiths. We will continue to provide assistance to the United Nations mediation
presence in Yemen, including through contacts with all political forces of the country
and interested parties.
We would like to recall once again the fact that resolution 598 (1987) tasked
the Secretary-General with developing a security architecture in the region, in
cooperation with the States of the region. We would draw the Council’s attention once
again to the Russian concept of collective security in the Persian Gulf region, which
is aimed at breaking the deadlock in conflict situations and devising confidencebuilding measures. In October, we organized a Security Council meeting on this
issue (see S/2020/1037), at which a call for de-escalation was made once again by
both the region and the international community.

26/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their usual cooperation and
dedication. I also thank our briefers, Mr. David Beasley and Mr. Omer Badokhon, not
only for the relevant information provided this morning but also for the invaluable
work that they do in Yemen.
People desperately need relief from the conflict and its unjustified
consequences. We commend the work of all humanitarian organizations operating
in Yemen to mitigate the adverse conditions for life and livelihoods, but this is not a
solution. It is merely a transient cure for the symptoms of the conflict. We also recall
the importance of the humanitarian response plan. While we welcome additional
humanitarian funding, there remains a need for donors that have pledged funds to
disburse them with the greatest urgency. A shortage of funds will end life-saving
humanitarian assistance. Yemen cannot afford this. In that regard, we also recall the
parties’ obligations under international law that demand the unhindered passage of
humanitarian aid. Moreover, there is a moral onus on all parties to ensure that all
persons in need are able to access such aid.
The threat of famine is real, but it need not be inevitable. Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock has consistently reiterated the various pillars of the solution that
made it possible to avert famine in 2018, including funding and support for the
economy, and he has emphasized that these remain relevant. Notwithstanding this,
we are approaching a dangerous precipice, and it will be unforgivable if critical
action is not taken to save the people of Yemen. The fuel shortages in some parts
of Yemen add to the suffering, and we call on the parties to work together for a
resolution of the crisis.
The parties have the ability to work together, as was seen on various occasions,
including the most recently concluded prisoner exchange. Dialogue has been the
necessary basis upon which that cooperation was achieved, and we call on the parties
to continue working with each other and with the Special Envoy’s Office in good
faith to open the pathway to consolidated peace.
We close by noting that the FSO SAFER oil tanker remains an unresolved issue
requiring urgent action. The threat of an environmental, economic and humanitarian
catastrophe still lingers, and we appeal for the necessary concrete steps to be taken
as soon as possible, before our window of opportunity is permanently closed.

20-1532627/40

S/2020/1109

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths; the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock; the Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme, David Beasley; and the
Founder and Executive Director of Solutions for Sustainable Society, Omer
Badokhon, for their briefings.
South Africa continues to support Special Envoy Griffiths in his quest for a
peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen, despite the continuing violence and the
unyielding coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We would like to reiterate that the tragic humanitarian situation in Yemen,
deepened by the COVID-19 pandemic, is inextricably linked to the political impasse.
As such, our intervention will focus on these two elements, namely, the humanitarian
situation and the political situation.
On the humanitarian front, South Africa continues to express concern
regarding the devastating effect on the people of Yemen, in particular women,
children, older persons, internally displaced persons and those with disabilities.
South Africa remains dismayed at the fact that the escalating violence is
aggravating the widespread man-made hunger crisis in Yemen, a grim reality in which
two thirds of the population is confronted with food insecurity. Acute malnutrition
rates among children under 5 are the highest ever recorded in the southern districts,
which is home to 1.4 million children.
Hard-won gains are being lost as the escalating conflict and economic decline,
coupled with the overwhelming impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, have pushed
an already exhausted population to the brink. South Africa urges all authorities in
various governorates to agree to a unified set of measures to counter the spread of
COVID-19 in Yemen.
South Africa calls on all parties to the conflict to improve the delivery of
humanitarian aid and provide impetus to the overall political negotiations to end
the war in Yemen and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. The conflict is
not only affecting the people and the nation of Yemen but is also having a negative
impact on all neighbouring States and the greater region. It is in the interest of all
Yemenis and all citizens of the region that the conflict be brought to an end.
We continue to stress the importance for all parties to abide by their obligations
and responsibilities under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and to take all measures necessary to end and prevent violations
against civilians.
The report of the Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts
on Yemen (A/HRC/45/6) highlights the dangers of the parties opting for military
solutions above political negotiations and dialogue, which have the greatest potential
for the development of peaceful long-term solutions.
On the political impasse, South Africa remains concerned that the continued
fighting, with several cross-border attacks, air strikes and gun battles in Al-Hudaydah
and several other cities, threatens to halt the overdue peace process and deepen the
world’s worst humanitarian catastrophe.
We further call on all parties to show a willingness to compromise and not to
be set on gaining absolute positions. After five years, it is clear that there can be no
28/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

military solution and that both sides should seek to compromise in order to secure a
negotiated political settlement.
South Africa calls on all parties to engage with Special Envoy Griffiths in
good faith and without preconditions in order to reach a comprehensive negotiated
settlement to end the conflict, and that this be done in parallel with continued
efforts to implement the agreements made in Stockholm and Riyadh. South Africa
commends the progress made under the Stockholm Agreement in October, when
part of the prisoner-swap agreement was implemented and applauds the parties for
their success in this regard. This is a valuable confidence-building measure that
could move the parties closer to a negotiated settlement and provide impetus towards
the much-anticipated implementation of the Hodeidah Agreement and the statement
of understanding on Taiz.
South Africa urges all parties involved in Yemen to conclude the issue of the
FSO SAFER oil tanker by allowing for critical repairs that would avert a humanmade disaster in the Red Sea, including the removal of the oil from the vessel, in
order for it to undergo substantial repairs. We urge all parties to the conflict to
display a willingness to resolve this matter and remove this pending environmental
disaster from the Red Sea.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the only solution to the conflict in
Yemen is an inclusive Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political settlement that delivers
on the hopes of the Yemeni people for a strong economic and political future. In
this context, we also call for the full and meaningful participation of women in all
aspects of an inclusive political process.

20-1532629/40

S/2020/1109

Annex XVI
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
First of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffith, UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock, the Executive Director of the World Food
Organization, David Beasley, and the founder of Solutions for Sustainable Society,
Omer Badokhon, for their valuable briefings on the unfolding situation in Yemen.
The situation in Yemen is still a source of grave concern. Despite the efforts
of the United Nations and the repeated calls for a ceasefire and de-escalation, the
conflict is intensifying, especially in the areas of Al-Jawf, Ma’rib and the northeast. The situation threatens to jeopardize negotiations, exacerbate the humanitarian
crisis, destroy the infrastructure and damage the economy and living standards for
the Yemeni people.
We remain convinced that constant military escalation complicates the
situation and undermines efforts to find a solution. We call on all Yemeni parties to
the conflict to commit to a comprehensive and lasting political solution that would
bring an end to the conflict through direct, peaceful political negotiations under
United Nations auspices, in accordance with the terms of reference for a solution
set forth in the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive National Dialogue Conference and
the resolutions of the Security Council, including resolution 2216 (2015), so as to
preserve the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. The path
of dialogue requires accepting necessary agreements and concessions and putting
the national interest first.
My delegation welcomes the recent prisoner release, which shows that the
parties to the conflict are willing to reach a comprehensive solution. It hopes that
work will continue until the agreement includes all male and female prisoners for the
sake of social harmony at the national level.
We wish to reaffirm the importance of a commitment to implement all the
provisions of the Stockholm Agreement. We support all efforts to implement the
Riyadh Agreement with a view to establishing a new partnership government.
We call on the parties concerned to keep building on the positive atmosphere that
characterized the negotiations overseen by Saudi Arabia.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy to push for a political settlement.
We hope that the parties of the conflict will respond positively to the draft joint
declaration, including by complying with the comprehensive ceasefire, resuming
political consultations and taking the necessary humanitarian measures to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. We hope that the adoption of the joint
declaration will be a starting point to ensure the protection of the civilian population
and facilities, and to bring to fruition direct political negotiations leading to a
definitive solution.
In order to make the peacebuilding process successful and long-lasting, the
discussions must be comprehensive and participatory. They must bring together
all components of society, and include the effective participation of women, young
people and representatives of civil society.
Yemen is now facing the worst humanitarian disaster in the world. My country
is deeply concerned at the situation. The armed conflict has helped to spread the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and exacerbated the threat of famine
30/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

facing millions of Yemenis, particularly children, women and vulnerable categories,
especially given the deterioration of the health care infrastructure, the shortage of
food sources and the steep decline of the economy. We hope that the international
community will agree to alleviate and contain the suffering.
My country also wishes to highlight the risk of an alarming environmental,
humanitarian and economic crisis in the Red Sea owing to the precarious condition
of the abandoned oil tanker FSO SAFER off the coast of Hudaydah governorate. A
swift intervention is needed in order to assess the damage and make the necessary
urgent repairs. We urge the Houthis to respond to the appeals of the international
community and allow the United Nations Panel of Experts to inspect the tanker
and take the necessary actions. Such vital issues must be detached from their
political context.

20-1532631/40

S/2020/1109

Annex XVII
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I thank Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley. I think the briefings left
us in no doubt as to the scale of the humanitarian crisis, the human crisis in Yemen
and the urgent need to find progress in terms of a political solution.
The United Kingdom fully supports Mr. Griffiths’ efforts to make progress
on a political solution. The recent success that he described in securing the exchange
of over 1,000 prisoners demonstrates that face-to-face dialogue can indeed lead to
positive outcomes. We therefore encourage him to do what he can to bring the sides
together to finalize the joint declaration. It is clear from everything we have heard
today that only an end to the violence can help us bring enduring humanitarian relief
and hope to the people of Yemen.
But as Mr. Griffiths has said, we continue to see spikes in violence — in
particular the Houthis continuing to launch persistent missiles and drone attacks on
Saudi Arabia and to pursue further territorial gains in Yemen, casting doubt over the
Houthis’ commitment to peace. The recent arrival of a senior Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps envoy in Sana’a underlines this point and highlights Iran’s destabilizing
role in the Yemen conflict. We therefore urge the Houthis to refrain from such
behaviour and, instead, to place their efforts into dialogue. Another necessary step
is the implementation of the Riyadh agreement. The United Kingdom therefore calls
on the parties to rapidly form an inclusive Cabinet and implement the necessary
military reforms.
We also heard today about the dire humanitarian situation. Several sets of
data were released last week, and it is clear that the risk of famine is growing. But,
as Mr. Lowcock said, this is not about data or statistics for the people and children
of Yemen, but a grim human reality. The latest acute malnutrition analysis by the
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification for parts of southern Yemen, as we
have heard, predicts that malnutrition in the south is soon expected to reach its
highest levels since the conflict began. We know how bad it has been, and it is getting
worse. By the end of 2020, the number of children suffering acute malnutrition will
grow by 10 per cent — risking the fate described just now by Mr. Lowcock.
And as we heard from Mr. Beasley, the World Food Programme has also
assessed that food insecurity is worsening faster than expected. With 40 per cent of
households across the country now not having enough to eat, the dire picture makes
swift action — now, before it is too late — all the more important, particularly in
terms of the economy, humanitarian funding and humanitarian access.
With regard to the economy, urgent action is needed to ensure the availability
and affordability of food, as we have heard. At present, Yemen’s economic problems
are escalating and driving up the prices of such basic goods as food and fuel and
putting additional pressure on the humanitarian response. The Yemeni rial has fallen,
as we heard again today, to record lows against the dollar, and the hard currency
reserves of the Central Bank of Yemen are effectively exhausted. The Government
of Yemen must set out a realistic and transparent budget, while taking steps to avoid
further inflation. External support in the form of getting hard currency to the Central
Bank of Yemen is also urgently needed so that food importers can continue to bring
food into the country.
The United Nations-led humanitarian response, as we heard again today,
remains vastly underfunded, further driving the risk of famine. Only 43 per cent
32/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

of the $3.3 billion appeal by the United Nations has been received to date. As a
result, 12 of the 38 major programmes of the United Nations in Yemen have already
closed or been significantly scaled back this year. If no further funding is received,
more will close, denying life-saving assistance to long-suffering Yemeni children
and adults. It is critical that donors disburse their pledges promptly and consider
additional funding for 2020. Donors must also commit new funds at the start of 2021,
and not wait for a pledging conference. For its own part, the United Kingdom has
already disbursed 81 per cent of its £200 million commitment for this financial year.
Shockingly, in this context, severe humanitarian access constraints, particularly
in the Houthi-controlled north, continue to hamper the humanitarian response. Aid
and humanitarian workers must be able to reach those in need, otherwise vulnerable
Yemenis will needlessly die. We also condemn any attacks on aid workers, including
the two recent incidents in Aden.
A senior officials donor meeting is taking place this week in Sweden, hosted by
the European Commission. It is vital that we use that meeting to send a clear message
that we will not tolerate constraints on the distribution of life-saving assistance.
I am grateful to the briefers for their updates on the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
Last month, the United Nations Office for Project Services and the Houthis agreed
in principle on an assessment mission to secure that tanker. But as Mr. Griffiths said,
this issue is progressing slower than urgency requires. We understand the revised
statement of works is due to be submitted shortly, but we encourage the United
Nations to accelerate this process and urge the Houthis to agree to the revised plan
so work can begin as soon as possible.
What we have heard today is an urgent call to action from the leadership of the
United Nations humanitarian organizations. We need to heed their grave warnings
with immediate action.

20-1532633/40

S/2020/1109

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank the briefers and my colleagues for their remarks today in this very
important discussion.
Last month, Mr. Griffiths expressed cautious optimism following the prisoner
exchange between the Yemeni Government and the Houthis, and a reduction in
fighting in and around Ma’rib and Al-Hudaydah (see S/PV.8770). I thank him for
what he is doing to resolve this tragic situation through diplomatic means.
Mr. Lowcock’s remarks about the devastating truth about hunger and famine
were deeply moving. And as painful and disturbing as it is to hear them, he owes it
to us, as he does with every briefing, to bring the truth home. I therefore thank him
for bringing the truth to the Security Council. The Council needs to take this to heart
and do everything it can for the Yemeni people.
Mr. Beasley’s passionate plea for funds and the vision he laid out, which can
be achieved with international support, really holds each of us accountable. So, I
hope, like the representative of Germany said, that we each use our contacts to be
able to bring in more funding for this very important cause. These successes, due
in no small part to Mr. Beasley’s efforts, remind us that the United Nations and the
actions of the Security Council have a real-world impact. We must take from that
fact renewed motivation to improve Yemeni lives and support movement towards an
inclusive political resolution. Inspiration and political will are the right combination
for success.
Unfortunately, the goodwill of the international community has not been
matched by the Houthis, who continue to focus their efforts on prolonging the
conflict and lashing out against Yemen’s neighbours. The United States condemns
the Houthis’ brazen attacks against Saudi Arabia on 28 October — attacks that
included unmanned aerial vehicles launched in the direction of Riyadh, which posed
a grave danger to the lives of many civilians, including United States citizens. The
Houthis have now launched hundreds of drones and missiles at Saudi Arabia over
the past several years.
The Houthis must be held accountable for their murderous conduct, as
must their primary supporter, the Islamic Republic of Iran. I am reminded of the
Iranian regime’s Foreign Minister, Mr. M. Javad Zarif, sending out a preachy tweet
on Sunday about the need for multilateralism and Iran’s record as a practitioner
of “responsible diplomacy”. It is so ironic, and it would be funny if it were not
so tragic — a diplomat using Twitter to spread propaganda on a platform that his
own people are forbidden to use in order to profess innocence and claim that his
Government is fighting for peace.
Wherever there is violence, instability and bloodshed in the region, Iran can be
found fanning the flames. The regime fuels the Houthis’ violence by providing funds,
weapons, training and encouragement. It is Tehran that is intent upon undermining
the work of Special Envoy Griffiths and the Security Council by making a political
solution to this conflict less achievable.
Just weeks ago, the Iranian regime dispatched a member of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, Hassan Irloo, to Sana’a, where Irloo called himself Iran’s
“Ambassador” to the Houthis. These acts demonstrate that Iran and the Houthis are
not serious about a political resolution to the conflict in Yemen. We once again call
on Iran to halt its support for terror, end its destabilizing actions across the region
and respect the human rights and needs of all its people, its own people.
34/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

On the humanitarian front, I thank Mr. Beasley for his powerful and sobering
update on Yemen’s food insecurity. I congratulate him, as we all have done today,
and the World Food Programme (WFP), for its well-deserved and well-earned
recognition by the Nobel Committee. The United States is a proud supporter of the
WFP’s global activities, providing more than 40 per cent of its resources. Despite
that generosity, the World Food Programme urgently needs more nations to come to
its aid in order to address the growing food security needs around the globe.
We share Mr. Lowcock’s concern that, despite recent additional contributions,
Yemen’s humanitarian response plan remains woefully underfunded. As we have
done for months, the United States encourages all donors to provide resources
immediately so as to help prevent further suffering. In addition, all parties to the
conflict must support the delivery of critical life-saving assistance. The Houthis must
end their interference in humanitarian efforts right now and take specific actions to
show their readiness to cooperate. Specifically, they must immediately permit the
World Food Programme to complete its biometric targeting and registration system
across all districts, allow third-party monitoring and provide travel authorizations
to humanitarian staff.
As David Beasley mentioned, household food insecurity levels rose between
May and September in areas where the World Food Programme had to reduce its
distributions due to obstruction by the Houthis. Just last week UNICEF announced
that the acute malnutrition rates among children under the age of 5 were the highest
rates among children ever recorded in certain parts of Yemen. The sinister political
manoeuvring that impedes humanitarian access must stop before a generation of
Yemeni children suffers permanent developmental damage.
The United States also reiterates its call for the Houthis to release Yemeni citizen
Levi Musa Merhavi from custody immediately. Mr. Merhavi remains wrongfully
detained despite a Houthi so-called court ordering his release in September 2019.
We call on the Houthis to respect religious freedom, stop oppressing Yemen’s Jewish
population and release Mr. Merhavi immediately.
Regarding the FSO SAFER tanker, it is unconscionable that month after month
the reality remains the same. The Houthis continue to withhold the final approval
of the United Nations mission’s plan for an assessment and initial repairs of this
corroding vessel. The United States reiterates the urgent need for the Houthis to
cease exploiting the threat of environmental and economic disaster simply to gain
political leverage. We must avoid a devastating “we told you so” moment that can
happen any day now. The Houthis need to take responsibility by providing their final
agreement without further delay.
As this harsh winter approaches, I quote my fellow Kentuckian statesman
Henry Clay: “The time will come when winter will ask you what you were you doing
all summer.”

20-1532635/40

S/2020/1109

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. David Muldrow Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme; and Mr. Omer Badokhon,
Founder and Executive Director of Solutions for Sustainable Society, for their valuable
briefings. I welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to this meeting.
It has been two months since Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock briefed the Security Council about the
deteriorating situation in Yemen (see S/PV.8757). Until now, we have not seen any
significant improvements. Fighting has escalated across more than 40 front lines,
causing a high number of casualties, including women and children.
We are extremely concerned about the threats of a famine facing the
Yemeni people. The briefings today, as well as the recent reports of the World
Food Programme and other United Nations agencies, have shown us an extremely
gloomy picture.
The humanitarian situation is expected to get worse if the World Food
Programme and other United Nations agencies do not receive adequate funding from
pledged donors. In fact, the United Nations aid programmes in Yemen have been
scaled back in the past several months.
Moreover, the second wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is
believed to add another layer of complexity to the conflict and the dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. It would aggravate the living conditions of the Yemeni people
and undermine the humanitarian efforts.
The inaccessibility of the FSO SAFER oil tanker remains our continued
concern. The United Nations technical team has been unable to do its job on the
tanker without written approval. Time is not on our side. We need to prevent
environmental and humanitarian catastrophes for Yemen and the Gulf region. The
United Nations expert team must be allowed to carry out its urgent assessment and
repair work on the tanker.
Against that backdrop, I would like to make the following points.
First, it is extremely urgent for all parties concerned to heed the ceasefire call
of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, cease hostilities immediately and
resume negotiations so that the joint declaration towards the nationwide ceasefire
can be reached. That will lay a crucial foundation for achieving the United Nations
peace proposal for Yemen.
Secondly, we reiterate our call on international donors to fulfil their financial
commitments so that the humanitarian work in Yemen can be implemented without
disruption. We see the urgency of the appeal by the United Nations for more than $50
million to scale up nutrition programmes. The children in Yemen deserve to receive
basic services, like other children in the world. We must act to protect Yemeni
children and prevent another crisis for Yemen’s future generations.
We also call on the parties concerned to fully cooperate with United Nations
agencies by providing protection and favourable conditions for humanitarian workers
to carry out their work in parts of Yemen. Famine cannot be averted if we do not act
enough now.
36/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

Thirdly, we stress the need for the parties in Yemen and the United Nations
agencies, especially the World Health Organization, to spare no effort in containing
the spread of the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is essential for the
parties to ensure access and the unhindered passage of humanitarian and medical
supplies to those in dire need in Yemen.
We also join other members in calling on all parties to uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian law with respect to the protection of civilians,
especially women and children, and civilian objects.
Last but not least, we would like to emphasize that the parties concerned
should uphold and fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh
Agreement with United Nations mediation. The meaningful participation of women
in the political process should also be ensured and further promoted.
We reiterate our support for the work of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
his team in Yemen.

20-1532637/40

S/2020/1109

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Ali Fadhel Al-Saadi
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish you and your delegation every
success, and I wish everyone the best of health.
The Yemeni Government, led by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour,
is still working intensively to fulfil its aspiration of bringing an end to the war
imposed on the Yemeni people by the armed Houthi militias. The war has caused
a dire humanitarian crisis and shattered the dreams and hopes of Yemenis to build
a future that would bring about their dream of a modern, civilian democratic State
and thus fulfil its aspirations and safeguard its dignity. The social fabric of Yemen
has been torn apart. Sectarian and racist ideas have been spread. Yemenis have been
displaced in waves. They have been repressed, detained and subjected to enforced
disappearance in flagrant violation of the rules of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. Under the President’s leadership, the Yemeni Government is
determined to bring an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people in this futile and
unjust war. The Government has made concessions and done everything it can to let
the language of dialogue and peace prevail over the language of war and destruction.
It has responded positively to the endeavours of the United Nations, acting through
the Special Envoy for Yemen, to achieve a just and comprehensive peace based on the
agreed terms of reference, namely the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive National Dialogue
Conference and the resolutions of the Security Council on Yemen, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015).
It has responded in a spirit of firm conviction to all invitations and proposals
intended to achieve the peace to which the Yemeni people aspires. These include
the proposal of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Martin Griffiths, for a
draft joint declaration, to which it reacted positively from the very first draft, out
of determination to facilitate his efforts in that regard. Unfortunately, at every turn,
the Houthi militias made new conditions to the draft. They proved intransigent, they
delayed, and they hampered the efforts of the United Nations and its Special Envoy
with regard to the political process and the economic and humanitarian dimensions.
Turning to the issue of prisoners and detainees, the Yemeni Government has
endeavoured to ensure the release of all prisoners and persons detained arbitrarily,
subjected to enforced disappearance or under house arrest on the basis of the allfor-all principle, including the four individuals mentioned in the Security Council
resolution. However, the Houthi militias have hampered the full implementation
of the agreement and engaged in blackmail for political gain. Nevertheless, the
Government has worked to make the agreement reached in October 2020 a success.
With support from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Yemeni Government
has worked to implement the Riyadh Agreement and the mechanism to accelerate its
implementation, at a time when our Yemeni people is facing exceptionally complex
circumstances that necessitate a unified effort to engage in a national project to
revive State institutions, achieve security and stability, overcome economic and
development challenges, and work under the legitimate authorities, led by President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, to restore State authority, put an end to the
coup, provide services and a dignified life for citizens, and alleviate their suffering.
We highly appreciate the support of Saudi Arabia at every stage, and we are fully
38/40

20-15326

S/2020/1109

confident in the role of Saudi Arabia in moving forward in order to make the
Agreement a success.
The Iranian rogue regime has continued to undermine security and stability
in Yemen and the region by supporting the Houthi militias with funds, weapons
and military expertise, which they use to kill Yemenis, attack navigation lines and
civilian targets in Saudi Arabia, and endanger international peace and security.
The regime does not respect the rules of international law or the resolutions of the
Security Council. It recently announced the appointment of officer of the Iranian
Republican Guard as so-called ambassador to the Houthi militias in Sana’a. That
decision flagrantly violates the rules of international law, the Charter of the United
Nations, the two Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations, and
Security Council resolution 2216 (2015). It sets a dangerous precedent that a rogue
state can send its representatives to rebel coup militia groups. Such conduct is one
more sign of Iran’s expansionist agenda in Yemen and the region, and of its barefaced interference in the affairs of sovereign States. Once again, we call on the
Security Council to assume its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security by condemning and putting a stop to the irresponsible behaviour
of the Iranian regime.
My Government will continue working to achieve economic stability and pay
public sector salaries regularly in all regions of Yemen, including by preserving
the value of the national currency. However, it faces a great many difficulties and
obstacles. The Houthi militias have continued to prevent the circulation of new
banknotes in the national currency. In so doing, they have further exacerbated and
complicated the economic situation. Their intention is to maximize their profits by
boosting the black market in currency and fuel in the areas under their control.
They have also bankrolled their factional, sectarian project by imposing illegal,
racist levies, such as a supplementary 20 per cent religious tax to prop up the
oppressive, racist regime. All the revenue from that tax goes to a given faction.
They have continued to misappropriate revenue from petroleum products at the port
of Al-Hudaydah and to hamper the entry of vessels carrying fuel to areas under
their control.
Despite those violations and obstacles, the President has instructed the
authorities to cooperate in order to alleviate the suffering of Yemenis in areas
under Houthi control. He has supported the efforts of the Special Envoy and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs. The Houthis have breached the
agreement brokered by the Special Envoy and taken more than 50 billion Yemeni
riyals from the account intended to collect fuel revenue for the payment of salaries.
Nevertheless, the Government continues to make numerous concessions and to take
measures to ease the situation. For instance, in the last six months, it has granted
transit permits to fuel trucks carrying more than 1,337,000 tons of fuel headed
exclusively for areas under the control of the Houthis. That quantity is enough to
meet the needs of those areas until the end of 2020. We call on the Security Council
to put pressure on the Houthis to desist from such practices, make the economy a
neutral space, stop creating artificial oil crises, and lift restrictions on the circulation
of national currency.
More than four months have passed since the Security Council held a special
meeting to discuss the oil tanker FSO SAFER (S/2020/721). Every month, we keep
hearing how the Houthi militias have clearly hindered the efforts of the United
Nations to send a technical team to inspect and maintain the vessel and unload its
cargo of oil. The Houthi militias’ intransigence and their imperviousness to the
appeals of the international community — not to mention the potential catastrophic
effects of an oil leak or an explosion on board the vessel — merely confirm the
20-1532639/40

S/2020/1109

nature of their conduct and their agenda. They seek to destroy all that is beautiful
in Yemen, and to increase the suffering of Yemenis, flagrantly defying the efforts
of the international community and the Security Council to avoid the environmental
and economic disaster that looms closer with every passing day. We appreciate the
contributions of numerous States to the fund for the maintenance of the tanker. We
reiterate our call on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility and adopt a
decisive position in order to spare Yemen and the region a catastrophe whose effects
could be felt for decades. The Council should exercise pressure on the Houthis,
who continue to procrastinate and to manipulate the situation to use this issue for
political blackmail.

40/40

20-15326
