General Aa1embly-Twenty-fint Ses1ion

M

2180 (XXI). Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly
Takes note of the reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
first 20 and second21 sessions.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
2186 (XXI). Establishment of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1521 (XV) of 15 December
1960, by which it decided in principle to establish a
United Nations capital development fund,
Recalling further its resolutions 1706 (XVI) of
19 December 1961 and 1826 (XVII) of 18 December
1962,
Taking into consideration the recommendation contained in annex A.IV.7 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development,2l1
Recognizing that the developing countries can usefully absorb substantial amounts of capital over and
above those that the existing financial institutions, with
their present resources and institutional set-up, can
provide,
Bearing in mind that the terms on which the developing countries currently obtain financial assistance
tend, in most cases, to offset the advantages derived
therefrom,
Recognizing that external resources should be made
available to the developing countries on terms and conditions which would help to accelerate their economic
and social progress,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on a
United Nations Capital Development Fund on its fifth
session, 28

Decides to bring into operation the United Nations
Capital Development Fund (hereinafter referred to as
the Capital Development Fund) as an organ of the
General Assembly which shall function as an autonomous organization within the United Nations in accordance with the provisions set forth below.
ARTICLE I

Purpose
The purpose of the Capital Development Fund shall
be to assist developing countries in the development
of their economies by supplementing existing sources
of capital assistance by means of grants and loans, particularly long-term loans made free of interest or at
low interest rates. Such assistance shall be directed
towards the achievement of the accelerated and selfsustained growth of the economies of those countries
and shall be oriented towards the diversification of their
economies, with due regard to the need for industrial
development as a basis for economic and social progress.
20 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fortyfirst Session, Supplement No. 11 (E/4150).
21 fbid., Supplement No. 11A (E/4219).
22 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll), p. 47.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 38, document A/6418.

ARTICLE II

Guiding principles
1. Tqe provision of assistance shall be in conformity
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the

United Nations.
2. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall not serve as a means for economic and political
interference in the internal affairs of assisted countries
and shall not be influenced by considerations relating
to the nature of their economic and political systems.
3. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be of a kind and in a form consistent with the
wishes of the recipients and shall not involve any
unacceptable conditions for them, whether political,
economic, military or other.
ARTICLE III

General economic provisions
1. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
may be given to the Government of a State Member
of the United Nations or member of a specialized
agency or of the International Atomic Energy Agency
or to a group of Governments of such States or, at the
request of the Government of one of these States, to
an entity having juridical personality within the territory of that State. Assistance provided to Non-SelfGoverning Territories shall be of advantage to the
economy of the recipient territory in accordance with
the provisions of article I a hove.
2. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be provided in such forms and on such terms as
are compatible with the continued economic development of the assisted countries, taking due account of
their balance-of-payments position and prospects.
3. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be given in a flexible manner and shall not necessarily be limited to specific projects or groups of
projects and should be given to support general development plans, where such plans exist, or to meet general
development requirements.
4. Every effort shall be made to co-ordinate tht
assistance rendered by the Capital Development Fund
with assistance from other sources, so as to achieve the
maximum permanent beneficial effect on the economies
of the developing countries, taking into account the
need to preserve the autonomy and the multilateral
character of the Fund.
ARTICLE IV

Resources
1. The expenditure of the Capital Development
Fund shall be classified in the following categories :
(a) Expenses for administrative activities;
( b) Expenses for operational activities.
2. Expenses for administrative activities shall be
borne by the regular budget of the United Nations,
which shall include a separate budgetary provision for
such expenses. The General Assembly shall fix a ceiling
for such expenses in the light of the voluntary contributions received for operational activities.
3. Expenses for operational activities shall be met
from the voluntary contributions made to the Capital
Development Fund, in cash or in kind, by Governments
of the States Members of the United Nations or mem-
