Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

3246 (XXIX). lmportance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
for the eflective guarantee and observance
of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming it& faith in resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, and resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970, containing the programme of action for the full
implementation of that Declaration,
Recalling, inter afia, its resolutions 2588 B (XXIV)
of 15 December 1969, 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 2963 E
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, 3059 (XXVUI) of
2 November 1973 and 3070 (XVIII) of 30 November
1973, and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
Noting with appreciation the reports of the SecretaryGeneral,~5
Noting with satisfaction the assurances given by the
Government of Portugal that it will fulfil its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
comply with United Nations resolutions relevant to
the right of the peoples under Portuguese administration to self-determination and independence,
lndignant at the continued repression and the inhuman and degrading treatment inflicted on peoples
still under colonial and foreign domination and alien
subjugation, especially on individuals detained or imprisoned as a result of their struggle for self-determination and independence,
Reaffirming'that the independence of Southern Rhodesia should not be negotiated with the illegal régime
but with the authentic and recognized representatives
of the Rhodesian people,
Mindful of its responsibility to evolve all possible
measures which wiH enable oppressed peoples to attain
independence and self-determmation and, in this regard,
deploring the obstructive attitude of certain Member
States,
Recognizing the imperative need to put an early end
to colonial rule, foreign domination and alien subjugation,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of ali peoples
under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation to self-determination, freedom and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
2. Renews its call to ali States to recognize the right
to self-determination and independence or ali peoptes
subject to colonial and foreign domination and alíen
subjugation and to offer them moral, material and other
forros of assistance in their struggle to exercise fully
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
3. Reafjirms the legitimacy of the peoples' struggle
for liberation from colonial and foreign domination
and alíen subjugation by ali available meaos, including
armed struggle;
~:; A/9638 and Add.l, Add.1/Corr.l and Add.2-5, A/9667
and Add.l.

87

4. Demands full respect for the basic human rights
of all individuals detained or imprisoned as a result of
their struggle for self-determination and independence,
and strict respect for article 5 of the Universal Declaration of. Human Rights under which no one shall be
subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, and their immedialle release;
5. Welcomes the recognition by the Govemment of
Portugal of the right of ali the peoples under its colonial administration to self-determination and independence, and the initiatives already taken in this regard;
6. Urges the Government of Portugal to continue
to ensure that the process of decolonization, which will
enable peoples still under its colonial administration
to achieve self-determination and independence, is accomplished without delay;
7. Strongly condemns ali Governments which do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence of peoples under colonial and foreign domination
and alien subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa and
the Palestinian people;
8. Further strongly condemns the policies of those
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and
those countries whose military, economic, sporting or
political relations with the racist régimes of southern
Africa and elsewhere encourage these régimes to persist in their suppression of the aspirations of peoples for
self-determination and independence;
9. Calls upan those countries to reconsider t•heir
policies and to sever ali links with the racist régimes of
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia;
1O. Renews its appreciation to Governments, United
Nations agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations for their efforts in extending various forros of assistance to peoples in dependent
Territories and appeals to them to increase such
assistance;
11. Requests the Secretary-Ge~eral to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out
measures for the provision of increased international
assistance to the peoples of colonial Territories;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974
3266 (XXIX). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 3223 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974
on the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination and resolution 3225 (XXIX) of 6 N~
vember 1974 on the status of the lnternational Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forros of Racial
Discrimination,26
Having considered the report of the Cornmittee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the fifth
year of its activities, 27 submitted under article 9, para26 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
27 Official Records o/ the General

Se.s.sion, Supplement No. 18 (A/9618).

A.ssembly, Twenty-ninth
