General AHembly-Eleventh Seaion

Page

1067 (XI). Hearings of petitioners from the Trust Territory of the Cameroons
under French administration (26 February 1957) (item 13) . . . . . . . . . . .
1068 (XI). Question of the frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland
under Italian administration and Ethiopia (26 February 1957) (item 40)..

1044 (XI). The future of Togoland under British administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 944 (X) of 15 December 1955, it recommended, in pursuance of Article 76 b
of the Charter of the United Nations, that a plebiscite
be organized and conducted in the Trust Territory of
Togoland under British administration by the Administering Authority in consultation with and under
the supervision of a United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner, in order to ascertain the wishes of its inhabitants in regard to the union of their Territory with
an independent Gold Coast or otherwise,
Having received the report of the United Nations
Plebiscite Commissioner 1 on the organization, conduct
and results of the plebiscite, and having noted in particular the conclusion contained in the report that the
plebiscite was held in an atmosphere of freedom, impartiality and fairness,
Having also received the report of the United Kingdom Plebiscite Administrator, 2
N oting that the majority of the inhabitants of the
Trust Territory participating in the plebiscite have
expressed themselves in favour of the union of the
Territory with an independent Gold Coast,
N oting also the recommendation of the Trusteeship
Council in its resolution 14% (XVIII) of 31 July
1956 that appropriate steps be taken, in consultation
with the Administering Authority, for the termination
of the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory to
become effective upon the attainment of independence
by the Gold Coast,
Having been informed by the Administering Authority that it is the intention of the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland that the Gold Coast shall become independent on
6 March 1957,
l. Expresses its approval of the union of the Territory of Togoland under British administration with
an independent Gold Coast and accordingly invites the
Administering Authority to take such steps as are
necessary to this end ;
2. Resolves, with the agreement of the Administering Authority, that, on the date on which the Gold
Coast becomes independent and the union with it of
the Territory of Togoland under British administration takes place, the Trusteeship Agreement approved
by the General Assembly in resolution 63 (I) of 13
December 1946 shall cease to be in force, the objectives
of trusteeship having been attained ;
3. Reqiiests th_e ~overnment of the United Kingdom of Great Bntam and Northern Ireland to notify
the Secretary-General as soon as the union of the
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Annexes, agenda item 39, documents A/3173 and Add.1.
• Official Records of the Trusteeship Council Eighteenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, documents 'T /1269 and
Add.1.

32
32

Territory of Togoland under British administration
with an independent Gold Coast bas been effected;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
to ail Member States and to the Trusteeship Council
at its nineteenth session the notification by the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, referred to in paragraph 3 above.

619th plenary ffl8eting,
13 December 1956.

1045 (XI). Report of the United Nation• Plebiscite Commiuioner for the Trust Territory
of Togoland under British adminhtration
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the United Nations
Plebiscite Commissioner1 on the organization, conduct
and results of the plebiscite in the Trust Territory of
Togoland under British administration,
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Plebiscite Commissioner;
2. Expresses its high appreciation of the work carried out by the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner
and by the United Nations staff under bis direction.
619th plenary meeting,
13 December 1956.

1046 (XI). The future of Togoland
French administration

under

The General Assembly,
Recalling section II of its resolution 944 (X) of 15
December 1955,
Having received the special report of the Trusteeship
Council, 8
N oting that the Trusteeship Council bas forwarded
the memorandum by the Administering Authority,'
with Decree No. 56-847 of 24 August 1956, requesting
termination of the Trusteeship Agreement,
H aving received the document entitled "Memorandum by the Government of the Autonomous Republic
of Togoland", 5 which memorandum was transmitted
by the Administering Authority to the United Nations,
Hamng taken note that the report of the Referendum
Administrator in Togoland 6 sets forth as a fact that the
population of Togoland under French administration,
consulted by referendum on 28 October 1956, expressed itself, by a substantial majority, in favour of
the reforms introduced by Decree No. 56-847 setting
forth the Statute of Togoland,
N oting further the statements made in the Fourth
Committee by the delegation of France, which included
representatives of the Government of Togoland,
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Annexes, agenda item 39, documents A/3169 and Add.l.
'Ibid., document A/3169/Add.l, anncx 1.
• Ibid., document A/C.4/341.
0
Ibid., document A/3169/Add.1, annex II.
