S/PV.9216*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9216th meeting

Friday, 9 December 2022, 4.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Mythen
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

*Reissued for technical reasons 8 February 2023.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-73448 (E)
*2273448*

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs; and Mr. Daniel Kovalik, civil society
representative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I have been requested to brief on
the issue of “supplies of lethal weapons to Ukraine and
their consequences”. This follows a similar briefing
I provided to the Security Council in September (see
S/PV.9127).
Since the Russian invasion of Ukraine on
24 February 2022, a number of States have transferred
weapons systems and ammunition to Ukraine for
its defence forces. As I noted in September, that is a
matter of public record. Information from Governments
regarding their transfers is largely accessible through
open sources. Such transfers have included heavy
conventional weapons, including battle tanks, armoured
combat vehicles, large-calibre artillery systems, missile
systems and uncrewed combat aerial vehicles, as well
as small arms and light weapons. There have also been
widespread and independently verified reports of the
transfer of major conventional weapon systems to
non-State armed groups involved in the conflict against
Ukraine, including artillery rocket systems.
The large-scale influx of weapons into any situation
of armed conflict raises many concerns for peace
and security, including risks of diversion as well as
potential spillover and escalation. Measures to counter
the potential diversion of weapons and ammunition
will be key to post-conflict recovery and regional
security and stability, as well as to conflict prevention
in other regions. Such measures include pre-transfer
2/20

09/12/2022

risk assessments and post-shipment controls, including
on-site inspections and end-user verification. Of equal
importance is the need to safeguard and account for
transferred military equipment. The United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms, in addition to the
Arms Trade Treaty, remains a key tool for enhancing
transparency in arms transfers. It is also an important
tool to track the influx of weapons and ammunition in
conflict zones. Those are all widely accepted general
policy approaches by Member States, which we
encourage all to follow.
Beyond addressing arms transfers, all parties
to the conflict have a duty to protect civilians when
conducting military operations. Since 24 February, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has recorded 17,181 civilian casualties,
with the numbers incessantly rising. Most of the
civilian deaths and injuries continue to be caused by
the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects,
including attacks by heavy artillery, multiple-launch
rocket systems, missiles and aircraft.
In addition to thousands of civilians killed and
injured, we have witnessed the destruction of civilian
and critical infrastructure and services, especially
using missiles and uncrewed aerial vehicles. In addition
to the homes, schools, roads, and bridges that have been
destroyed, hospitals and health facilities have also been
impacted. Of particular concern are the disruptions to
water, gas, heating and electricity caused by Russian
attacks on energy infrastructure, with the onset of
winter bringing a new dimension to the humanitarian
crisis and putting millions of people at risk. Under
international humanitarian law, combatants must not
direct attacks against civilians or civilian infrastructure
and must take all feasible precautions in the conduct
of military operations in order to prevent, or at least
to minimize, incidental loss of civilian life, injury to
civilians and damage to civilian objects.
Since 2007, two Secretaries-General have expressed
their serious concerns about the humanitarian impact
of explosive weapons in populated areas. They have
consistently called on parties to conflict to refrain
from using such weapons because they are highly
likely to cause indiscriminate effects. Last month, on
18 November, more than 80 States adopted the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas. The
declaration marks a milestone in our efforts to better
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

protect civilians from the consequences of armed
conflict. I call on all Member States to give effect to
the declaration.
The past nine months have seen tremendous
devastation, much as a result of the use of heavy
conventional weapons. Attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure must stop. I also urge States
to apply effective arms-control measures to address
the risks related to arms transfers. I want to reiterate
that preventing the diversion of supplied weapons and
ammunition is essential to prevent fuelling conflict and
insecurity in the region and beyond.
The only way to end the suffering and devastation
in Ukraine is to end the war. I appeal to all Member
States to make every effort for peace.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kovalik.
Mr. Kovalik: My name is Dan Kovalik. I am a
professor of international human rights at the University
of Pittsburgh School of Law, where I have been teaching
for 10 years. I graduated from Columbia Law School in
the great city of New York in 1993, and I have been
very involved in human rights issues and human rights
cases, particularly in Latin America — particularly in
Colombia — and South America, which has a major
problem with arms going into the wrong hands, of
guerrilla groups and right-wing paramilitary groups.
That has been something I have been following for
years, and therefore I want to share what I have also
been studying and learning also about Ukraine and
arms shipments there and the danger of those ending up
in the wrong hands. Therefore, with forbearance of the
Security Council, I will get right down to it.
First of all, I would call the Council’s attention to
a study done in January 2021 by the German Federal
Foreign Office, a small-arms survey called Making the
Rounds: Illicit Ammunition in Ukraine. As I just said,
that survey was published in January 2021 — even before
the major conflict began earlier this year. And what it
said was that the outbreak of the conflict in eastern
Ukraine in 2014 — we have to remember that is when
it really began — led to the widespread proliferation of
small arms, light weapons and their ammunition. That
ammunition, which includes thousands of grenades,
rockets, mortar rounds and landmines, along with
vast quantities of firearms cartridges, has spread to

S/PV.9216

nearly every oblast region of Ukraine, including areas
located far from the conflict zone. The survey said that
while the Government of Ukraine has taken steps to
reduce the trafficking of those arms, those are daunting
tasks, given the sheer volume of illicit ammunition in
circulation and the numerous modes of transport and
smuggling techniques used by traffickers in Ukraine.
While the survey concluded that at that time there
were no major transfers of those arms outside of Ukraine,
it warned — again this is in 2021 — that the barriers
to smuggling grenades, rockets and other ammunition
out of Ukraine were hardly insurmountable. Even a
successful trafficking scheme could radically alter
the profile of illicit weapons in some countries. It said
that preventing such schemes and reducing civilian
casualties caused by loose ammunition in Ukraine
would require a coordinated, sustained effort by
Ukrainian authorities and the international community
for many years to come. That was in 2021.
Now let me fast forward a bit. That survey
was ultimately a warning, given what came
next — the intervention that began in February 2022. As
my colleague said, a lot of the information on that can
be found in open sources. In April of 2022, merely two
months after the war began with Russia’s intervention
in February, CNN published an article entitled “What
Happens to Weapons Sent to Ukraine? The US Really
Doesn’t Know.” The article goes on to explain that
“The United States has few ways to track the
substantial supply of anti-tank, anti-aircraft and
other weaponry it has sent across the border into
Ukraine, sources tell CNN, a blindspot that is due
in large part to the lack of United States boots on
the ground in the country and the easy portability
of many of the smaller systems now pouring
across the border. It is a conscious risk the Biden
administration is willing to take.”
The article then quotes a senior Department of
Defense official who said that it was “certainly the
largest recent supply to a partner country in a conflict.”
And at that time, there had probably been about
$30 billion in military aid sent so far. By the end of
January that will probably been about $100 billion in
total sent by the United States alone. The article went
on to conclude that
“the risk, both current US officials and defence
analysts say, is that in the long term some of
those weapons may wind up in the hands of other

22-734483/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

militaries and militias the US does not intend to
arm.”
According to a Department of Defense official,
“[w]e have fidelity for a short time, but when it
enters the fog of war, we have almost zero. It drops
into a black hole, and you have almost no sense of
it at all after a short period of time. In making the
decision to send billions of dollars of weapons and
equipment into Ukraine, the Biden administration
factored in the risk that some of the shipments may
ultimately end up in unexpected places.”
They also quote other officials saying the United
States really does not have a hold over where these
weapons are going. They are depending on Ukraine for
information regarding that. And, privately, according to
CNN, officials recognize that Ukraine has an incentive
to provide only information that will bolster its case for
more aid, more arms and more diplomatic assistance. In
April, they were warning that those arms were going to
end up in places where we do not want them to be, and
they give the example of Afghanistan, where the United
States left in a hurry and left millions, if not billions,
of dollars of equipment. God knows where that is going
to end up.
By the way, I want to mention, before I go on much
further, that I just spent a week in Donetsk, and I did
not myself witness illicit transfers of arms, but I did
see the effects of arms that apparently went into the
right hands. Those were ordnance — shelling — done
by Ukraine against a school, against a stadium, against
a place people go to get water, because water is at a
premium in Donetsk in particular because the water
filtration system had been destroyed by Ukrainian
forces sometime before. And I have been reading
that the shelling has only increased since I was there.
By the way, a monastery to which we helped deliver
clothes is being shelled almost daily by Ukraine. So
while I am focusing on illicit arms or arms going to the
wrong people, even when they are going to the right
people, they are not necessarily ending up in the right
places. They are attacking civilians, and that has been
happening since 2014. That is obviously a problem.
In June of 2022, an article appeared in The
Guardian entitled “Arms sent to Ukraine will end up in
criminal hands, says Interpol chief: Jürgen Stock urges
members to cooperate on arms tracing as weapons will
flood hidden economy when war ends”. The Interpol
chief was saying that as a matter of certainty.
4/20

09/12/2022

“Jürgen Stock says once the conflict ends, a wave
of guns and heavy arms will flood the international
market and he urged Interpol’s member states,
especially those supplying weapons, to cooperate
on arms tracing;
“Once the guns fall silent [in Ukraine], the illegal
weapons will come. We know this from many other
theatres of conflict. The criminals are even now, as
we speak, focusing on them;
“Criminal groups try to exploit these chaotic
situations and the availability of weapons, even
those used by the military and including heavy
weapons. These will be available on the criminal
market and will create a challenge. No country or
region can deal with it in isolation because these
groups operate at a global level;
“We can expect an influx of weapons in Europe
and beyond. We should be alarmed and we have to
expect these weapons to be trafficked not only to
neighbouring countries but to other continents”.
In August, CBS News did a documentary and
published an article about the documentary entitled
“Why Military and Aid in Ukraine May Not Always
Get to the Front Lines”. In April, Jonas Ohman,
founder and Chief Executive Officer of Blue-Yellow,
a Lithuania-based organization that has been meeting
with and supplying front-line units with non-lethal
military aid in Ukraine since the start of the conflict in
2014, said that back in April, he estimated that just 30
to 40 per cent of the supplies coming across the border
reached their destination. So, we are talking about
potentially billions of dollars of equipment not reaching
the intended destination.
The same article from CBS goes on to say,
“a combination of Ukraine’s constantly shifting
front lines with its largely volunteer and paramilitary
forces has made delivery of the military aid difficult
for those attempting to navigate the dangerous
supply lines to their destination. Some have raised
concerns about weapons falling into Ukraine’s
black market, which has thrived on corruption
since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991”.
So, that is not anything new. It is not anything
we should be surprised about. It is something that we
should have been prepared for. But as I go on, Council
members will see that we have been woefully, almost
wilfully, unprepared for that.
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

On 1 November, The Washington Post published
an article entitled “US Races to Track American Arms
in Heat of Ukraine War”, stating that United States
monitors had inspected just 10 per cent of high-risk
weapons sent to Ukraine. That is incredible. That is
in November. Again, for months, for years, they were
saying, “get a hold of that stuff.” In November, a little
over a month ago, they said, “Well, we probably looked
at about 10 per cent of them”, though they said the Biden
Administration hoped to achieve a reasonable level
of compliance with United States oversight rules, but
admitted it would certainly would not achieve 100 per
cent. That should be troubling to anyone.
“Rachel Stohl, the Vic-President for research
programs at the Washington-based Stimson Center,
said officials also must develop longer-term plans
to ensure the security of surplus US weapons once
the conflict with Russia ends, noting Ukraine’s
history as a theater for small-arms smuggling after
the Cold War.”
Again, that has been going on for decades.
“The challenges in Ukraine echo the larger concerns
about how weapons produced in the United States,
the largest global weapons seller, are employed
worldwide. Advocates have long complained that
despite systems designed to prevent their misuse,
foreign partners have sometimes employed those
arms against civilians in places including Yemen.”
We know that. In Yemen, since 2015, the Saudis
have used United States munitions, including cluster
bombs, to attack civilians and civilian infrastructure,
as well as UNESCO historic sites.
“Sophisticated equipment also has fallen into
adversaries’ hands, allowing the Islamic State to
showcase Abrams tanks and the Taliban to pilot
Black Hawk helicopters.”
Again, none of that is surprising, but very little is
being done about it.
Then, on 30 November, the Voice of America,
which is more or less the United States itself speaking,
published an article entitled “Nigerian President:
Ukraine War Funneling Arms, Fighters into Lake Chad
Basin”, quoting the Nigerian President complaining
that this is already happening. He says,

S/PV.9216

“the war between Russia and Ukraine is allowing
arms and fighters to stream into the Lake Chad
region, bolstering the strength of terrorist groups”.
Of course, after NATO’s bombing campaign and
war on Libya, we saw illicit arms and fighters flooding
into the Sahel region to destabilize places such as
Tunisia, Chad and Mali — and even beyond in Syria.
Council members should read the article by Pulitzer
Prize-winning author Seymour Hersh about the transfer
of fighters from Libya to Syria. Therefore, that is
already happening according to the Nigerian President.
Weapons from Ukraine are already ending up in the
hands of extremists.
Finally, in terms of the information I am relying
on, Council members can look at an interesting opinion
piece dated 7 December, two days ago, in The Hill
publication, which can be found online at thehill.
com, entitled “Preventing US Weapons from Escaping
Ukraine is a Challenge”. It again underscores the
difficulty, if not impossibility, of getting a handle on
all those weapons, which goes back to the first report
saying we need international oversight of this. With
respect — and I am an American — the United States
is not going to do it. In fact, two days ago, the same
day this was written, a draft resolution submitted to
a House committee on whether to audit weapons and
money transfers to Ukraine was voted down. Congress
affirmatively decided that we are not going to audit
the billions and billions of dollars of weaponry we are
sending to Ukraine. As an American taxpayer, I can say
I do not like that, but I would think that the Security
Council, in charge of maintaining international peace
and security, should not like that. Who is watching the
watchmen here? It is the job of the Security Council to
do that. I urge the Council to do that.
The President: I am sorry to interrupt, but we are
running short of time. Could I ask Mr. Kovalik to wrap
it up as soon as he can?
Mr. Kovalik: Yes, I will wrap it up right now. I just
want to reiterate the comments made by colleague who
opened this meeting — what really has to happen is a
negotiated end to this war, which I think is possible.
We know that in March or April there was apparently
a deal that both sides could have lived with. It appears
that Boris Johnson from the United Kingdom told
Zelenskyy not to sign, but there must be some way
to end this conflict, which needs to end through a

22-734485/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

negotiated settlement. I once again urge the Security
Council to work towards that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Kovalik for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank today’s briefers and, in particular,
Mr. Kovalik, because he touched upon one of the topics
that is the reason we called this meeting, namely, the
consequences for international peace and security of
the growing smuggling of arms supplied to Ukraine
into various regions of the globe. We also called this
meeting so that Security Council members could assess
the impact that the ongoing massive pumping of Ukraine
with Western weapons is having on the prospects for
ending the Ukrainian conflict.
As everyone will recall, soon after the start of
the special military operation, one goal of which was
the demilitarization of Ukraine, it became obvious
that the military capacity of Ukrainian forces was
being depleted rather quickly. The moment when the
Kyiv regime would have stopped posing a threat to
our country was therefore rapidly approaching. Such
a scenario, however, did not sit well with our former
Western partners. That is not why they carried out an
illegitimate coup d’état in Ukraine in 2014, encouraged
blatant nationalism and Russophobia and re-armed
the Ukrainian military while pretending to monitor
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. In fact,
that was all in service of their geopolitical plans to
weaken Russia. The fact that the Minsk agreements
were but a smokescreen for rearming the Armed Forces
of Ukraine was confirmed quite cynically recently by
former German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Then the West started saying that it must not let
Ukraine lose because, once defeated, Ukraine would
cease to exist as an independent State, even though
Russia has never said anything like that. Another reason
was that the militarism and imperial ambitions of the
Kremlin were not limited to Ukraine alone and that Kyiv
was allegedly defending not only itself but the whole
free world. That absurd thesis does not even warrant a
response. Nevertheless, those two reasons became the
foundation of a frenetic campaign to arm Ukraine and
extend indirect military support to it. That is when the
United States and its NATO allies began their proxy
war against Russia to the very last Ukrainian.
6/20

09/12/2022

No State in history has likely ever received such
immense military support. As reported by the United
States Center for International Policy, the total volume
of Washington’s military assistance to Kyiv from
February to the beginning of October alone amounted
to $40 billion. Add to that the billions pledged or
already allocated by the European Union and Great
Britain and it becomes clear that the weapons and
military assistance to Ukraine for less than one year
cost more than the military budgets of the majority of
NATO States. In addition to weapons, the United States
and NATO are also providing Kyiv with intelligence
data, including using satellites, and Ukrainian units
with Internet communications, as well as training and
guidance. Add to that the thousands — if not tens of
thousands — of foreign mercenaries and personnel
of private military companies, whose existence we
discover only when we find their bodies or intercept
radio communications. If we consider all of that, the
following question emerges: is it really the Ukrainians
who are facing the Russian forces in that country? One
thing can be said for sure — without Western assistance,
the military activities in Ukraine would have ended a
long time ago. Even the leaders of the criminal Kyiv
regime acknowledge that.
Apart from prolonging the senseless agony of the
Kyiv regime and the further suffering of ordinary
Ukrainians, what are the other consequences of our
Western opponents’ actions? We are destroying the old
Soviet-era weapons and ammunition in Ukraine fairly
quickly. Since very few of those remain, the West is
providing the Zelenskyy regime with Western weapons,
which are more sophisticated and include long-range
rocket and artillery systems. Those are worth a separate
point, because they make it possible for the Armed
Forces of Ukraine to target peaceful areas of Donbas
that Ukrainian artillery had previously been unable
to reach.
Examples abound. Yesterday in the Security
Council and the General Assembly, we circulated
a letter from a Donetsk civil society organization
named Fair Protection, which provides an account of
the indiscriminate shelling of residential and densely
populated areas. The document shows that what we are
witnessing in Donetsk in recent weeks is a massacre
using Western weapons. Encouraged by the West,
Ukrainian death squads are literally trying to raze the
city to the ground. With great hatred they carry out
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

daily indiscriminate strikes on residential areas that do
not, and cannot, contain any military targets.
Another such criminal shelling incident took place
this morning. Crowded places are being hit during
rush hours, which leads to significant casualties
and destruction. For example, on 4 December, a
155-millimetre guided artillery M982 Excalibur shell
hit the Druzhba sports complex, where drinking water
is being distributed to civilians. The reason for that
is because, back in February, Ukraine disconnected
Donbas from its only water source. But our Western
colleagues do not notice that because they effectively
denied the people of Donbas their right to a decent
human existence as early as eight years ago. We also
regret that the members of the Secretariat did not have
the courage to condemn the shelling of Donetsk, even
as they remained very vocal on strikes launched against
the territory of Ukraine.
Since 27 November, 22 civilians have been killed
in Donbas, most of them residents of Donetsk — 83
civilians were wounded, 234 residential buildings and
106 private houses were damaged, as were 31 educational
facilities and 92 infrastructure objects. I underscore
that those were not the consequences of an air defence
missile falling on residential buildings, as has been
known to happen in a number of Ukrainian cities,
but rather of targeted intentional strikes against
civilian objects and houses.
Ukrainian armed units do not hesitate to use NATOsupplied artillery to strike facilities that store hazardous
materials. On 7 December, for example, they carried
out a strike on the Stirol chemical facility in Horlivka.
The shells hit the sulphur warehouse, which caught fire.
Sulphur catching on fire is not dangerous, but when
combined with water, sulfuric acid is formed, which
can trigger acid rain in certain weather conditions.
Among the weapons that the West supplies
Ukraine, American HIMARS rocket launchers deserve
a special mention. We know for a fact — and it has been
indirectly confirmed on many occasions by both Kyiv
and Washington — that American experts participate
in the work of the HIMARS. They are using American
satellite information and other American military assets
on the ground to coordinate satellite data, enter it into
the HIMARS software, and control the effectiveness
of the missiles. Their representatives in Kyiv have
themselves stated that not one single HIMARS strike
takes place without coordination with the Americans.

S/PV.9216

We are being told all the time that this weapon’s
advanced technology makes it “high-precision”,
guaranteeing that they always strike their exact target.
What, then, are the military targets in Donbas that have
ended up being struck by these missiles launched with
Washington’s approval? I offer a list of just some of
the targets: a kindergarten in Snezhny, an art school
in Bryansk, a hotel in Krasny Luch, a volunteer centre
in Stepano-Krynk, a swimming pool, a school and
a bakery in Stakhanov, a sanatorium in Alchevsk,
cultural centres in Nyzhnia Duvanka, Gorsky and
Yasinovataya, and the agrarian college in Novoaidar.
Among the people hit were individuals working in
these places — doctors, teachers, volunteers and
bakers — dozens of peaceful people who died because
of American missiles. This Sunday, HIMARS missiles
hit buildings of Donbas technical institutes in the city
of Alchevsk. More detailed information on this is
contained in the note we have disseminated.
Could those numerous documented strikes against
civilian objects be the result of a mistake or an accident?
Obviously, it represents the conscious and intentional
participation of the United States and NATO in the Kyiv
regime’s crimes and the victimization of civilians. They
bear the same personal responsibility for this damage
to social and civilian infrastructure as the Ukrainian
artillery and gunnery personnel do.
The direct involvement of the United States and
NATO in attacking civilian infrastructure in Ukraine
is now a matter of fact, but that is not all: we have
information that the Russian airbases in Dyagilevo and
Engels were attacked using American satellite data.
Modern Soviet drones TU-141 were found and targeted
using the American GPS global-satellite system.
Secretary of State Blinken commented on that, stating
that the United States does not encourage or does not
enable the Ukrainians to attack the Russian territory.
Nevertheless, at the same time, the Chief Executive
Officer of the American corporation, Raytheon
Technologies Corporation, Mr. Gregory Hayes, stated
the following on 8 December:
“We work with the Government to provide real-time
intelligence on the battlefield in Ukraine [including
when missiles are launched.”
Of course, we very carefully note all such crimes
committed by United States and its allies, and there
will be legal consequences for everyone involved. We
also track and destroy the equipment they provide.

22-734487/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

This equipment is also dwindling in warehouses,
and, because of that, Washington and its allies are
trying to work with third countries, buying equipment
and material from them and giving it to Ukraine. This
was recently acknowledged by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine Kuleba.
We should assess to what extent this is legal.
Obviously, when Western countries do this, they
are violating the obligations they have under the
international Arms Trade Treaty, which provides for
a ban on exports to those regions where such exports
could lead to violations of international humanitarian
law and an intensification of conflict. However, they
are not held back by that, and they go even further: on
30 November, Secretary Blinken talked about resuming
the manufacture of Soviet combat systems in Eastern
European countries so as to then supply them to the
Kyiv regime. Organizing the manufacture of Soviet
and Russian weaponry in these factories is regulated by
international agreements that stipulate the commitment
not to provide such goods without our consent. In
other words, the United States is currently pushing
those countries to violate foundational arms control
standards, which is an example of how it upholds
the so-called rules-based order, namely, by violating
international law in actual fact.
Another important topic is the spread of the
weapons supplied to Ukraine throughout the world. In
the September meeting on this topic (see S/PV.9127),
we warned about the risk of these weapons ending up
in the hands of terrorists and criminals. This is not
conjecture. It is, rather, a warning — and the concern
of the police forces across Europe. For example, the
Finnish police have received information about weapons
supplied to Kyiv falling into the hands of criminals
in their country, as well as in Sweden, Denmark and
Poland. NATO weaponry that Helsinki hoped would
help Finland defend itself is now threatening the lives
of Finnish citizens.
I would like to remind members that the issue of
weaponry being stolen from Ukrainian warehouses
first arose a long time ago. Recent reports by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research state that
in 2020 they discovered a scheme to illegally divert
weaponry — heavy weaponry, including tanks — which
could only have come from army warehouses. Of
course, Washington and European capitals are well
aware of this, but pumping Ukraine with weapons is
8/20

09/12/2022

more important to them. The situation has gotten so out
of control that the weaponry for Kyiv is now appearing
on the black market, not just in Europe, but also in the
Middle East and in Africa.
Mr. Kovalik today quoted the President of Nigeria,
who said that the Ukrainian conflict is a main source
of weapons for Boko Haram terrorists in the Lake
Chad area. Why are these egregious cases of crossborder trafficking in illegal weapons, in which corrupt
Ukrainian officials participate — as do, obviously,
European and American officials — not being
investigated? Is this not a direct threat to international
peace and security to which the international community
should be paying attention?
The same also applies to the billions in socalled assistance — for military and humanitarian
purposes — to Kyiv, a large part of which remains in
the pockets of interested persons. We know about the
discussions of this topic in European parliaments and
the American Congress, but we also see that the ruling
elites there basically silence any opposition when a
careful audit of every dollar or euro sent to Ukraine at
the expense of the Western taxpayers is called for. In
the course of Senate hearings on the bill authorizing
an audit of United States assistance to Ukraine,
Democratic representative Gerald Connolly said that
he supports transparency and accountability, but not
right now, which is probably the best illustration of the
double standards of the American establishment and its
desire to support its vassal.
I know that all the representatives of those Western
countries who will take the floor after me will try to
shift the blame and start talking about the military
supplies being transferred from Iran to Russia, which is
an assertion that has already been refuted many times.
The military-industrial complex in Russia is working
perfectly fine and does not need anyone’s assistance,
whereas the Ukrainian military industry basically
does not exist, so it needs to assistance from Western
industry. Western companies are enjoying huge profits
from this situation, so they certainly are not going to
give it up simply to bring about peace.
I would like to call upon those who can objectively
look at the information and soberly assess the risk
coming from the uncontrolled pumping of the Ukrainian
regime with weapons and look at the threat it poses to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is the Security Council’s main responsibility.
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

These threats are not diminishing; rather, they are
growing, because Western countries do not understand
that they are fuelling the fire with their uncontrolled
arms transfers.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers for
their statements. I will make five short points.
First, we condemn Russia’s war against Ukraine in
the strongest possible terms.
Secondly, we reiterate our unwavering support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders. Ukraine has a
right to self-defence, as enshrined in Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter, as well as the sovereign right
to ask for and receive support from other States in the
exercise of this right. Norway will continue to stand
with Ukraine.
Thirdly, Russia’s war against Ukraine is a blatant
violation of international law, including the United
Nations Charter. It is a violation of the core principles on
which the Organization is built, namely, the sovereign
equality of its members and the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force. Russia must
abide by international law and must stop its war of
aggression now.
Fourthly, we are alarmed by the recent increase in
Russian attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The massive waves of missile and drone strikes
on Ukraine clearly demonstrate Russia’s complete
disregard for the horrible suffering that they are causing
millions of people. In addition to causing casualties,
those cynical attacks destroyed a large number of power
facilities, leaving Ukraine’s population freezing in the
middle of the winter. Children, persons with disabilities
and the elderly are in a particularly vulnerable situation.
They must be protected.
Fifthly, on the transfer of lethal weapons from Iran
by Russia, we recall that all States are obligated to respect
the restrictions of resolution 2231 (2015). The use of
such drones is a further addition to the list of Russia’s
total disregard for international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the decisions of the very Security
Council on which it sits as a permanent member.
Finally, Russia is the one driving weapon flows
into Ukraine. It does that through its illegal war against
Ukraine. Almost one year has passed since Russia’s
aggressive invasion. It is not too late for Russia to do
the right thing: respect the United Nations Charter,

S/PV.9216

withdraw all troops and work for a peaceful solution
through dialogue and diplomatic efforts.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
for her briefing.
I will be brief because we discussed Russia’s
war of aggression in Ukraine just three days ago (see
S/PV.9208). During that meeting, we heard UnderSecretary-General Griffiths’s harrowing account of
the horrific consequences of Russia’s war and his deep
concerns about the impacts of Russia’s systematic
attacks on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure and civilian
centres, particularly ahead of winter. We just saw
further reporting by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the potential
atrocities against civilians committed by Russia.
Given the topic of this meeting, the irony is that
Russia is perpetrating this war including with weapons
sourced from Iran, in violation of resolution 2231 (2015),
and is almost certainly seeking to source weaponry
from other United Nations-sanctioned States, such as
North Korea, as its own stocks dwindle.
We note that, despite the resounding calls in the
Council again on Tuesday for a ceasefire and for peace,
dialogue and diplomacy, the Russian President on
Wednesday doubled down, confirming that the invasion
would continue and that it would be protracted. He also
reaffirmed the neoimperialist nature of the campaign,
claiming that, unlike Peter the Great, he had made the
Sea of Azov a Russian internal sea.
In the face of Russia’s relentless efforts to seize
Ukraine’s territory, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, and to dehumanize, kill and subjugate
its people, Ukraine has no choice but to exercise its right
to defend itself. If it did not, it would cease to exist. In a
similar situation, all of us would do the same, and, due
to the deep determination to live, Ukraine is prevailing.
The United Kingdom is proud of the support that
it is providing to the Ukrainian people in the face of
that aggression: defensive and humanitarian support
and assistance to rebuild the critical infrastructure
destroyed by Russian attacks.
Russia can end the suffering immediately by
ceasing attacks against Ukraine, including critical
national infrastructure and innocent civilians, and
withdrawing all its forces illegally present in Ukraine.
We welcome and support Ukraine’s initiative for a just

22-734489/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

and sustainable peace. We again join the international
community in calling on Russia to similarly commit
to meaningful dialogue and negotiations based on
upholding Ukraine’s rights under international law and
the United Nations Charter.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing. My delegation has also
taken note of the information provided by the civil
society representative, Mr. Daniel Kovalik.
I begin my statement by reaffirming Ghana’s
complete and unwavering commitment to the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, and affirm Ukraine’s inherent
right to self-defence under customary international
law, codified in Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The stability of our international system has been
carefully built on the established norms of inter-State
relations, one of which is the cardinal prohibition on the
use of force by one State against another. Any contrary
actions, as we witnessed by the Russian Federation
against Ukraine, undermine the fundamental principles
of international law and the values and purposes of the
United Nations Charter and constitute serious threats to
international peace and security.
Over the past nine months, Ukraine has deployed
its military and strategic capabilities in asserting
its inherent right to self-defence against the armed
attack of the Russian Federation and in a courageous
endeavour to preserve its national interests. There is
no prohibition om such action, neither do the rules of
international law or the Charter prohibit the supply of
conventional weapons to a State under armed attack
by another.
Regrettably, the war has come at the great cost
of destruction, damage and the loss of lives. With
each passing day of missile attacks, the toll in
civilian casualties and damage to Ukraine’s critical
infrastructure continues to compound as the United
Nations registers some of the worst humanitarian
statistics since the Second World War. We also remain
acutely aware of the looming danger of a nuclear
catastrophe as the integrity of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant is persistently violated.
Beyond Ukraine, the war has spurred unprecedented
levels of global energy, food and financial crises, which
have derailed the capacity of many developing States
10/20

09/12/2022

to rebound from the impact of the global coronavirus
disease pandemic, further worsening socioeconomic
conditions for many communities far removed from the
theatre of war.
It remains in our common interest to end the war
and the trail of devastation that it is leaving in its path.
It is therefore our view that the preoccupation of the
international community should be the immediate
cessation of military hostilities, a key aspect of which
is the unconditional withdrawal of Russian forces from
the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine.
We reiterate our call on the Russian Federation to end
its aggression against Ukraine and respect Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, in line with the
norms and principles of international law.
While diplomatic efforts to end the war may appear
to have eluded the international community, we must
remain steadfast and unified in our efforts to facilitate a
political dialogue with credible guarantees of addressing
the respective security concerns of the parties. In its
enduring wisdom, the Charter of the United Nations
provides several modes of pacific settlement, which
promise to deliver our present and collective aspiration
for peace in Ukraine if undertaken with the genuine
commitment and greater determination of the warring
sides and all stakeholders. We must pursue the path
of dialogue, as there can be no military solution to
the conflict.
Finally, we urge the parties to uphold the rules
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
requirements for distinction and proportionality
to avoid causing needless harm to civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Nakamitsu and Mr. Kovalik
for their briefings.
The Ukraine crisis has been unfolding for almost
10 months now and a large number of weapons and
ammunition have poured into the country. Human
lives appear so fragile in front of gun barrels. Both
sides have suffered huge losses and immense trauma
in the fighting, with ordinary people bearing the
brunt of it. In her briefing to the Security Council in
September (see S/PV.9127), Mrs. Nakamitsu stated that
a large-scale influx of weapons to conflict-affected
zones raises concerns about their potential diversion.
Mrs. Nakamitsu re-emphasized that point in her
briefing today.
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

In June this year, INTERPOL also indicated that
weapons destined for Ukraine could end up on the
black market and fall into the hands of criminals.
Unfortunately, those warnings have indeed materialized.
There have been reports that some armed groups and
terrorist organizations in the Middle East and Africa
have obtained, through illegal channels, weapons and
ammunition flowing from Ukraine. The international
community should pay attention to that issue and take
preventive measures.
From a long-term perspective, the large stockpile
of weapons, ammunition and explosives on Ukrainian
territory may pose security risks to post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction. Afghanistan, Iraq and
Somalia are among the countries that have had painful
experiences in that regard.
On the Ukrainian issue, China has always advocated
the cessation of hostilities, as well as dialogue and peace
talks. Since the onset of the crisis, China has always
stressed that a political solution is the only way out.
Flooding the battlefield with weapons and continuously
expanding the categories and scope of deployed
armaments will only aggravate the existing strife,
prolong and amplify the conflict and make ordinary
people pay a high price. The facts have shown that
resolving the crisis through dialogue and negotiation
is the only way to effectively minimize casualties and
help to restore peace in Ukraine and Europe as a whole.
China once again calls on the international
community to redouble its efforts to encourage peace
talks, promote a favourable atmosphere for the parties
involved to return to negotiations and create conditions
for a political settlement of the Ukraine crisis.
During his recent meetings with the leaders of
several countries on the issue of Ukraine, President Xi
Jinping underscored that conflicts and wars produce no
winners and that such a complex issue has no simple
solution. In the current situation, China believes that
the international community must work together on the
following four fronts.
First, we must jointly support all efforts aimed at
a peaceful settlement of the Ukraine crisis, calling on
all parties concerned to stay level-headed, exercise
restraint and make direct contact as soon as possible
in order to create the conditions for relaunching
negotiations.

S/PV.9216

Secondly, we must collectively reject the use and
threat of use of nuclear weapons, reaffirming that
nuclear weapons should never be used and that nuclear
war should never be fought in order to prevent a nuclear
crisis on the Eurasian continent.
Thirdly, we must make joint efforts to stabilize the
global industrial chain and supply chain and prevent
any disruption to international cooperation in the
energy, food and financial spheres that may undermine
global economic recovery, especially the economic and
fiscal stability of developing countries.
Fourthly, we must jointly provide winter relief for
civilians in crisis-affected areas. We must improve the
humanitarian situation on the ground and prevent a
humanitarian crisis on an even larger scale.
China will continue to uphold objectivity and
impartiality and will work with all peace-loving
countries in the world to play a constructive role in the
peaceful settlement of the Ukraine crisis.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): Once
again, Russia would have us believe that its war is being
waged by Ukraine, encouraged by the United States and
Europe. On 24 February, however, it was indeed Russia
that invaded Ukraine, in defiance of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. It was Russia that
started the war by unilaterally attacking its neighbour,
and it was Russia that has taken the decision to continue
and escalate the war every day for the past nine months.
Let us not reverse responsibilities by confusing the
aggressor and the aggressed. Russia alone is responsible
for the deterioration of the humanitarian situation.
We heard from Mr. Griffiths on Tuesday about the
disastrous repercussions of the conflict in that regard
(see S/PV.9208).
France continues to give the Ukrainian people all
the support they need to exercise their right to legitimate
self-defence and to preserve their freedom, sovereignty
and independence. It does so by providing military
support to Ukraine, both nationally and at the European
level, in particular through the European Peace Facility.
That is a conscious choice: Ukraine is also fighting
to defend the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, namely territorial integrity, the inviolability
of borders, the independence and sovereignty of States,
the prohibition on territorial conquest by force and the
condemnation of wars of aggression. Only respect for
those principles can guarantee peace.

22-7344811/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

The General Assembly’s adoption of the resolution
entitled “Territorial integrity of Ukraine: defending
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations”
on 12 October (resolution ES-11/4) is further proof of
Russia’s isolation. President Zelenskyy recalled that
by placing the abovementioned principles at the heart
of his 10-point peace plan. In response, Russia offered
nothing but the continuation of its indiscriminate
bombing of Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure and
population. We welcome the peace plan and stand ready
to help Ukraine to build a just and lasting peace.
Russia does not hesitate to violate international
law by attacking another State and procuring weapons
illegally. As its stockpiles dwindle and it finds itself in
great difficulty on the ground, it seeks to obtain supplies
by any means, including in violation of Security Council
resolutions. It has been well documented that it is using
combat drones supplied by Iran and continues to use
them as part of its strategy to systematically target the
Ukrainian civilian population and infrastructure. We
call on the United Nations Secretariat to investigate
those transfers — as it is mandated to do — as they
constitute a violation of resolution 2231 (2015), and to
report back to the Security Council.
France will continue to provide military support to
Ukraine for as long as Russia’s aggression continues,
as well as humanitarian, economic and political
assistance. If Russia wants to stop the transfers it is now
denouncing, the solution is simple and can be found
in the order issued on 16 March by the International
Court of Justice. Russia must immediately cease all
military operations in Ukraine. It must withdraw from
Ukrainian territory and respect its internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. We
also listened carefully to Mr. Kovalik’s remarks.
When the Council last considered the issue of
arms transfers in the context of the conflict in Ukraine
three months ago (see S/PV.9127), we expressed our
concern that the risk of those arms transfers would
be compounded if both sides were intent on achieving
a military victory and the conflict were to become a
protracted one. Unfortunately, the prospects of reaching
a negotiated settlement have not grown appreciably
closer in the intervening months. Still, there have been
signals of a widening recognition that talks are the
inevitable path to a durable peace. The United Arab
12/20

09/12/2022

Emirates is steadfast in its belief that there is simply
no military solution to the war. A sustainable end will
have to come through negotiations.
With that in mind, as the war continues, we must
mitigate the attendant risks. In all military conflicts, it is
vital to safeguard weapons during transfer, storage and
deployment so that they may not inadvertently fall into
the wrong hands, particularly those of terrorist groups.
On that note, the United Arab Emirates welcomes
announcements of efforts to mitigate risks associated
with arms transfers, which includes plans tailored to
the transfer of high-tech weapons systems and regional
programmes to enhance anti-trafficking capabilities
in the region. We also welcome other recent initiatives
aimed at strengthening illicit arms trade prevention
related to the conflict in Ukraine. The volume and
type of arms involved in this case necessitate greater
vigilance and transparency. We support calls, such as
that made by the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs today, for effective arms control measures.
War is not only inhumane and causes untold
suffering, but it is also fraught with unintended
consequences. The Council has a responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and an obligation to Ukrainians and people around
the world. For its part, the United Arab Emirates
continues to actively support and facilitate mediation
and de-escalatory confidence-building measures, and
we stand ready to support all efforts towards a peaceful
resolution.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for the information that she
has provided.
Since the very beginning of the war, we have
consistently pointed out a very key aspect of the war
in Ukraine: it is a war of choice, an act of aggression
against another country and a blatant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Everything else we hear or say about developments in
Ukraine is derived from that. As a result, since the very
first day, Ukraine has defended itself, has resisted, has
pushed back the aggressor and has called on the world
for help. Helping Ukraine defend itself from a brutal
war is a moral duty. It is also an essential security
imperative, since Russia’s actions seriously undermine
European and global security and stability. Albania is
proud to be among those doing what they can to help
Ukraine and Ukrainians. We are assisting a country the
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

very existence of which is under threat to resist and
escape from a war that it has not chosen.
International law is crystal clear. A country
under attack has every right to defend itself, under
Article 51 of the Charter. Ukraine has been under
attack for 10 months, and it is simply defending itself.
Its sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence have been assaulted, which makes selfdefence not only a natural right, but also an existential
imperative. Therefore, whoever is helping Ukraine, in
whatever way legally and openly, is helping not only a
nation in need, a nation in danger and a nation under
threat. They are also upholding the law and protecting
the Charter. Therefore, the issue here is not the means
Ukraine is being provided to resist the aggression.
In fact, as we have been called upon to speak about
lethal weapons, the real and very disturbing issue is the
transfer of killing drones to Russia by Iran, in flagrant
violation of paragraph 4 of Annex B to resolution 2231
(2015). The drones, the existence of which were first
denied and later admitted, delivered by Iran and used
by Russia to attack civilians and civilian infrastructure
throughout Ukraine, are the real question that requires
a clear answer. We expect the Secretary-General to
provide a full report on the matter, as soon as possible,
in accordance with resolution 2231 (2105).
We have said it before and want to reiterate once
again that, instead of abusing the time and resources
of the Security Council with meetings like this one, we
should concentrate on real issues. As we speak, Russian
attacks are causing casualties and destroying civilian
infrastructure, in particular the energy-supply system,
leaving millions of people without access to electricity,
heat or water, punishing everyone without distinction,
which constitutes a violation of international
humanitarian law. Those who disrespect the law must
face the consequences; those who commit crimes must
be held accountable.
Therefore, I would like to conclude by saying that
nothing — even less so an overused and hackneyed
false narrative — is preventing anyone from seeing the
terrible reality in Ukraine, the crimes being committed
there and, above all, the need to stand in full solidarity
with Ukraine, its resistance and its rights to decide on
its policies and choose its friends and future.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu and Mr. Kovalik for their briefings.

S/PV.9216

We note with extreme concern the ruinous damage
that the war is causing to Ukrainian lives, as well as
Ukraine’s legitimate right to sovereignty, territorial
integrity and regional and international security. As
the Security Council debates the conduct of the war,
as we have done so often, including two days ago (see
S/PV.9208), we must reiterate our calls that every effort
be deployed to stop it. We must be more responsive to our
fundamental mandate to maintain international peace
and security comprehensively. We acknowledge the
heavy responsibility Ukraine must bear in defending its
internationally recognized borders. While conscripting
for, training and equipping one’s army in times of war
is expected, the impact of the proliferation of weapons
is bound to have a significant impact not only in the
country in conflict, but also beyond.
We are faced with a multi-pronged global crisis
resulting from the war in Ukraine. Besides the magnitude
of the food insecurity, threatening developing countries
in particular, and the more complicated multilateral
order, we must now move to urgently address the
unprecedented proliferation of weapons. None of
those challenges can be effectively addressed as the
war rages on. As the first and most effective step, the
war needs to end. Kenya therefore calls for specific
and sustained efforts to reach arrangements to deliver
a minimum level of de-escalation and deconfliction,
while establishing channels of dialogue that will lead
to stability.
Lastly, we once again call for the cessation of
hostilities and a political settlement that respects
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.
We all know that actions speak louder than words.
But before we discuss Russia’s actions, let us discuss
Russia’s words here in the Security Council today. It
continues to confound my delegation that we are all once
again brought into this Chamber to devote our attention
to Russia’s fictions. In the middle of and despite its war
of aggression against its neighbour, Ukraine, Russia
has wasted countless hours of the Council’s time on
fictional dirty bombs in Ukraine, a claim debunked
repeatedly by the inspectors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. They have wasted our time on fictional
biological weapons, supposedly to be delivered to
Ukraine’s near neighbours on the wings of birds and

22-7344813/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

bats — claims rejected by the Council and the States
parties to the Biological Weapons Convention. Russia
uses such stories and words to try to distract us from
its own aggression. For example, Russia claims that its
forces are not committing atrocities, when there is a
host of credible reports from a broad range of sources
that members of its forces have committed rape, torture
and summary executions in Ukraine.
Russia has not come here today to present us
with any credible solutions, and these are not credible
accusations. What we are seeing is, frustrated on the
battlefield, Russia has resorted to destroying Ukraine’s
critical energy infrastructure from afar, causing
immense suffering to civilians, as we heard just three
days ago, and defying the international community’s
call to end its aggression.
Despite all of this, Russia has the gall to demand
today in the Council that the international community
watch from the sidelines as Moscow seeks the
destruction of another State Member of the United
Nations. Western assistance to Ukraine, in the face of
Russia’s illegal, brutal invasion, is not the problem here.
It is Russia’s invasion itself. That is the one attribute
common to all of Russia’s fictions and words: to find
any distraction, no matter how odious or transparently
false, to try to shift our focus from the immense and
needless suffering Russia has caused, and continues to
cause, to the people of Ukraine.
It is Russia that cynically called for today’s meeting,
alleging an illicit conspiracy of weapons transfers from
Ukraine when, in fact, as others around the table have
noted, it is Russia that is complicit in Iran’s illegal
transfer of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to Russia,
in violation of Annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Russia continues to use Iranian UAVs in its war against
Ukraine and attacks against civilian infrastructure and
cities, which have led to the deaths of civilians.
Let me be clear. We have seen no credible evidence
of the diversion of United States-provided equipment.
We have heard no credible evidence of diversion today
in the Council. We would certainly review evidence
to support those claims, whether it came from a Head
of State or international law enforcement official, if it
were produced. We would do that because the United
States takes very seriously its responsibility to protect
its defence and dual-use technologies and prevent
their diversion.
14/20

09/12/2022

At the same time, the United States is committed
to continuing to support the people of Ukraine as they
defend their country and their freedom. We are not
hiding that support. As others have said, Ukraine has
every right to defend itself, and we have every right to
continue our long-standing support to its defence.
Although we have seen no credible evidence of
Ukraine diverting United States-origin arms and
munitions, we must all recognize the inherent risk of
weapons’ capture and diversion on the battlefield in any
armed conflict. We have always taken, and the United
States continues to take, proactive steps to mitigate that
risk. What we have seen are Western-origin systems
captured by Russia in Ukraine. Indeed, Russia is the
only known vector of diversion. Russia has an incentive
to spread disinformation about diversion and indeed
to actually divert United States weapons in order to
create a false narrative about United States assistance
that spuriously discredits Ukraine and seeks to weaken
international support for Ukraine’s self-defence.
The Ukrainian Government has committed
to appropriately safeguarding and accounting for
transferred defence equipment. It is important that we
remind ourselves that that equipment is vital to Ukraine’s
defence, and so Ukraine has a strong incentive to protect
it. We welcome the Ukrainian Government’s formation,
just this summer, of a commission to strengthen the
monitoring of donated military equipment.
We continue to work closely with our Ukrainian
Government partners to ensure that all assistance
continues to be properly used and safeguarded, as
Ukraine defends its sovereignty and territorial integrity
against Russia’s ongoing aggression. Helping Ukraine
to keep and regain control of its sovereign territory is
an important factor in limiting potential illicit diversion
by Russia’s forces, Russia’s proxies, criminal groups,
terrorist organizations or other non-State actors.
Consistent with its commitment to the serious
responsibility of safeguarding against diversion, in
October, the United States Government published
the United States Plan to Counter Illicit Diversion of
Certain Advanced Conventional Weapons in Eastern
Europe. This is a comprehensive whole-of-Government
approach that also engages our allies and partners.
While it is a recent publication, it is not a new plan. We
have been working to address the risk of diversion since
well before last February, including in close cooperation
with our allies and key partners. The plan has three main
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

lines of effort: first, working with Ukraine’s authorities
to monitor and control sensitive and dangerous arms;
secondly, strengthening border controls inside and
around Ukraine; and thirdly, enhancing law enforcement
capability in neighbouring countries.
While the Russian Government is heavily invested
in spreading disinformation to justify and distract the
international community from Russia’s unprovoked
war against Ukraine, we and our allies remain firmly
committed to supporting Ukraine as it defends its
territorial integrity and civilian population against
Russia’s aggression. We therefore take those allegations
of diversion of United States-origin weapons from
Russia’s officials or pro-Kremlin sources with a healthy
dose of scepticism.
I will conclude on the subject of diversion with
a statement of fact. The most effective path towards
reducing conflict and any risk of illicit diversion of
arms would be for Russia to end the war that it started
and withdraw its forces from all of Ukraine’s sovereign
territory. That may begin to relieve Russia of its
dependence on its many corrosive fictions.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Izumi Nakamitsu, and Mr. Daniel Kovalik for
their respective briefings.
I welcome the participation of the representative of
Ukraine in today’s meeting.
The Council is meeting again today for the second
time this week on the issue of the war in Ukraine. I
would like to reiterate our opposition to the war. I also
reiterate my country’s repeated calls on the parties
to engage in good faith negotiations, with a view to
finding a diplomatic solution.
No one can predict the destabilization and
insecurity that could result from the many deliveries
of weapons used in the war. My country calls upon
the parties to honour their commitments under
international humanitarian law by refraining from the
use of weapons of mass destruction and the targeting
of civilians and civilian infrastructure. The parties are
duty-bound to prevent civilians from falling victim to
landmines. The parties must avoid any action that could
inflict further suffering on civilians and must allow
unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid.
As the war becomes entrenched, accusations
abound about the threat of use of weapons of mass

S/PV.9216

destruction and even of nuclear weapons. Such an
outcome would make the perpetrators responsible for
a disaster of irreparable consequences. My country
condemns the use of weapons that have indiscriminate
effects, as well as any use of remote-guidance weapons
that target civilians. We urge the parties to cease all
verbal or military escalations and actions that could
escalate tensions.
It is time to silence the weapons in Ukraine.
Undoubtedly, more weapons will mean more war,
death, destruction, suffering and civilian victims.
One upmanship in that area would benefit no one. It
will jeopardize efforts towards peace and merely stir
up animosity.
I wish to conclude by recalling that the Council has
a crucial role to play in seeking peace. My country will
continue to stand with those who propose alternatives
to the language of weapons.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu and
Mr. Kovalik for their briefings.
As we said in September (see S/PV.9127), over
the many months that the Security Council has
been debating the conflict in Ukraine, Mexico has
constantly pointed to the importance of and need to
pay attention to the implications of arms transfers.
In the light of Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Mexico’s concern regarding arms transfers is
not limited to the current situation — it dates back the
beginning of the conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014.
The use of weapons in this conflict is ubiquitous. But
it is civilians who have paid the highest price — that of
their lives and the destruction of residential areas and
infrastructure, including hospitals and schools.
While some exporters have made statements
concerning the precautions they have taken in selling
and shipping weapons, given the high volume of
transfers, it is virtually impossible to maintain control
of these weapons over their life cycle — not to mention
the inherent risks of trafficking and diversion. Criminal
organizations inevitably exploit the situation. The
proliferation of civilian-owned weapons also has many
very serious implications.
More recently, we have taken note of the various
allegations of transfers of uncrewed aerial vehicles.
Regardless of their origin, they too have been used
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, which is

22-7344815/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

a violation of international humanitarian law by any
measure. The Small Arms Survey project has published
reports of transfers of a wide range of weapons — from
rifles to man-portable air defence systems. Those
reports also warn of the growing number of unregistered
civilian-owned weapons. In mid-November, a court
in the Netherlands issued a judgment against those
involved in the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight
MH-17 in eastern Ukraine in 2014, arguing that it was
the result of the transfer of a Buk surface-to-air missile
system. All of those reports suggest there is, in fact, no
effective arms-transfer control system in place.
All countries that are party to the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) must adhere to its provisions, especially
those relating to the prohibition of transfers that would
be in violation of the Treaty and the application of the
strict risk analysis that the Treaty itself stipulates. But
we equally call on those who are not yet party to the ATT
to responsibly comply with the highest precautionary
standards in their transfers, with objective criteria that
transcend private corporate or geostrategic interests.
That is an issue of utmost importance because the lives
of thousands of people truly depend on it. We therefore
highlight the fact that, beyond the current decisions
to approve new sales and transfers, it is also time to
establish more specific arms-control measures before
entering the post-conflict stage — and we will get to
that stage. The longer we take to do that, the harder
it will be to get there, and the consequences of not
having planned for it in time will once again be felt by
civil society.
This may be one of the last occasions on which
Mexico will make a statement on the subject of Ukraine
as an elected member of the Security Council. I would
therefore like to reiterate my country’s position: the
military route clearly does not offer a timely or viable
solution. It is time for the Council and the international
community to focus on promoting more dialogue and
diplomatic understandings. Mediation options — those
that exist already and those that may arise — should
not be ruled out. Ending the supply of weapons
implies negotiations and truces. Mexico reiterates its
commitment to respecting the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu and Mr. Kovalik for
their input.
16/20

09/12/2022

Over the years, the Security Council has sought
to incorporate into its agenda issues for which the
relationship with international peace and security is
not always clear. Interestingly, the nexus between
weapons and armed conflict has received less attention.
That linkage is explicitly recognized by the main
instrument of international law on conventional arms
exports, the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which commits
exporting States to consider whether arms transfers
would contribute to or undermine peace and security.
On the other hand, all States have the inherent right
to self-defence, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, and, consequently, the right to acquire
arms for their security, including from outside sources.
It should also be recalled that the ATT explicitly
prohibits transfers of arms and ammunition that would
be used in the commission of genocide, crimes against
humanity, grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, attacks directed against civilian objects or
civilians protected as such, or other war crimes.
In the past years, we have witnessed the phenomenon
of the growing urbanization of conflicts, the increasing
involvement of non-State actors and the use of methods
and means of war that do not comply with the principles
of distinction and proportionality. Additionally, we see
a risk regarding the problem of the illicit trafficking of
conventional weapons and ammunition. The weapons
now being used in the conflict in Ukraine will possibly
fuel other conflicts in different regions of the world in
the future.
As to the case being considered, it should be
recognized that the supply of arms and ammunition
to the parties to the conflict in Ukraine might result
in prolonging it and in more suffering for the civilian
population. On the other hand, it is undeniable that
a State has a right to self-defence in the case of the
violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
That is a principle enshrined in the Charter.
This discussion, however, distracts us from
fulfilling our mandate, which is to maintain peace and
security and, therefore, work towards a ceasefire and
negotiations. We must bear in mind that the norms
and principles of international humanitarian law are
mandatory at all times and under all circumstances.
Respecting and ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law is not only a legal obligation, but also
an effective way to protect civilians.
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations
assigns to the Council the responsibility to explore
avenues of dialogue in favour of the peaceful solution
of disputes: “The Security Council shall, when it deems
necessary, call upon the parties to settle their dispute by
such means.” After more than nine months of conflict
in Ukraine, we must recognize that the Council has yet
to fulfil its mandate.
Brazil is concerned that signs of openness to
dialogue have been in short supply. Last July, the Black
Sea Grain Initiative provided, in the words of UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, a beacon of hope
for all in the face of a global food crisis (see S/PV.9104).
There have also been occasional arrangements to
exchange prisoners of war. The harsh reality, however,
is that the belief in the feasibility of a military solution
continues to be present, and not only on the part of the
parties to the conflict, whatever the cost in terms of
human suffering.
Once again, we reiterate the call for an immediate
ceasefire without preconditions. Saving human lives
must take precedence over any consideration, including
the just desire for reparations and punishing those
responsible for war crimes. Brazil adds its voice to
that of other members in favour of dialogue and recalls
that the world looks to the Security Council in the
expectation that it will fully exercise its responsibility
to stop the spiral of violence.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing. I note the presence of
Mr. Kovalik.
The facts surrounding the war in Ukraine are clear.
Ukraine was a peaceful, independent country. Russia
chose to upend that peace and to violate Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. It did so in 2014
when it illegally annexed Crimea. It did so again this
year when it launched its brutal war of aggression.
What is less clear is the justification for today’s
meeting, called by the Russian Federation. Ukraine
did not commit or threaten to commit an armed attack
against Russia. It was Russia that attacked Ukraine and
that cynically sought to justify its invasion by invoking
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
Russia that now seeks to deny Ukraine its entirely
legitimate right of self-defence, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations

S/PV.9216

Ireland, along with all European Union (EU)
member States, rigorously implements its international
obligations. We apply the EU common position under
which EU member States assess exports of military
technology and equipment against a range of criteria,
including a specific criterion on the risk of diversion.
Attempts by the Russian Federation to frame the urgent
and necessary support for Ukraine’s defence as an
uncontrolled supply of weapons are, once again, a poor
attempt at obfuscating its grievous actions. The EU and
its member States are determined to support Ukraine
for as long as it takes.
We are greatly concerned by the manner in which
Russia is acquiring and using unmanned aerial vehicles
in Ukraine, as well as reports of ballistic missiles
obtained from Iran in contravention of resolution 2231
(2015). The comments by the Ambassador of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to Moscow that
his country is to supply Russia with ballistic missiles in
contravention of resolution 1718 (2006) is also of serious
concern. Russia’s actions risk undermining those
essential resolutions and the authority of the Council.
For its part, Ukraine has sought to restore peace.
President Zelenskyy has offered a road map to peace:
his 10-point peace plan to end this senseless war.
Russia has responded with a barrage of missile strikes,
bringing with it further death and destruction and
further worsening the humanitarian crisis that Russia’s
war has caused.
We ask that Russia stop trying to use the Security
Council as a platform for its disinformation, to paint
itself as the victim of its own aggression, in the face of
the heinous actions it has committed. Instead of using
disinformation to falsely blame others, Russia should
cease its aggression against Ukraine, and it should do
so immediately.
Ireland once again calls on Russia to withdraw
its troops and engage in good faith in dialogue and
diplomacy to bring about a peaceful resolution of the
conflict in line with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. Millions of lives in Ukraine
depend on that.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national as the representative of India.
At the outset, we thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her detailed briefing.

22-7344817/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

The trajectory of the Ukraine conflict is a matter
of profound concern for the entire international
community. We believe that internationally agreed
principles and regimes should be respected and upheld
by all countries.
The Security Council will recall that, since the
commencement of the conflict in Ukraine, India has
been consistently calling for an immediate cessation
of hostilities and for an end to violence. We have
emphasized that dialogue and diplomacy are the only
way forward. Actions that exacerbate the conflict
should be avoided. Rather, all efforts should be made
to de-escalate and bring both sides to negotiating table.
As our Prime Minister has said, today’s era is not an
era of war.
In a globalized world, the impact of the conflict
has not just been limited to Europe. We have all
experienced its consequences in terms of surging costs
and shortages of food grains, fertilizers and fuel. The
global South, in particular, is feeling the pain acutely.
We must therefore not initiate measures that further
complicate the struggling global economy.
For our part, we are providing humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine and economic support to our
neighbours under economic distress. We very much
hope that the international community will continue
to respond positively to the call for humanitarian
assistance. India has dispatched 12 consignments of
humanitarian aid to Ukraine so far, and we stand ready
to do more.
India’s approach will be to promote dialogue and
diplomacy with an overarching aim to end the ongoing
conflict and work with other partners to mitigate
emerging economic challenges, particularly for
developing countries.
It is in our collective interest to work constructively,
both inside and outside the United Nations, towards
seeking an early resolution to this conflict.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the global order
is anchored in the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
18/20

09/12/2022

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened very carefully to all the speakers
and asked for the floor to draw Council members’
attention to the following.
Our former Western partners have not said a peep
about the topic of today’s meeting — the consequences
of supplying weapons to Ukraine — despite the facts
and evidence that we provided today. They simply have
nothing to say, and that is why they continue to repeat
the same talking points at every meeting. According
to their worldview, Russia is guilty of everything
everywhere. There are no other explanations, and
neither have there been any for a long time. In their
blindness, they continue on a pathway that could lead
to global consequences. That has become even clearer
to us after today’s meeting.
Therefore, I would like to stress that Council
members will not be able to blame Russia for the fact
that Ukrainians, using their weapons, have killed — and
continue to kill — the peaceful citizens of Donbas, who
they have been terrorizing since 2014, as punishment.
Neither will they be able to blame Russia for the fact
that, because of the flourishing corruption of Ukrainian,
American and European officials, weapons from
Ukraine flow to international terrorists and help fuel
conflicts in other regions of the world and kill peaceful
civilians there. No one who watches our meetings
will be left with any doubt about the consequences of
what they are doing and the consequences in terms of
undermining international peace and security and the
denial into the microphone by our American colleagues
of obvious facts and trends. Their desire to continue
uncontrollably pumping Ukraine with weapons will be
fully assessed by the unbiased Members of the United
Nations and the American taxpayers themselves. If only
for that fact, convening today’s meeting has definitely
been worthwhile.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu. I also recognize the remainder of
representatives of terrorist Russia in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
It is becoming grotesque, and soon it will not be a
surprise to see Leo Tolstoy’s major work called Special
Operation and Peace in order to comply with Putin’s
laws. After all, it is also a mix of fictional narrative,
22-73448

09/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

history and, often, perverse philosophy, like many
Russian statements delivered here in the Chamber.
If someone tells me to my face that “eastern
Ukraine had good reason to join Russia”, or, even more
delusionally, that “Russia’s intervention in Ukraine
is legal under international law”, who in their right
mind would refer to the author of those statements
as an authoritative source at this global watchdog of
international law and order? Of course, there is freedom
of speech in this country, including for alumnae of
otherwise respectable universities. But for God’s
sake, even in this city, where cannabis is now legal,
there is no need to fill the Chamber with the smoke
of conspiracies.
Russia is again attempting to legitimize its flagrant
violations of the Charter of the United Nations by using
the Council as a platform for circulating its propagandist
narratives. It is a very simple algorithm that Moscow
has explored since Soviet times. But as Mr. Kovalik
himself said, he is an American, and he can say what
he wants. Of course he can. But why in the world is
he wasting our time. Neither American taxpayers nor
ours approve of the frittering away of their money. Let
me remind the Council that the largest country in the
world, the Russian Federation, pays less than 2 per cent
of the United Nations regular budget. It hardly covers
this debauchery.
In this algorithm, one must first blame the victim.
The more resolutely the victim resists, the more
assistance it receives from responsible nations, the
graver the accusations should be.
Secondly, the lie should be wrapped up in numerous
terms and names, technical characteristics and numbers.
All those lies are supposed to make fakes look like
facts. In particular, we have never heard from Moscow
why mass graves and torture chambers have been found
only in the places where Russian troops were deployed.
We can only imagine what we will find in the territories
that still remain under Russian occupation.
What we do know for sure is that, the sooner those
territories are liberated, the more Ukrainians can be
saved. We will therefore continue to de-occupy our
sovereign territories in strict accordance with Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations. Anything else
would be a betrayal of our compatriots who have been
compelled to stay in the occupied territories and are
now waiting for liberation.

S/PV.9216

We are grateful to all friends and allies who
support Ukraine in this noble endeavour, including
by supplying modern weapons. Their use has been an
element of Ukraine exercising the inherent right to selfdefence under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Russia brought the same allegations to the attention
of the Security Council on 8 September (see S/PV.9127).
Let me remind the Council what happened afterward.
The Armed Forces of Ukraine launched its operation
to liberate the east and south of the country. Since
September, thousands of square kilometres in Kharkiv,
Kherson and Luhansk regions have been liberated.
That is the most powerful and viable evidence that all
weapons in Ukraine’s possession serve their intended
purpose — to help Ukrainian soldiers to liberate our
people and our territories.
To prevent their illegal use, Ukraine has created
and ensured the effective functioning of a multilevel
system of arms control. It is carried out on three
tracks: circulation and use of small arms and light
weapons, export control and control and supervision of
weapons and military equipment transferred by foreign
countries. The circulation and use of small arms and
light weapons has been controlled on an inter-agency
level that includes the Ministry of the Interior, the
Security Service, the State Border Service and other
governmental structures responsible for combating
illegal arms trafficking.
The State service of Ukraine for export control,
as well as the inter-agency commission on military
and technical cooperation and export control, are
responsible for the practical implementation of the State
policy in the area of export control over international
transfers of dual-use and military goods, as well as for
the implementation of measures to prevent their use for
terrorist and other illegal purposes.
Ukraine has also established a three-level system
of control and supervision for weapons supplied by our
foreign partners. Parliamentary oversight is carried out
by the temporary special commission. The President
exercises its constitutional duties through the National
Security and Defense Council of Ukraine. A special
system called SOTA, implemented there to monitor
weapons and equipment supplied by foreign partners,
makes it possible to receive information about every
single sample of such weapons.
At the governmental level, the Ministry of Defence
and the Armed Forces of Ukraine, together with foreign

22-7344819/20

S/PV.9216

Threats to international peace and security

partners, carry out direct control and monitoring,
including through the use of the Logistics Functional
Area Services system, which allows the monitoring of
arms supplies to Ukraine, as well as the movement of
international technical assistance. In addition, auditors
of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine carry out field
inspections of weapons supplied by foreign partners.
At the same time, we remain extremely concerned
about the activities of illegal armed formations,
including the infamous Wagner Group, in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine. Those
formations widely recruit people with criminal
backgrounds in Russia and use weapons that are not
subject to any control mechanisms, including internal
Russian mechanisms. Given the fact that the Wagner
Group is reported to operate on other continents as
well, the threat of illicit arms trafficking arising from
the activities of Russian private military companies

20/20

09/12/2022

is more than real and worth being addressed by the
Council and relevant international mechanisms. In turn,
the Ukrainian side, through both its civil and military
representatives, demonstrates transparency and a
commitment to cooperating fully with our partners, as
well as within international export-control regimes.
We will continue to act on that basis, as it is fully
in line with our main task — the full de-occupation
of the sovereign territory of Ukraine within its
international recognized borders. Following the defeat
of Russia and the end of the war, the demilitarization
and denuclearization of Russia should take place. It will
prevent the threat of the repetition of aggression, thereby
laying a solid foundation for both the transformation
of Russia into a peace-loving nation and for ensuring
sustainable peace and security.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

22-73448
