r
I

/

i

r

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFF,ICIAL ·RE-CORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DESECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS' /
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 51
147th and ~48th meetings
27 June 1947

147eme·et 148eme seances
27 juin'1947

"

..._
( 46 p.)

..........

Lake Success
New York

. TABLE DES MATIERES

TABLE ·Of CONTENTS
_. Hundred ~nd forty-seven,h meeting··

Cent-quarante-septieineseance

. Page

Pages

187. Provisional agenda.
~
1115 187. Ordre dujourprovisoire
1115
188. Adoption of the agenda
~ .. ~T1f6" -1M.' Adoption de l'ordre du jour......•.... 1116
189. Credentials of. representatives to the .
W9. Pouvoirs des representants aupres du
Security Council,for the ~cussion of the
Conseil de securite pour la discussion de
Greek question. :
: ....•... 1116'
la question grecque
1116
190. Discussion of, the report of the Commis190. Dmcussion du rapport de la Conimission
sion of Investigation concerning Greek
d'enquete sur les ~cideuts survenus a la
Fronner Incidents
'.. ; 1116
frontiere grecque
~ ...........•... 1116
< <. <.

•••••••••••

Hundred and forty-eighth meeting

Cent-quarante-huitieme seance

191. Continuation' of the discussion of the report of the Commission of· Investigation
CpilC.:rning Greek Fl'Ontier Incidents ... H 43

191. Suite de la discussion du rapport de la
Commission "d'enquete stir les incidents
survenus ala frontiere grecque
1143

Document

Document

The following document,releyant to ,the hundred
and forty-seventh· and hundred and forty-eighth
'meetings, is publi~hed as follows:
Official Records of the Security Council, Second
. J;"ear, Special S1!pplement No. 2.
Report, of the Co:tnmiSsion of. Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents (dQcqment

Le document suivant, se rapportan~aux .cent·
quarante-septieme et cent-quarante~huitieme
seances, figure dans la publication suivante:
Proces'-verbay.x officielsdu Conseil de securite;
DeuxiemeAnnee, SUl.jJpUrnent special No 2.
Rapport de la GoIIlIi1issiond~enquete sur les incidents survenus _a la' frontie~e grecque au
Conseil de secunte (document 8/360).

S/360)

c

"

j

p

1143
therefore 'be grateful to members of the Council if
they would keep these copies ~d bring thelll back
at the beginning of each meeting in which this
question is discussed. ,Of course, the Secretariat
will provide delegations with whatever number of
copies they may need; but would delegations
please ask only for the absolutely necessary number of copies iJ;l order to avoid needless expen'diture.
.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

pourquoi nous senons reconnaissants aux membres du Conseil s'ils voulaient bien conserver ces
exemplaires et lesrapporter au debut de chaque
seance--o-uc-eette-'question' sera ~cutee. Naturellement, le Secretariat fournira aux delegations le'
nombre d'exemplairesdont elles auront absolument besoin; nous les prions de bien vouloir ne
demander que le nombre d'exemplaires absolument indispensables, afin d'eviter des depenses
inutiles.
La seance est levee a13 h. 15,

"

HUNDRED AND FORTY-EIGHTH MEETING

CENT-QUARANTf:-HUITIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,

01! Friday; 27 June 1947, at 3 p.m..

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le vendredi 27 juin 1947, a15 heures.

President: Mr. A. PARODI (,France).

President: M. A. PA'RoDI (France).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United King~om, United
8.tates of America.
'

Presents: Lesrepresentants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

191 .. Continuation of the discussion of the -, 191. Suite de la discussion du rapport de
report of the Commission of Investila Commission d'enquete sur les inci·
gation concerning Greek Frontier
dents survenvs Cl la frontiel'e grecque1
Incidents1
At the'invitation o/the President, Mr. Urrutia,
Rapporteur of the Commission of Investigationj
Colonel Kerenxhi, rep,resentative of Albaniaj Mr.
Mevorah, representative of Bulgariaj Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greecej and Mr. Vilfan,
representative of Yugoslavia, took their place at
the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Urrutia, Rap.. '
porteur, le Colonel Kerenxhi, representant de
l'Albanie, M. Mevorah, representant de Ja Bul:
garie, M. Dendramis,representant de la Grece,
et M. Vilfan, representant de la Y ougoslavie,
prennent place ala table du Conseil.

Mr. MEVORAH (Bulgaria) (translated from
M. MEvORAH (Bulgarie): Jesuis tres heureux
French): It is a very great pleasure fo't me to d'avoir a representer mon pays devant cette haute
represent my country before this important body. assembIee. J'essaierai de contribuer 'aux effor-.s
I shall try to help the Council in its efforts to' que tente le Conseil pour clarifier et resoudre le
clarify and settle the problem referred. .to it.
probleme qui lui est soumis.
We are met here before a supreme Llltematio:pal
Nous sommes id devant un tribunal intematribunal, set up after a war which has upset all tional, institue apres une guerre qui a bouJethe established' principles of international order. verse tous les principes d'ordre intemational exis..,
We now have to establish anew order. Theoppor- tants. Il s'agit maintenant decreer un nouvel
tunity now presented to you, although it may seem ordre. L'occasion qui vous en est actuellement
so insignificant, is one of considerable importance, offerte, bien que minime en apparence, est d'une
for your decision will have its repercussions not importance considerable; car votre decision aura
only on the countries concemed but ,also on the une repercussion, nOIl seulement sur les pays intedevelopment of intemational relations. This de- resses, mais aussi sur le developpement des relacision will be the beginning of an historical chap- tionsintemationales; elle marquera le debut d'un
ter, and all the decisions to be taken in the future chapitred~histoire, et toutes les decisions qui sewill be governed by it.
' ront prises al'avenir se conformeront a elle.
YO'Q are now creat~g a precedent, a jurispruVous creez donc en ce moment un precedent,
dence; and it is~therefore important to make a une jurisprudence~ et par consequent il est imporgood start. The whole world hopes that the insti- tant de bien debuter. Le monde entier esper{~ que
tution to which you belong will gain more and l'institution dont vous faites partie prendra de
more stature and authority, and that it will be- jour en jour plus d'ampleur et d'autorite, et
come, finally, the supreme tribunal to which all qu'elle deviencIra enfin le haut tribunal auque1
countries with disputes to settle will apply without s'adresserorit tous les pays qui auront des diffehaving to resort to the barbaric methods which, rends a regler sans avoir a recourir aux moyens
unhappily, were already becoming a feature of barbares dont allait deja, helas, etre caracterise
Our wonderful century.
notre beau siecle.
1 Document S/360. See Official Records of the Security
COtfncil, Second Year, Special Supplement No. 2.
..

1 Document S/360. Voirles Proces-verbaux officiels du
Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special
N_O_2........:_

1144
. C'est done avec une .profonde·~ohfiartce'qll~-··'c~
j'abordel'examen du l'apport de'la Commission
Investigation;- and I hope that the final solutioIl d'enqueteetj'espere que la solution definitive que
.' WhiCAYouwill offer us wil1settle theie1ationsof vous nous proposerez amenera l'ordre dans~i's rethose, Balkan" countries, _which, .unfortunately, lations de ces pays balkaniques qui,malheureusehavelong beenknoWIi as hotbeds of discord and ment, solit depuis. longternps cites tomme des
mutual. distrust.
foyers de discorde et de mefiance reciproque.
Greece has often said that she has no aggressive
La Grece· a maintes foisdeclare qu'elle n'a
designs OIl us. All the Balkan countries have sm- point envers nous de visees agressives. Tous les
ilarly stated that' they have no aggressive designs pays balkaniques ont declare de ttleme qu'ils n'ont
on Greece. So we already have an excellent start- point de visees agressivesenvers la Grece. C'est
ing point, which should sllffice to help these coun- donc une base excellente, toute acquise, et il doit
tries to eliminate the distrust by which th~y are suffire 'd'aider ces pays a eliminer les mefiances,
ravaged andso create a betteratmosphere of un- qui les'rongent pour creer un. meilleur climat
derstanding. If, with your help and by following d'entente. Si nous arrivons, avec votre aide et en
your wise advice, we succ~ed in creating good- suivant .vos sages conseils" a creel' entre tous nos.
neighbourly relations between, all our countries, pays' un etat de ban vl?isinage, ce sera la, une
that will indeed be a great victory, which will grande conqu~te .qui nouspermettra de pourenable us to develop in ~. atmosphere of p'eace suivre notre developpement dans une atmosphere
and mutual collaboration. Our children will be de paix et de collaboration mutuelle.;Nos fils,
able to say that not only has the war put an end to pourront dire que la, guerre n'a pas seulement mis
the reign of nazi brutality, but also that it has fin au regne de la force brutale nazie,mais qu'elle
inaugurated a new era; an era of justice and con- a inaugure uneere nouvelle, une ere de justice et
cord in the world, and that it has changed the d'entente dans le monde, qu'elle a change le cours·
course of history of the Balkan peoples by leading de l'histoir~ .des peuples balkaniques en les dirithem.into the path of agreement and reason.
geant sur la voie de l'entente et de la raison..
Unfortunately, ,the report which the.CommisLe rapport que la Commission d'enqq.ete vient
sion of Investigation has just submitted to you . de vous presenter admet malheureusement beaucontains many inaccurate stat~ments of facts, and coupd'inexactitudes dans l'expose des faits, et
·-·-itsGonclusiorisare therefore' erroneous. I should ses conclusions s'en tromrentpar consequent el'rolike to point out the most striking o£ these.
nees. Perinettez-moi de· signaler les plus marquantes de ces inexactitudes.
I shall begin by defining the subject of debate.
Je debuterai par une delimitation de robjet. Le
The Gr~k Govermnent, as you know" submitted Gouvernement grec a, comme vous le savez, pretWo hooks to the Commission: one is entitled Evi- sente a la Commission deux livres:. l'un intitule
dence 'in support of the Greek appeal, and the Temoignages al'appui du recours grec,et l'autre,
other is entitled Incidents on the Greek frontier. Incidents a lafrontiere hellenique. Je remarque
I note that both of them were edited and pub,:" que tous deux ontete rediges et edites en Gr~ce.
fished in Greece.
.
I should like to say a few words about, the first . Quelques mots sur le pr~mier livre. Le rapport'
book. The report often quotes depositiol1S con- de la 'Commission d'eilquete cite souvent'les detained in the book entitled Evidence in support positions contenues dans le livre T emoignages a
of the Greek,appeal, which is called the White l'appui du recours grec, appele Livre blanc; ilen
Book. It regards these depositions' as real. proofs. traite comme s'il s'agiSSait de preuves veritables.
As exampl~, I might cite pages 39, 40 and 441 of Nous pourrions citei a titre d'exemple.les pages
the report, where reference is made to the deposi- 4P, 43 et 47 1 du rapport,ElU l'on trouve des
tions of the witnesses Ivan Gologanov, Ratko references aux depositions' des temoins Ivan
Plevneliev, andSimeonVelikostoyanov, who were Gologanov, Ratko ,Plevneliev et Simeon Velikonever heard by the Commission.
stoyanoV; lesquels n'ont point ete entendus par la
Commission. .
I think that is an indubitable and a grave error,
CeIa constit!1e, me semble-toil, tine erreur inwhich should indeed be noted, since the book in contestable etgrave qui doit vraiment etre notee,
question really presents only the results of inves- car lelivre en questb:l ne presente en realite que
tigations made in Greece by the Greek administra- le resultat d'enquetes menees en Grece par les
tive and police authorities., Furthermore, the autorites administratives et policieres grecques.
d~positions in the Greek book in question are not De plus, les depositions contenues dans le livre
authentic reproductions in extenso of the deposi- grec en question ne sont pas une reproduction autions made by the witnesses before the Greek au- thentique et in extenso des depositions, faites par
thorities; they are,rather, summari~ edited by les temoins devant les autorites grecques; ce sont
Greek officials, who have taken it upon them- plutot des resumes rediges par des fonctionnaires
selves to draft them according to their own lights . grecs, qui se permettent de leurdonner une redacand often diverge greatly from what the witues5, tion'qui leur est propre et qui s'eloigne bien souhims~lf said.
vent tres largement de ce que le temoin lui-meme
a dit. .
.
I feel, therefore, de'eply confident as lbegin the

epca~ati?rl ~f .the. report, of the, Commission. of

c

1 This and subsequent page references to the Commission's report apply to the mimeographed document 5/360,
English text.

-

1 Ces references au rapport de la Commission, ainsi que
celles de la page suivant~, s'adressent au document roneotype 5/360, texte franljais.-'
.
............

1145

-~.

·-Permit :rn.e to give you. JUSt ofleexample. Ofie
witness stated in the White Book,when describing
his itinerary, that he passed bya height for which
he gavethe figure. When questioned, the-witness
explained that, as an ordinary soldier, he did not
know what the term "height" m.eant in :rn.ilitary
language. To everyone's amazement the -Greek_
liaiBon officer explained that the witness, in describing biB itin~rary, probably meJ?-tioned some
'villages, and that it was the editor of the deposition-who, transposing it into :rn.ilitary terminology
_and following on the map the points referred to in
plain language bythe witness, thought it advisable
to describe the itinerary in biB ov..'Il words.

permertez:':rridi·- de·· VOllS en dolli:ier-iri{~seur

exemple. Un destemoinsdtes dansleLivre blanc,
en decrlvant son itineraire, mentionne.le numero
d'lL'1e cote. Aux questions qui Iui sontulterieurement-posees, le-temoin-explique qu'etant simple
soldat, il ne sait pas ce que _signifie, en langage
militaire, une. cote. A l'etonnement general, l~ offi':'
cier de liaison grec entreprend d'expliquerque le
temoin, en decrivant son itineraire, .a probablement mentio:nne des villages, et que c'estleredacteur de la deposition qUi} transcrivantcelle-ci en
langage militaire et suivant :3ur la carte les points
simplement enonces par le temoin,a trouve opportun de C:ecrire 1'itineraire seIon des termes qui-lui
etaient propres.
This is a case to be noted, for it is a striking
Cetexemple est a noter, caril nous montre de
example of the curious way in wpich the evidence maniere frappante 1'etrangefat;;on dont les temoi-was reported.
.
gnages ont ete rapportes.
- It must also be added that this evidence was
.n faut ajouter encore que ces temoignagesemagiven by persons 'whom the Commission neither nent de personnes qut} laCommissiol1 n'i nivues,
-saw nor heard. Thus, the -Commission had no ni -entendues; -celle-cin'a done pas eu la possibilite
opportunity o~ checking the identity of the wit- de controler 1'identite des temoins, ni d~ faire dans
nesses, of sorting out what was true in their depe- leursdepositions le tri entre le vrai et le faux, ni
sitio:p8 from what was false-or of putting questions de soumettre les temoins a un interrogatoire perto the witnesses which would fill in the gaps and _inettant de completer les insuffisances et d'eclaircir
dear up the c;;cnfusion; It is, therefore, obvious les confusions. Par consequent, il est clair que les
that the depositions contained in the White Book depositions contenues dans le Livre blanc ne peuare valueless unless they have been corroborated vent avoir aucune valeur, amoins -qu'elles n'aient
-before the Commission by the witnesses them- ete confirmees par les temoins eux-memes devant
.selves.
la.. OQmmiBsion.
I could give a lengthy exposition of this arguNous pourrions -longuement diBserter sur cette
ment, and would have done so had the represen- affirmation, et ilOUS l'aurions fait si. le representant
tative of the Greek Government himself not de- du Gouvernement gree n'avait lui-IIleme declare
clared--I quote his words--'--that "the White - je le dte - que "le Livre blanc n'a etepublie
Book was publiBhed only on your account to serve que pour serVir, a votre egard, de point de depart
as a starting point for the hearing of witnesses.... a l'audition des temoins; ce qui importera, en fin
Therefore, what is important in the long run is de compte, sera ce que les temolls auront dit
what"the witnesses state directly to the Commis- directement devant la COTIllllission" (proces-ver",
sion" (verbatim report of 4 March 1947, page bal du 4 mars 1947, page 33.).

I

3)!

I

~

This point is therefore absolutely clear, and the
Ce point est done tout a fait elueide et la quesquesti0u ~f the intrinsic value of the Greek book tion de la valeur intrinseque du livre grec intitU;1e
Evidence in support of the Greek appeal must be Temoignages a l'appui du recours grec doit etre
settled in the light of the above-mentioned quo- tranchee dans le sens de la declaration dtee citation.
'
dessus.
Thus, the Commission made a mistake in quotLa COlmnission a donc commis une faute en,
ing in the report evidence which was not corrobo- mentionnant dans le rapport des temoignages non
rated by the witnesses in question before the Com- confirmes par leurs auteurs -devant la Commismission and-a more serious matter-by basing sion, et, ce _qui est plus grave, en fondant ses conits conclusions in many cases on tbiB evidence.
dusions, en nombre de cas, sur ces temoignages.
En resume, nous disons qu'il faut purement et
In brief, my view is that the book Evidence in
support of the Greek appeal should purely and simplement eliminer le livre T emoignages al'apsimply be disregarded as an item of evidence, for pui du recours grec en tant que piece aconviction,
it merely contains the claims and allegations of car il ne s'agit que de pretentions et d'allegations
one of the parties concerned. It is therefore an emanant d'une des parties en cause. C'est done
argument of no intrinsic value, unless properly une these-sans valeur en soi, a moins qu'elle ne soit
substantiated.
prouvee par des moyens appropries.
1. must give a second definition of the question
Nous devons faire une seconde delimitation de
under dispute, this in relation to the book I nci- 1'objet du differend, cette fois par rapport au livre
Incidents a la frontiere helUnique.
.
dents on the Greek frontier.
Le Gouvernement grec, voulant compenser la
The Greek Government, wishing to make up in
quantity what is lacking in quality, has cited in qualite parla quantite, cite dans ce livre quelque'5
this book dozens of incidents which occurred along -dizaines d'incidents qui se seraient produits le long
the whole frontier. The report (page 175) states de la frontiere. Le rapport de la CommiBsion d'enquite rightly that the majority of the incidents re- quete (page 182) signale a juste titre que la ma1 The reference is to a verbatim record of the meeting
held by the Commission of Investigation.

1 n s'agit du proct$-verbal de la reunion tenue par la
Commission d'enquete.

"ferredto were of anon,;,politicalchara<;ter. These
incidents m~y be described as strikinglyinsigrUficant. One may well ask why the Greek Government brought before the Security' Council
unimportant incidents,' which are minor happenings that can occur even between neighboursliving on friendly terror Jases of petty smuggling, of
thefts Df cattle, ofsporadic rifle shots, of rockets
sent ~p in Bulgarian territory alld. of shepherds
grazing their flocks in Greek territory, are so numerous- as to give the whole tone to the book.

I cannot, however, refrain from citing two or
threeenremely simple cases; One of these is mentioned. on page 36 of the White Book,· and I shall
cite it to support myargument: On 1 March
,1946, a Greek patrol engaged smugglers from
Bulgaria. One of them was killed and the other
three were cllptirred.
The report of the second incident described
how, on.16 March 1946, a Bulgarian -named
Nicolas Mitov Argyrov. penetrated into Greek
territory as far as Mount Beles and was arr~ed
by· the Greek frontier guards. Tha,tis all.
The third incident related that, on 10 April
1946, privates of the Bulgarian frontier post no.
'. 12 entered G:reektenitory and cut doWll timber
in the wood' near the Greek frontier post. That
is all. But I cannot refrain from quoting a typical
case:
.
"On 28J)ecember 19~6, three bandits in civilian clothes coming from Bulgaria seized 56 sh~ep
from the Greek village of K . . . and drove 'the
sheep to the Bulgarian village of Koletsovo. . . .
When the soldier in charge at the Greek post protested,the soldier in charge of the Bulgarian post
replied tl1athe <• • • had found nothing whatsoever.
•.. However, on 3 January 1947 (i.e. six days
after the incident) he informed the·.·.. Greek post'
that he had just found the sheep, which would be
restored to their owner, and that the thieves had
been arrestedandimpnsbU-ed."1 .

jorite des cl{s cites ne contient aucun element
d'ordre politique.. Ces .incidents peuvent ctre
caracterises par leur insignifiance frappante. On
se demande pcurquoi le Gouvernement grec a
presiilnteau Conseil de securite des cas sans aucun
inter-et et qui ne sont, en somme, que des '~faits
divers" pouvant se produire meme entre'voisins
vivant en termes amicaux. Les cas se rapportant
a depetites affaires de contrebande, a des vols de
betail, des coups de feu isoles, des fusees blanches
tirees en' territoire bulgare, a des bergers faisant
pmtre leurs troupeaux en territoire grec, sont si
nombreux qu'ils donnent au livre son ton predominant.
Je ne puis cependant m'abstenir cl'en citer deux
ou trois, tres simples.· L'un figur.ea la page 32 du
Livre.blanc etje le cite pOUf appuyer ma these:
le ,1er mars 1946, une patr<;>ttille helIenique se
trouve aux prlSes avec des contrebandiers.venant
de Bulgarie; l'un des contrebandiers est tue et
trois autres arretes.
. Voici le deuxieme cacs: le 16 mars 1946, Nicolas
Argyrov, un Bulgare quclconque, ayant penetre
en tenitoire helIecique, dans la region dumont
Beles, est-fait prisonnier par des gardes-frontieres
helIeniques. C'est tout.
.
Et le troisieme cas: le 10 avril1946, les soldats
du: poste bulgare No 12 penetrenten territorre
helleniqueet coupent du bois dans la foret voisine
du poste grec. Un point, C'i!St tout. Mais je nepuis m'abstenir de eiter un e~AS typique:

"L~ 28 decembre 1946, trois individuS armes,
habilles en civil et provenant du territoh'e bulgare,
'enleverent dans le village grec K ....56 moutons
qu'ils eonduisirent dans le village bulgare. Koletsovo. . '. . Aux protestations du chef de poste
helIenique ; ... aupres de son collegue du' poste
bulgare . ,.. le chef de poste bulgare repondit qu'il
. .. n'avait rien dckouvert ... toutefois, le 3 janvier
1947 [done sixjours apr~s l'incident], il porta la
connaissanee du ... poste heiIenique que les moutonsavaient .ete retrouves, qu'ils allaientetre rendus et que Ifs voleurs avaient ete •.• misAA...::c_":'"
prisOn."l
.
..
L'insignifiance.
faitS cites par l'accusation
Ihepettiness of the facts quoted is further
prov~d by the fact that the Greek co~plaint could grecque ressortde ce qU'elle n'a pu reIever que les
metrtion only "eleven Greek soldiers ", . ldlled chiffres de "onze spldats grecs . . . tues et treize
a,nd thirteen wOlmded.in. thecoui'se of~ngage­ blesses ~ emirs des engagements contre des francsments, either with guerrilla bands, or with Bul- tireurs ou despatrotiilles bulgares" (page lOldu
garian patrols" (report of the Commission of In- rapport de la Commission d'elfguete) . C'esttout,
vestigation, page 94J. Tkatis all; and even that is et pourtant, est faWl!, .car seIon le Jivre Incidents
untrue, since, accordfugtothe.bqok itself -1nci.. a la frontiert! .helUnique lui-meme, il n'y. a eu
dents ontlte Greek .frontier------o11lyone man was qu'un s.eul tue -.- et non pas par les soldats bulJcilled-and not by Bulgariansoldiers,but by gares, mais par les contrebandiers - et unseul
smugglers•. and one sqldiervouridd (page 35,) . soldat· 'bl~se (page 31 ). Les autres chifIres .se
The remaining losses were those sustained by the rapportent a des. pertes grecques subies an cours
Greeksinthe encounter at CorymbOs, with which, de l'engagement de Corymbos,auquel, bien en(if" course, the Bulgarian' authorities and spldiers tendu, les autorites et'Ies soldats bulgares n'ont eu
had nothing to do. One soldier killed by smug- .rien a voir. Unsoldat tue par descontrebandiers
j glers~nd one soldier wounded; there you have
et un soldat blesse, c'est la tout le bUan desinci,I the whol~ outcome oftheiricidents so loudly pro- dents annonces avec tant de fracas.
.'i claimed.
i' '1 shall add. yet another important point. The
II ~aut ajouter encor.e un point important: les
: Creek
rGovernmenfs
allegatioIlS,
reported
in
the
allegations.'
du Gouvemement greerapportees
,
"t'"
,

a

des

c:

1;Rettll3slated from the original French; .quotedbr tht:
'
.

sP: "keY.

1 Ci~tions

du texte fran~is original.

I1J7

a

book Incidents on the Greek frontier, are r..erelyl· dans '. 1j;"',fJidents la frontiere hellenique
allegations an.d do not constitute proof. Accord" lie SC'
.. '.its allegations et ne constituent pas
ingly, any ineident which has not been invesn- J des po_uves. 11 convient donc d'6liminer puregated by the Commission should simply be disre-·~J.e-nt et siruplement tous les incidents qui n'ont
gard~d.
pas fait l'objet d'une enqu@te de la part de la
Commission.
If ~ll the incidents quoted which bear no politSi 1'0n eliniine tous les cas cites qui sont deical complexion, and all the cases not investigated pourvus de caractere politique et tous les· Cas sur
by the Commission, are eliminated, there will be lesquels la Commission n'a pas enqu@te, il restera
V<f:ry little left; and that little, according to the ties peu de chose, et ce peu de chose s'est ptoduit,
Greek Government's a8S~rtions, occurred, on a se10n les assertions du GOlLlvemement grec, sur
frontier 500 kilometl'eslong and in the course of .une frontiere ·longuede 500 kilometres et ., en
a whole year. We might rejoice at that, for the l'espace de toute une annee. On'devrait @tre cr>ncivil war which has tom Greece for so long might tent de cela, car la guerre civile qui dechire depuis
have given rise to far more serious incidents, were longtemps la Grece pourrait donner lieu a des
not the good will of her neighbours beyond all incidents bien autrement serieux si la bonne
question.
.
volonte des voisins de cette demiere n'etait pas
au-dessus de toutc epreuve.
All the above forces one to this conclusion: We
Tout ce qui vient d'etre dit impose une conclushould have the courage to say frankly that the sion: il faut avoir le courage de dire franchement
incidents imputed to Bulgaria are not serious and que les incidents imputes a la Bulgarie sonf dehave no political significance; that in most cases pourvus de gravite et de signification politique,
no evidence has been offered in support; and que, qans Ia'plupart des cas, aucune preuve n'a
therefore that all the· charges made in this cate- ete produite a leur appui, et que, par conse'
gory should be termed unfounded.
quent, tous les chefs d'accusation de cette sorte
doivent etre declares non fondes.
I would therefore ask the Security Council to
Nous prionsdonc le Conseil de securite d'exagive separate consideration to each of· the inci- miner separement chacun des
contenus dans
<:lents contained in the White Book, and to declare le Livre blanc et de dedarer la Bulgarle non couBulgaria innocent whenever it finds that evidence pable toutes les fois que sera constate un manque
is lacking or that the incid~nts mentioned aFe non- de preuves, ou l'absence de caractere politique
political in character.
.
des incidents cites.
Although they seem to be purely theoretical,
Ct;s points, d'apparence purement theorique,
these are really very weighty'points. I think that sont en realit~ d,une gravite considerable; Je crois
this was eloquently brought out by the represeT- qu'ils ont ete eloquemment releves par le repre:tative of France in one of his remarkS 011 the sentant de .la France dans l'une de ses remarques
chapter of the report with which we are con- relatives au chapitre du rapport qui nous interesse.
cerned. The.Commission of Investigation also La Commission d,enquete s'est d'ailleurs aper~ue
realized that the incidents cited have no ~oliticaI du fait que les incidents cites sont sans caractere
bearing and are neither on a large scale nor of a politiqu~et n,ont nj envergure ni gravite, et c'est
serious character; and that is why the CoIlUtlis&ion pour cette raison. qu'insensiblement elle a deplac6
imperc::ep~bly shifted the question on to :-1j:fferent la question, la faisant passer sur un autre plan;
ground and passed overthe real. incidents;
quant aux incidents proprement dits, la Commis,
sion les a laissesde c8te.
En quoi consiste la question de l'a.ide auxpartiWhat does the matter of assistance to guenillas
·.,amount to? The Commission of Investigation has, sanS? La Commission d'enquete a, a juste titre,
quite rightly, tried Jo discover, whether Bulgaria 'cherche asavoir si la Bulgarie a soutenu des partisupported Greek guerrillas. 'In order to be able sans grecs et, pout reponclrea cette qu~tion, eUe
. to answer this question, the Commission has 'a cherche, dans le volumineux materic::l d'infor~J1unted through the 'great mass of material col- mation recueilli sur place, les reponses $UX points
lected on the spot for. the. answers to tliefollowing suivants: . '
<tue~tions:
.
Y a-t-il eu, en Bulgarie~ des camps utilises
Were there camps in Bulgaria which were used
:as field hospitals, munitieu.· dumps and military comme postes de, secouTs de campagne, comme
dep8ts de munitions et comme lieux d'entrainetraining centres?
ment militaire?
La Bulgarie a':'t-elle fourni aux partisans armes
. 'Did Bulgaria provid~arms and munitions for
the guer:rillas?
.'
et munitions?
. .Did she send detachments of guerrillas into
A-t-elleenvoye des detachements de partisans
en G:rece?
·Greece?
A-t-elle hospitalise des partisans en Bulgarie?
Did she give hospital tr~at:rJ'enf to guerrillas in
Bulgaria?
, I should like to make a few remarks on the subPour ce _qui est des camps d'instruction, je
ject of training. We need not dwell on this~Qunt . voudrais faire que1ques observations. Nous n,avons
ofthe accusation, for there is no proof to c6rtobo- pas anous arreter sur ce chef d'accusation, car il
fate it~ The Commissionitselfdoes n.ot take it into n'existe aucune preuve P!Juvant le confirmer. La
account. To maintain military training camps is CommissioneUe-meme n'en fait,aucun cas. Pour-

cas

t'ti--_._..

1148

not, howew::r, something which could be concealed. T~usands of men would have passed
through them, and a large number would always
remain to testify to their existence.
The Commission admits that it has not collected enough evidence about the arming and
equipping of guerrillas (page 171 of the report of
the Commission of Investigation.). This is a point
which must be emphasized. But the Commission
should have been more explicit and should have
said-simply thatthe Greek complaint on this score
was illt.founded. The Commission would not have
used this vague expression if· it had not based itself on depositions such as that of Simeon Velikostoyanov, which appears only in the White Book
since he was not interrogated by the Commission
itself. Such evidence is null and void, as I think
I have shown above, particularly so if we consider
that we ar,~ concerned here with hearsay evidence, since the witness reported what his Mend
R~,dekvvapparentlyhad told him. It should also
he added that the report gives an entirely wrong
quotation in this connexioIi (page 39).· But I do
not want to dwell· on this.
On page 170, the report accuses us of helping
partisans by facilitating their entry in~o Bulgarian
territory, by giving them shelter and by hmlpitalizing their wounded. Bulgaria has never denied that
she has, from time to time, given shelter to peQple
who sought refuge across the frontier from persecution by the Greek authorities and right-wing
bands. This is a point which should not have to
be proved, because it is simply admitted. The
people in question were women and children and,
sometimes, guerrillas. We have always thought
that all these· people had a right to ~k us for the
right of sanctuary; that was, in fact, th~ir right
and our duty.
Although the Greek Government is in the habit
of calling the people in question "bandits", they
were in fact political· offenders (for we coIisider
that what is going on in Greece is civil war). The
young people of both sexes who have taken to the
mountains. were not· risking i:heir lives to rob
p~ers-by,but to serve an ideal which they consider sacred~ The Greek democratic army consists
of tens ofthousands offighters ;it has its own administration and grading of ranks, it fights as a
regular army and has extensive me~ of communicationandlarge areas under its control. But I
do not think there is any need technically to describe the situation in Greece as a state of civil
war. It is enough to admit that the persons seeking refuge on our territory were engaged in political activities. I feel that this point cannot be seri~
ously questioned. . ....
.
Our frontier was often stormed by strange
groups of people, starving and trembling with
cold;~d we are astonished to find ourselves reproached now. with doing something that any
Government inspired by principles of right and
.humanity . would have done· without. hesitation.

tant l'entreoen de camps d'instruction militaire •
n'est pas un fait que l'on puisse dis$imuler. Des
milliers d'hommes seraient passes par ces camps
et it en resterait un assez grand nombre qui pourraient temoigner de leur existence.
La Commis.."\ion avoue ne pas avoir recueilli
assez d'elements d'information en ce qui concerne la fourniture d'armes et d'equipement aux
francs-meum (page 179 du rapport de la Commission d'enquete). C'est la un point qu'on doit
souligner. Mais la Commission aurait dO, etre plus
explicite et dire simplement que l'accusation
grecque sur ce point est mal fondee. La Commission n'aurait pas temoigne d'une telle hesitation
dans l'expression si elle ne s'etait fondee sur des
depositions comme celle de Simeon Velikostoyanov, deposition qui ne figt.U"I.~ que dans le Livre
blanc, puisque ce temoin n'a pas ete interroge par
la Commission elle~meme. Un te1 temoignage est
nul et nonavenu, comme je crois l'avoir demontre
plus haut, d'autant plus si l'onconsidere que nous
avons affaire.ici aun temoignage d~ secondeinaill,
le temoin rapportant lui-meme ce que son ami
Radekov lui aurait dit. Il faut ajouter eucore que
le rapport donne a cet egard (pages H et 42)
une citation tout a fait inexacte. Mais je ne voudrais pas m'arreter la-dessus.
Le rapport de la Commission d'enquete, a la
page 179, nous accuse d'avoir fourni une aide aux
partisans' en facilitant leur entree en terfitoire
bulgare, en leur qonnant asile et en hospitalisant
lew"S blesses. Eh bien, la Bulgarie :l'a jamais conteste que, de temps a autre, elle ait donne asile
awe gens qui, persecutes par les autorites et par
les bandes grecques de droite, ont cherche refuge
au dela de la frontiere. C'cst un point qu'on ne
devrait pas avoir a prouver, parce qu'il est avou~
tout. simpl~ment. Il s'agissait de femmes et cl' enfants et, parfois, de partisans. Nous avons toujours ern que tous ces gens avaientledroit d'exiger
de notre part que leur fo't accorde le droit d'asile;
c'etait la, en verite, leur droit et notredevoir.
Il s'agissait de delinquants politiques, bien que
le Gouvernement grec ait l'habitude de leur appliquer le terme. de "bandits"; car pOUf nous,
c'est bien une guerre civile qui sevit en Grece. Les
jeunes gens, hommes et femmes, qui ont pris le
chemin de la montagnen'ont pas risque leur vie
pour devaliser lis passants;ils l'ontfait pour servir
un ideal qui,pour eux, est sacre. L'armee democratique grecque compte des dizaines de rnilliers
de militants; elle a son <:tdministration e~ sa hierarchie; elle lutte en armee regulicre et tient sous son
contr81e des moyens de communications· et des
espaces considerables. Mais j'e crois qu'il ~'est pas
necessaireque la situation en Grece soit c1assee
techniquement dans la categorie des guerres
'civiles. Il suffit d'admettre que l'activite des personnes ayant cherche refuge sur Ilotre territoire
a ete une activite FJolitique. Et ce point-la, croyonsnous, ne peut serilusement etre contest6.
Notre frontiere a ete souvent prise d'assautpar
des groupesheteroclites, affames et tremblant de
froid; nous s()mmes 6tonnes de nous voir-teptocher aujoutd'hui ce que tout Gouvernement s'inspitant des principes de droit et d'humanite aurait fait sans hesiter. On pourrait citer des

~.........

1149
exemples historiqtles prouvant qu'une activite de
ce genre n'a jamais suscite la moindre reprob~tion .
de la part de l'opinion publique, et je suis tente
de citer surtout l'exemple de la France. Nous au~
rions, bie~ au contraire, ete blames si nollS avions
tourne le dos am:: victimes de la terreur sevissant
en Grece, si nollS avions femuS hermetiquement
nos frontieres.
Les refugies grecs qui se s~'ltpresentes a nos
postes frontieres ont toujours ete envoyes loin de
la frontiere apres avoir ete desarmes.Le decret du
Ministre de l'Interieur, en date du 30 octobre
1946, fixant la maniere dont on devait proceder a
l'egard des partisans grecs qui se presenteraieilt a
notre frontiere, a toujours ete strlctement observe.
Nous n'arrivons pas aconcevoir comment, dans
ces conditions, qui que ce soit puisse nollS reprocher d'avoir danne aux refugiesblesses et aux
malades les soins medicaux que Jeur etat,exigeait. '
Fallait-illes laisser mourir de leurs blessures ou de
leurs maladies?
Nous arri:'vom. main~enant au point principal:
I come now to the main point: the crossings of
the frontier from Bulgaria into qreece. Under .passages de la fro.ltiere de Bulgarie en Grece.Sur
this head, several cases of different types are con- ce chef d'accusation, quelques cas, de caracteres
sidered together in the report. I think it would be differents, sont envisages ensemble dans le rapclearer to consider them in two separate groups. ' port. Nous croyons apporter plus de c1arte en les
separant en deux groupes pour les etudier:
a) Formation de.bandes en Bulgarie. Le Gou~
(a) Training of guerrilla groups in Bulgaria.
The Greek Government has failed to convince vernement grec n'a; pu convaincre la Commission
the Commission of the alleged existence of bands de la pretendue existence de bandesformees en
trained in Bulgaria in order to be sent to Greece. Bulgarie pour e:treenvoyees en Grece. Nous
We think this question was settled above, in deal- crayons avoir regJe cette question • plus haut,
ing with military training camps. In any case, it Iorsque nous avons traite des camps d'instruction
should be noted that throughout the whole inves- militaire. Notons, en tout cas, qu'au cours de toute
tigation not a single witness mentioned the exis- I'enquete, pas un seul temoin n'a mentionne
tence of such bands trained in Bulgaria. We l' existence de teIles bandes formees en Bulgarie.
.would therefore ask the Security Council to, give Nous prians donc le Conseil de securite de bien
its opwion on this qUl':stion, and to dec1~\'e the vouloir se prononcer sur cette question et declarer
Greek accusation on this point to be groundless. que I'accusation grecque est, sur ce point, non fonWe stress' this point because the sending into deC1. Nous insistons la-dessus parce que l'envoien
Greece of bands trained in Bulgaria, in whichBul- Grece de bandes formees en Bulgarie, et parmi
garian soldiers and instructors would necessarily lesquelles, forcement, des soldats et, des instruc. have been included, might constitute intervention teurs bulgares auraiept pris place, pourrait'constion our part deserving of censure. The fact that no tuer une intervention blamable de notre part. Le
band was organized in Bulgaria, and that not a fait qu'aucunebande n'a et6 orgamse~ enBulsingle Bulgarian soldier or officer took part in garie, que pas un seul'soIdat ou officier bulgare
Greek domestic strife, rubs out much of the sub- n'a participeaux luttes intestines grecqu,es enleve
stance of the picture which the Greek representa- une bonne partie de ses elements.au tableau brosse
tive drew of,Bulgarian inspiration ~nd assistance. par le representant grec et mettant en cause l'inspiration et l'aide bulgares.
(b) Dispatch of guerrillas to Greece. 1 come to
b) Envoi de francs-tireurs 'en Grece, Iei no't1S
the main accusatIon, to which the Commission abordons l'accusation principale, a laquelle la
practically limited its investigation. Unfortu- Commissiana, presque limite son enquete. 'Mais,
nately, it made the mistake of basing itself in its malheureusement, dIe a eu le tort de se fonder,
report on quite inaccurate evidence, that of Kon- dans son rapport, sur des temoignages tout a fait
stantinos Papadoulis and Simeon Ve1ikostoyanov, errones: ceux de Konstantinos Papadoulis et
which appears only inthe White Book. Who is this Simeon Velikostoyanov qui ne figurentquedans le
Papadoulis? Did he really say, what the White Livre blanc. Qui est cet individu nommePapa~ .
Book attributes to him? Does the summary in the doulis? A-t-iI yraiment dit eeque le Livre blanc
White Book convey everything that the witness lui attribtie?- Et le Livrc :-:anc rapporte-t-il, dans
said? What are the sources of information of the son resume tout ce que le temoin a' dit? QuelleS
witness? Did he see with IUs own eyes, or did he sont lessources cPinformation du temoin? A-t-ilvu
merely hear SOJ;Jleone say, that three or four hun- lui-meme, ou a-t-il simplement entendu dire, que
dred guerrillas wereexpected? (report of the Com- trois cents a quatre cents bandits etaient attendus
misoion of Investigation, page 40) . Ail these ques- (page 43 du rappott de la Commissiop. d'en~
tions, remain unanswered., The Commission had quete) ? Toutes ces questions restent sansreponse.
no means ()f checking the truth of these deposi- La Commission,n"a eu aucun moyen de controler
Historical examples could be quoted to prove that
such action has never really been disapproved by
public opinion, and here I feel tempted to point
in particular to the example of France. On the
contrary, we would have been censured if, by
hermetically sealing our frontiers, we had turned
our backs on the Victims of the terror now raging
in Greece.
The Greek refugees who arrived at our frontier
posts were always sent far away from the frontier
after having been disarm~d. The decree of the
Minister of the In.terior, dated 30 October 1946,
prescribing how any Greek guerrillas who presented themselves at our frontier should be treated,
was always strictly observed.
In these circumstances, we cannot see how anybody could reproach us for having given wounded
refugees and sick persons the medical care required by their condition. Should we have allowed
them to die of their wounds or of thei; diseases?

I

b

1150
tionS and it should~ therefore, not consider them
~,e.viden'ce or bas~ its conclusions on them. Nevertheless, testimony of this witness is reproduced
word for word in the report, and a conclusion is
also based on it. These depositions are in reality
only allegations; I think I proved that at the beginning of my speech.

la veracite de ces depositions et, par consequent,
elle n'aurait pas dil les considerer comme des
pre,uves et fonder ses conclusions sur elles. Pourtant, la deposition de ce temoin est consignee noir '
sur blanc dans le rapport, et sur elle egalement est
etablie la conclusion. En fait, ces depositions ne
sont que des allegations; je crois d'ailleurs l'avoir
demontre au debut de mon discours.
And, what kind of' man is the second witness,
Et ce deuxieme individu, nomme VelikostoyaVelikostoyanov? What reliance c~ be placed on nov, qui est-il? Quelle,'foi'peut-on ajouter a ce
his statement to the Greek authorities? In what qu'il a declare aux autorites grecques? En quelles
circurpstances was he inte;frogated? Did he speak circonstanceS son interrogatoire a-t-il en lieu?
freely or after having undergone pressure? We A-t-il parM librement ou sous la contrainte? Nous
n'en savons rien, et la Commission' n'en sait rien
have no idea,andneither has the Commiss,ion.
non plus.
,
n est donc evident que de pareils temoignages
. ObViously: such testimony cannot serve as,a
nepeuvent pas servir de base a des conclusions et
basis for, conclusions and should be dropp~d.
doivent ~tre elimines.
'
The third witness, Konstaritinos Zalatinoudis,
Le troisieme temoin, Konstantinos Zalatinouis only a fOlilteen-year-old child. In order n9t to dis, n'est qu'un enfantde quatorze ans. Je m'abswaste your precious time, I shall not comment on tiens de commenter ses depositions pour ne pas
vous faire perdrevotre temps, qui est precieux.
his depdsitio!lS" .
Du temoin Kroum Ivanov, on rapporte la
, The witness Kroum Ivanov is quoted as saying
that "lle learned ... that many Greek bandits ... phrase ou il declare "qu'il ~l.Vait ~tendu dire que
are being treated in the hospital of Sveti-Brate". de nombreux bandits grecs etaient traites a l'hOpiHere again, we have merely 3. quotation from the tal de Sveti-Brate". Id encore,nous n'avons
Greek White Book (page 133), which gives us qu'une citation du Livre blanc (page 144), qui
only rumours heard by the witness and not his own ne nous rapporte que des bruits recueillis, par le
observations. Moreover, I would assert that this temoin et non. un temoignage direct. D'ailleurs
is a case of perjury. The witness states (report of ici, je I'affirme, Q.ous .avons affaire
un faux
the Commission of Investigation, page 43) that temoin, car il dit (page 47du rapport de la
,he is relating facts which occurred iI). October Commission d'enquete) avoir constate les faits
1946, when a memorial service for Stambuliski rapportes en octobre 1946, "le jour ou une messe
, was being held" Whereas q:fficial documents show funebre etait dite a'la meru.oire du chef agraire
that the date of this leader's death does not cor- Stambouliski", alors qu'il a ete prouve, par des
responq with Ihe'date mentioned and that actu- documents officiels, que la mort dudit chef ne
ally no service was held' on that date.
concorde pas avec la date citee et qu'en fait aucune messe n'aete ceIebree cette date.
Le memetemoin dit. (page 47 du rapport de la,
The same witness states (report'of the Com'mission of Investigation, page 43) that he saw Comnlission d'enquete) qu'il a vu des camions
lorriescarrymg guerrillaS pass by within two transportant des partisans passer a'deux metres de
metres of the prison where he was incarcerated la prison ou· il etait emerme et que; notez,.le bien,
'3.Ild that...,....markthis carefully-'these guerrillas It>.sdits partisansetaient entres en rapport avec
,got in touch with Bulgarian officers and soldiers. des officiers et solElats bulgares. Qu'il ait pu voir
, Well,he may possibly have seen •Greek guerrillas des partisamgrecs passer devant sa prison, passe
"passing in front of his prison. But I wonder how, encore! Mais on se demande comment, etant en
he could have, while still in p~on, found out that prison, il a pu constater que 'les, partisans sont
the ,guerril1asgot in toucn with Bulgarian offi- entres .en rapportavecdes officiers et des soldats
eer$ and soldiers! This man is a shady individual, bUlgares! 'n s'agit d'ailleurs d'un personnage
who was sentenced by Bulgarian courts for a com- louche, condamne par des tribunaux bulgares
lnon law offence.
pour deIit de drojt commun.
, The witnesses I~an Gologanov and Ratko
Les temoins Ivan Gologanov et Ratko PlevnePlevneliev are also quoted, but here again we are liey sont egalement cites, mais, id e~core, nOllS
-dealing, with 'witnesses whose statements appeal' avons, affaire a des temoins dont les depositions ne
only in the White Book (pages 138-139) and who figurent que dans le Livre blanc (pages 144 et
w'·n" ~lot heard by the Commission. The ComniiS- 145 du Livre blanc) et n'ont pasete entendues
siOi! should have ruled out their testimony. May I directement par la Commission. Celle.,.ci aurait dll
add that Colonel Gologanov too has .been sen- les eIiminer. Ajoutons que le colonelQolovanov a
tenced, by the 'Bulgarian.courts.
ete, lui aussi, condamne par l~ tribunaux bulgares.
'
Mehmud Hassan Cakir saw a group of eighteen
Mehmud Hassan Cakir a Vu un groupe de dixto twenty men crossing from Greece into Bulgaria, huit a vingt hommes passer de::Grece en Bulgarie,
but he adds expressly that he "did not see anybody' mais il ajoute expressement qu'il "n'a vu percross fJ(omBulgariain'to Greece".1 ,
. ' sonne passer'de Bulgarie en Grece"l.

a

a

---'-:..'-

'

See, the repoxt of the Commission of Investigation con.
cerning Greek Frontier Incidents to. the, Security Council,
plirt II, chapter I, section B (10) •
i

1 Voir le rapport de la Commission d'enqul!te sur Iesj1J,Ck~~~
dents survenus a la frontiere grecque au Consell de securite,
~.
deuxiem~ partie,chapitre 1, s~tion B, paragraphe 10._...........

ps

1151

Le lieutenant Mat~alos, lui, n'a pas vu la bandetraverser la frontiere, mais ses hommes lui ont
raconte qu'its l'avaient vue alors qu'elle entrait en
Bulgarie1 •
Le temoin Alimoudis declare qu'il n'a pas vu'
The witness Alimoudis said that he had not
seen the band crossing the frontier, although he la bande traverser la frontiere, bien qu'll l'ait vuese diriger vers celle-ci1 •
saw it heading in that direction.1
Le temoin Voitsis Hallos a fait une deposition
The witness Voitsis Balios made confused depo'
,
sitions. 1
confuse1 •
Les contradictions sont cOnStatees du reste par
The contradictions are obvious in the report itself. To sunimarize, the entire accusation is based le rapport lui-meme. En resume, toute l'accusaon the' depositions of a doZen witnesses. Ofthese; tiOD s'appuie sur les depositions d'une douzaine de'
" one is a boy of 14; one is ,an anonymous person, temoins - dont un gar~on de t 4 ans, un temom., '
that is to say, a witness who refused to give his anonyme, c'est-a-dire un temoin qui a refuse; atreal name to the Commission; one is a perjurer; vant la Commission, de dire son vrai nOIJl, un faux
and two witnesses noted the direction taken by a teJ;nom' et deux personnes qui n'ont vu qlie la
band but did not see it cross the frontier. To these direction prise par une ba~de sans avoir vu celle-ci
must be added two depositions included in the traverser la frontiere - depositions auxquelles
White Book which were not corroborated before s'ajoutent deux', temoignages pris dans le Livre'
the Commission. That is the sum total of it all, blanc et qui n'ont pas ete confirmes devant la
and there is nothing else in the documents. It is Commission. Tout se reduit acela. I1 n'y a rien de,
the testimony of persons of questionable veracity. plus dans les. documents. L'on peut dire de ces
temoignages qu'ils emanent de gens dont la v~racite pourrait etre mise en doute.
'.
But I feel we must not go astray arriong the in- '
Mais je crois qu'ilne faut pas s'egarer dans la.
numerable witnesses quoted; we must not lose the foule des temoins cites etrisquer de perdre de vueunderlying idea. What is the real poir." at issu~? l'idee qirectrice. De quoi s'agit-il au juste? Le
The Greek Government undertook to prove that Gouvemement grec a assume la tache de prouver
Bulgaria had inspired and fomented the civil war que la Bulgarie a inspire et fomente la guerre',
goiIlg on in Greece. It has quickly to be admitted civile e..ostant en Grece. On est vite force de ret~at this is not the case for, if my Government had
connaitre qu'il n'en est rien, car si notre Gouintended to help the, Greek guerrilla movement, vernement avait eu l'intention d'aider le mouvethat intention would undoubtedly have mani.: ment des' partisans grecs, cette attitude Se serait
fested itself in many forms of serious action which indubitablement .traduite par des actions graves, ,
it would have been very easy to prove.
et multiples qu'il eut ete tres aise de prouver.
This means that there is a striking disproportion
C'est dire qu'il existe une disproportion frapbetween the accusation and the facts which are pante entre l'accusation meme et'les faitsqu'on.
being brought forward to,prove it. Te encourage se propose d'etablir pour la justifier. Pour fo-,
civil war in Greece would mea.Tl large financial menter la guerre civile en Grece, nous eussions da
contributions, issuing pamphlets and tnlcts, or- aider le mouvemert par d'importantes contribuganizingand training bands-in which there tions en argent, par l'etablissement de brochures,
would be traces of Bulgarian soldiers or instruc- et de tracts, par l'organisation et l'instruction de
tors; it would mean setting up Greco-Bulgarian bandes Oll l'OIl aurait pu trouver trace de milisocieties operating on our territory and canalizing tants ou d'instructeurs bulgares; nous'eussions da
discontent, deluging the Greek Government with ereer des associationsgreco-bulgares travaillant
resolutions 'and telegrams of protest; and main- sur notre territoire et canalisant les mecontentetaining a fierce press campaign against the Greek ments, faire pleuvoir sur la tete du Gouvernement
Government's policy. All this would have consti- grec une pluie de r.esolutions et de teIegrammes
tuted a body of facts which could have been de protestations, soutenir une campagne de presse
brought out and proven before the Commission achamee contre la politique du Gouvemement
without" any trouble. Instead {)f this,. the Greek grec ... 'Tout ce1a eut constitue lIn ensemble de
representative acquainted' the Commission with faits concrets qu'on pourrait faire ressortir et eta"petty occurrences" described in the White Book, blir devant la Commission sans aucun effort. Au
, and with isolated cases of frontier crossings. These, lieu de cela, le representant grec a saisi la Comas I have already said, are things which might mission de "faits divers" relates dans. le Livre
happen between neighbours living on the best of blanc et de cas isoles ou la frontiere a ete francllle;
terms. The Council is not called upon to decide ce sont la, comme nous l'avons deja cijt, des choses
whe~er, on such and such a date, a Mr. Man- qui pourraient se passer entre voisins vivant dans
tzourakis and his few companions crossed the les meilleurs termes. On ne demande pas au ConGreco.,B'ulgarian frontier; the Council is asked to seil de deCider si a telle ou telle date un sieur
say whether Bulgaria inspired and fomented the Mantzourakis et ses quelques compagnons ont
Greek disturbances or bears part of the responsi- passe la fron:";ere greco-bulgare; on lui d('~mande
bility for them. Once the accusation le'/elled de dire si la Bulgarie a inspire et fomente .~es
against us of inaintaining military training camps troubles grecs, OU si elle y a une part de responsaand arming guerrillas has been disproved, what bilite .. ; Dne fois tombee l'accus,ation qui a ete
Lieutenant Marsalos did not.see the band croS!S
the frontier but his men told him that they had
seen it ~tering Bulgaria.1

a

-,-See the report of the Commission of Investigation con·
I

cerning G.reek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council,
part 11, chapfer I, section B (10).

........

I

I Voir le rapport de la Commission d'e\lqu~te sur les incl·'
dents survenus 11 la frontiere grel:que au Conseil de securite.
chapitre I, section B, paragrap~e 10•

1152

-

remains-whether proved or not-,is so insig-I portce contre nous d'avoir entretenu des camps
nificant as to be a striking ·q.emonstratiori of the d'instruction nillitaire, et al"mc les partisans, les
disproportion- we have' already' pointed out. We faits qui restent, prouves ou non, sont si insignistartedwith theserious accusation of having taken fiants qu'ils marquent de fa~on eclatante1a dispro. part in fx:ontierincidentsandhaving inspired and portion que nous avons deja signalee; car, parns
fomented the disturbances in Greece; we now de la grave accusation d'avoir participe aux incihave to deal only with the much nlildercharge of dents de frontiere et d'avoir inspire et fomente les
having hospitalized guerrillas and fac~tatedtheir troubles en Gre!=e, nous n'avons plus maintenant
. crossing of the frontier; and there are only iso- a considerer qu'une accp54-tion beaucoup plus
lated, unimportant or ill-founded facts to support benigne, ceIle d'avoir hospitalise des partisans et
this charge. I do not think the Security Council favorise leurpassage; or. a l'appui de cette accu"
should be. bothered with such unimportant sation, on ne trouve que des laitsisoles, sansimmatterti..
. portance et mal etabliS. On ne devrait pas, je
crois, deranger le Conseil de securitepour des faits
aussi insignifiants.
,I now come to the conclusions of the report of
J'arrive aux conclusions.
the •Commission,.of, Investigation.
The report concludes (page 167) that ''YugoLe rapport de la Commission d'enquete (page
_slavia, and to a lesser extent, Albania and Bul- 175) conclut que "la Yougoslavie, et, dans une
garia, have supported the guerrilla warfare in moindremesure, l'Albanie e.t la Bulgarie, ont
Greece". The expression, "to a lesser extent"· is soutenu la guerilla de Grece". L'expression"dans
very ,elastic;' and ,it is difficult to ,understand une moindre mesure" est tres elastique, et 1'0n
whether the degree of guilt imputed to Bulgaria arrive difficilement a comprendre si le degre de la
sufficiently justifies recomnlendationssuch as culpabilite iIn;putee a la Bulgarie est suffisant pour
thc>sesuggested by the Commission to the Secu- motiver le recours a des recommandations teIles .
nty CpunciL
que cellci qu'a suggerees la Co~sion au Conseil de securite.
What the Commission has fuially decided, toac~
Les result?.ts de sonenquete retenuspar la
cept, as.' COlIDts proven, by" its investigation is so Commission comme chefsd'accusation etabliS
scanty compared with the initial' allegations that sont si' maigres, par comparaison, avec le point de
it should siInPly be said that Bulgaria has done depart, qu'on devrait tout simplement dire que la
nqtblng reprehensible and has not defaulted in her ~ulgarie n'arien fait de repre4ensible, etqu'elle
.
obligations under international law.
n'a point manqueaux obligations imposees par le'
droit mternational.
.'
.
n nous semble inutile de nollS arretedongueI think. there is little ponit in dwellingatlength
on the. Macedonian' question, which has a long ment sur la question macedonienl1e, question qui
history., Dis~ussion of this question is not in order a une longue histoire. EIle n'est pas, actueIlement '.
now, for my Government said all it had to say on a l'ordre du jour, cartoutce que notreGouverne'the subject at the Peace Conference in Paris, ment avait a dire, ill'a dit lors de la Conference
where it 'deClared repeatedly thatithad no aggres.. qe la Paix a Paris, en affiI"Inant constammentqu'.il
,'sive'designs ,against Greece. ,Why, therefore, go n'entretenait point de visees,agressivesa,l'egard
into, the details, ofthe Macedonian problem, and de la,Grece,Pourqu()i, dansces conditions,entrer
\\Thy force us to make statements on subjectswhich dans le detail de la question mac~dOJ:penne et.
nousJorcer.a fairc;des declarations sur des points
.have no bearing on the present discussion?
quin'ont .aucun rapport ave.c la discussion presente?
'Nevertheless, the ,Commission decided to deal
La Cornniission a toutefois accepte de -s'intewith this questipu an~, finding that one of its :tesser ~ cette question,y voyant un aspect qui
aspectslnight have,affected the problem referred auraitpu touche:r: auprobleme qui lui est soumis;
toit, was~oust()regard that particular aspect eIle a voulu.notamment y trouver un motif a la
asa motive for'our'aIleged.interference in Greek preten<;lueimmixtion dans les affaires de la Grece.
affairs. But it.is not~ough to find a motive; the Mais, trouverunmotif, cela ne suffit pas: il faut
alleg~tionsmust ~eproved. It ~ therefore not prouver les faits allegues." Il 'ne ~uffit donc point
.er:~ughtolook fqr Bulgarian aspirations to Greek de chercherchez nous des aspirations a la MaceMacedonia 4Iorder,toprove that there has been doinegrecque pour rendre concrete une iIn.mPF---Which. is theoretic~y ,plausible--interference ·tion theoriquement plausible de notre part. L'iinby us. What is important is that there was no such portant, c'estque cetteimmixtion n'ait paseu
interference. The Greek representative s,ubniitted lieu. Le representant grec apresente a la Commisto the Comtnission ~veraJ extracts from newspa- sion quelques extraits de joumaux contenant des
pers ,containing" statemeJJ.ts made by 'prominent aeclarations faites par des personn~tes bulgares.'
Bulgarians. When thesestatements are examined, En les examinant, on constate qu'elles ont ete
it will he, fpund -that· they were made at a time faites a une, periode OU les questions, territoriales
wlierrlemtorialquest.ions were being actively dis- etaient vivement disc!1tees dans lesjournaux du
the world PreSs in view of the imminent mondeentier en vue de la conclusion imminentc
cussed in
r. ',:' " , :
cpnclusion of the peace treaties.
des traites de paix.
With regard to' the statements made in August
Quant aux declara.tiolls faites enaout 1945 pat
1945 by:,Mr. George Dimitrov (who held no offi- M. Geprges Dirilitrov :..::...: qui, a cette epoqu~
1

..

ps

1153

cial position at that time), and with regard to the ! Jl'Occupaitaucun poste offlcie1 - et a l'article
article which appeared nn 16 November 1946 in.·.. 1 paru le. t6 novembre 1946 dans le journal Rabot,..
the newspaper Rabotnichesko DeloJ we would nitchesko Delo~ nous relI:'arquons que tout cela ne
point out that all of these refer only to the rela- se rapporte qu'aux relations entre la Yougoslavie
tions between Yugoslavia and Bulgaria. The et la Bulgar:ie.-4.a-deelar.ati<:m suivant laquelle la
statement that the relations of fraternity and unity fraternite et l'unite de la Bulgarie et de la Fedebetween Bti:garia and the Yugoslav Federation ration yougoslave realiseront la liberation natiowill bring about the national liberation of the nale des Macedoniens ne se.rapporte, elle aussi,
Macedonians also refers only to the two countries qu'aux deux pays en cause, la Bulgarie et la, Youconcerned, namely, I!ulgaria and Yugoslavia. goslavie. Les. noms de la Grece et de la MaceThe· names of Greece and of Greek .Macedonia doine ne sontmeme .pas mentionnes. Les· Grecs
are not even mentioned. The Greeks are attempt- cherchent a decouvrir la une allusion qui n'existe
ing to discover here an allusion which does not ex- pas; maisexis~erait-elle qu'on serait en droit de
ist; but, even if it did exist,one would be entitled' se demander si une campagne de presse acharnee
to ask if a fierce press campaign can be carried on peut se faire par allusions. Vne campagne visant
by allusions. A campaign aiming at the dismem- au demembrement de la Grece et tendant a· preberment of Greece and at preparing public opin- parer l'opinion publique .a l'h'"lcorporation proion for the imminent incorporation of Thrace and chaine de la T.hrace et de la Macedoine ala BuIMacedonia in Bulgaria or Yugoslavia would not garie oua la Yougoslaviene sauraifse servir d'alemploy sibylline allusions, but would express itself lusions sibyllines, mais aurait comporte des exin strong, violent and unequivocal terms, provoca- pressions fortes, violentes et nettes, excitant a la.
tive of hatred. If there had been a real campaign, haine. Si une vraie campagne avait eu lieu, elle
it would ha'.-c been evidenced by thousands of se serait manife~tee par des milliers d'articles et
articles and not by one or two statements of minor non par une ou deuxdeclar·ations d'importance
importance. Against the few· newspaper extracts mineure. Aux.quelques.extraits de jow:naux cites
quoted by the otherside, we could point to hun- par la partie adverse, nous pourrions opposer des
dreds of articles published in the Greek Press, centaines d'articles parus dans la presse grecque,
which in their chauvinist outbursts go so far as to ou l'acharnement d'une ideechauvine va jusqu'a
claim Bulgarian territory far beyond the ~ting aspirer a des territoires bulgares s'etendant bien
frontier.
au dela de la frontiere actuelle.
But-and this is an important point-the
Mais,et cela est important, Ies revendications
Bulgarian Government expressed its maximum territoriales que notre Gouvemementa fon:l1ulees
territorial claims at the Peace Conference, and lors de la Conference de la Paix epuisent le stijet,
these claims do not. apply to Greek Macedonia. et. ces revendications ne portent pas sur la MaceThe Greek representative's insinuation that Bul- doine .grecque. L'insinuation faite par le. repregaria and Yugoslavia have concluded a pact sentant grec,sui'lant laquelle la Bulgarie et la
obliging Bulgaria tosuppott Yugoslav claims for Yougoslavie ont ,conclu un pacte obligeant' la
the incorporation of Greek Macedonia in afed- Bulgarie asoutenir les pretentions yougoslav~2 a
erated Macedonian State, in exchange-Jor the l'incorporationde la Macedoine grecque a l'Etat
support which Yugoslavia would give us in ob- . macedonien ,federatif -- en echange du soutien
taining .an outlet on the Aegean Sea, is nothing que nous donnerait la Yougoslcj,-vie pour l'obtenbut a mere insinuation, which canhotbe in the tion d'uD debouche sur la mer Egee -- n'est autre
least substantiated.
.
chose qu'une pure insinuation, qui n'a pu etre
etayee sur la moindre preuve.
Nous insistons done 'pour que le Conseil de seWe therefore insist that the Security Council
acknowledge explicitly the. base1essness of the ac- curite recbnnaisse explicitement le maI,..fonde des
cusations made by Greece that Bulgaria inspired accusations formuleeSpar la Grece contre la Euland fomented. the Greek disturbance. More spe- garie. d' avoir inspire et fomente les troubles grecs,
cifically, we insist that the Security Council ree,.. et, plus precisement,qu'il reco~aisse que la Bulognize that Bulgaria has not giv,en fin,!-ncial assis- garie n'a pas preted'aide pecuniaireaux parti,..
tance to the Greek guerrillas; has notcondueted a sansgrecs, qu'elle n'a pas declenche de campagne
press campaign in favour of' the guerrillas; has de presse en faveur cles partisans, qu'elle n'a pas
made with Yugoslavia no pact providing far the conclu de pade avec la 'Yougoslavieprevoyant
incorporation of Greek Macedonia in Yugosl,avia; l'incorporation de la Macedoine grecque 3. fEtat
has not organized guerrilla bands onher own ter~ yougoslave, qu'e1le n'a pas organise sursoliterriritary nor sent such bands. into Greece; has not toire de bancles de francs-tireurs,· ni envoye de
given guerrillas military training in camps nor pareilles b~mdes en Grece, qu'elle n'a.pas donne
provided them with arms; and, finally, that the aux partisans une instruction militaiJ;e dans· des
few frontier crossings mentioned bycetrtain unre- campsappropries et ne leur a pas foufni d'armes,
liable witnesses ar~ not such as to constitute a enfinque les quelques passages de frontiere rnentionnes par quelques temoins sujets a ··caution ne
breach of internatkinallaw.
sont pas de nature 'a constituer uneinfraction aux
regles internationales.
Comment, etant donne cela, determiner la
In view of these fa.cts, how can the amount of
responsibility which the Commission imputes to mesure de responsabilite que la Commission noUll
us be determined? There is.only one way, and that impute? Il n'est qu'unseul moyen, c'est de nous
. is that we should be told how much respoIlSibility remdre compte du degrc de responsabilite que la
C

b

.

·_m.'.....

•

,

1154
.

· the .Commission agrees should be imputable.to
· the interriat situation in Greece. The causal link
bet,ween t.,iiis· situation and the existing disturbances is) in principle, ad.IDitted by the Commission; we have only to establish its extent. The
Commission finds that "a general condition of unrest" prevails :ill over Greece. 1 In proof of this,
theoCommission cites figures: 922 encounters, according to one of two tables submitted to the
Commission, and 1,338 encounters according to
, the second. That makes a total of 2,260 encounters b~iween the guerrillas and government troops.
That 'is the,situation. The Commission does not
dare to call it civil war, but it has failed to find
a word which. would better describe this unrest.
It is useless) however, to dwell on words. Unrest)
disturbances, civil war-these words matter
· little. The fact is that for years Greece has had'
nothing but encounters, explosions, offensives and
counter-offtnsives and that" as some of the Com-,
missiol}'s teams were able tq see for themselves,
means of communication are uncertain, the courts
are cluttered up with political dossiers, jails are
packed. with prisoncrrs and life is obstructed and
disturbed.
.Only.the cities of Athens' and Salonika seem to
be able to breathe freely. But, as we read in a
memorandum submitted to the Commission, an
Greece is at present divided into tWo parts, the
· tourist part and the terrorist part. Behind the deceptive appearance of Athens and Salqnika, there
are vast areas where fear reigns ,and where
wretched people are incarcerated, deported, imprisoned, sentenced and executed for the slightest
ntisdemeanour.
What is the reason for this unrest? We do not
have to go far to find it; the report indicates it
dearly. I shall quote:
"... the Commission is of the opinion that the
discrimiIlation
persecution to which minorities and political opposition groups were subjected by the Greek Government in the atmosphere of bitterness and reprisal following the civil
war of 194;1-1945,as weU as communist propa,ganda, had, caused several thousand persons to
·flee to the mountains or take refuge on the soil of
Greece's three northern neighbours, where they
formed groups actively hostile to the Greek re·gime".2

and

'And the report ,adds, immediately afterwards:
". . . the existence of disturbed conditions in
Greece in no way relieves the three northern neighbours of their duty under international law to
prevent and' Suppress subversive activity on their
territory aimed against another Government ...".
'That is the decisive question : it is always the
problem of cause and eff~ct which arises. Two
friends take leave of one another at a station. One
says to the other, "Take train A and not train B".
The friend follows this advice; five minutes later
1 See '. the report· of the Commission of Investigation coli·
eemingGreek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council,
.
,
part Ill, chapter 1. section D. 10 (c).
, 21bid., sectionD, 10 (i) •

,

Qommission admet etre imputable a la situation
interieure en Grece. La causalite entre ~ette situation et les troubles existants est admise en principe par la Commission, et nous n'avons qu'a en
mesurer l'etendue. La Co1lUl1issjon constate qu'il
regne dans toutela Grece "un malaisegeneraI1 " .
Pour nous en convaincre, elle cite des chiffres:
92~ rencontres,' d'apres l'un des deux tableaux
presentes a la Commission, 1.338 rencontres
d'apres l'autre. Cela fait en tout 2.260 rencontres
entre-Ies partisans et les troupes gouvernementales.
Voila qui caracterise la situation. La Commission n'ose appeller cela une guerre civile, mais elle
n'a pu trouver de mot qui eut mieux qualifie ce
malaise. D'ailleurs, il est inutile de nous arreter
sur les mots: malaise, troubles, guerre civile, peu
importe, le fait est que, depuiS des annees, il n'y
a en Grece que rencontres, explosions, offen.L
sives, contre-offensives, et que,' comme certaines equipes de la Commission ont eu l'occasion de le constater par eUes-memes, les voies de
communicationsont incertaines, les tribunatix
'sont encombres de dossiers politiques, les prisons
sont bondees de prisonniers, la vie est entravee et
troubIee.
Les villes d'Athenes et de Salonique seules ont
l'apparence de respirer librement.Mais, comme
, nous le lisons dans un memorandum adresse a la
Commission, toute la Grece est divisee actuell,ement en deux parties: celle du tourisme et ceUe
du terrorisme. Derriere les apparences trompeuses
qu'offrent Athenes et Salonique, il y a de vastes
espaces ou lapeur regne et ou les pauvres gens
sont incarceres, deportes, mis en prison, condamnes et executes pour la moindre faute.
, QueUe est la cause de ce malaise? Il ne faut pas
la chercher loin; le rapport nous l'indique clairement; je cite:
"La Co~sionest d'avis qu'en raison du
traitement discriminatoire et des persecutions
auxquelles furent soumis les minorites et les
groupements politiques d'opposition par le Gouvernement grec; dans l'atmosphere derancreur et"
de represailles qui a suivi la guerre civile'de 19441945, ainsi qu'en raist)ll de la propagande communiste, plusieurs milliers de personnes ont fui
dansJes 1ll0ntagnes ou se sont refugiees sur le ter.ritoire des trois' pays limitrophes du nord de la
Grece, ou ils ont forme des gr~upes activement
hostiles au regime grec."2
Et le rapport ajoute immCdiatement:
"
". . . L'existenc'e d'une situation troubIee en
Grece ne dispense nullement les tro~ pays limi~
trophes du Nord de l'obli.gation que leur impose
le droit international d'empecher ou de reprimer,
stir leur territoire, touteactivite subversive dirigee
contreun autre Gouvernement ..."
Le point deciSif est justement la: c'est toujours
, le probleme de la causalite qui se pose. Deux amis
se separent a la gare; l'un !lit a l'autre: "Prends'
le train A et non pas le train B." L'~ suit le
conseil. Cinq minutes plus tard, il y a une cawSVoir le rapport de la Commission d'enquete' sill:' Ies
incidents a 'la frontier~. grecque au Conseil de securite.
troisil:me partie, cbapitre 1. section D. paragraphe 10 c) •
slbid., section D. paragraphe 10,).
, ......

1155
there is an accident and the friend is, killed.' One& tropheet l'ami est mort. On 'se demande quelle
may well wonder what causes the death. If ~he est la cause de cette mo.rt. Si le premier ne lui
first- man had not advised, his friend to take that avait pas conseille de prendre ce train, l'amni n'autrain, he would not have been a victim of the acci- rait pas ete victimede la catastrophe; si le chef
dent. If the station-master had not made a mis- degare ne s'etait pas trompe, la catastrophe ne se
take, the accident would not have occurred. serait pasproduite. AIors, ou est la cause? Les
Where then does the cause lie? Philosophers, logi- philosophes, les logiciens et les juristes disent qu'il
cians and jurists would tell us to look for the so- faut chercher ce que l'on appelle une cause efficalled efficient cause. The~eare causes every-' ciente. Car des causes, il yen a partout; chaque
where; every event, every fact of nature is the evenement, chaque fait dans la nature, est. cause
result of thousands of conditions. But the efficient par des milliers de conditio~; mais il faut rechercher la cause efficiente.
cause must be sought.
Quelle,est donc la mesure de notre responsa'"
What,Jhen, is the Hegree of our responsibilitY,
and what is the efficient cause of the disturb~mces bilite et quelleest la cause efficiente des troubles
observed in Greece? Once the alleged chargt~ of constates en Grece? Vne fois que les pretendues
incitement are dropped, and it is shown that there. .accusations d'inspiratioI1 sont' tomMes, et qu'il
was no camp where guerrillas were trained, no n'y a paseu de camp ou auraient ete instruits des
provision of arms and munitions, no subven~ive partisans,. et qu'il n'ya pas eu de fourniture
press propaganda, no financial aid, that no Bul- d'armes et de munitions, qu'il n'existepoint de
garian soldiers or officers were ever found along propagande de presse subversive, ql;l'il n'y a pas
with the guerrillas, that not a single case has even eu d'aidepecuniaire,et qu'on- n'a jamais ren.,.
been mentioned of letters being exchanged be- coJ;ttre de sl?ldats et' d'officiers btilgares partici, tween Bulgarian elements and the ,Greek demo- pant a la guerilla, qu'iln'a meme pas etefait
cratic army, and that there are no Greco-Bulga- . mention d'un setillien epistolaire entre des milieux
rian so~ieties in Bulgaria, then· there ,is notmng, bulgares et l'armee democratiquegrecque, qu'il
absolutely nothing, left. If we are to speak as his- n'existe point d'associations greco-bulgares en
torians and without bias, it would indeed be rash 'Btilgarie - alors, il ne reste rien, il ne ~este ~bso­
to talk of a State's responsibility, basing our view lument rien; et si on veut pader en historien., en
merely on a few isolated cases of hospitalization homme objectif, il serait vraiment hasarde de
mettre en cause la responsabilite d'Un Etat en ne
reported by a certain Mantzourakis.
se fondant que sur quelques faits isoIes d'hQspi. talisation rapportes par un certain Mantzourakis.
In c.oncl:usion, I should like to add this observaPour terminer ce chapitre, je me permettrai
tion. It will soon be three years since the Balkans d'ajouter encore ceci: depuis la liberation des
were liberated. For the whole of this three-year Balkans, trois ans se seront bientot ecoules; sur
period, our accusers have been able to produce to toute .cette periode d~ temps, nos accusateurs ne
the Commission only a few witnesses recounting sont arrives ,a presenter a la Commission que
one or two stories of frontier crossings. I repeat quelques temoins racontant une ou deux· histhat it is not our business here to decide 'Whether toires de passage de frontiere. Il ne s'agit pas id, je
these few frontier crossings took place; the ques- le repete, de resoudre la question de .'Savoir si ces
tion is whether these crossings can justify the, quelques passages de frontihe ont eu lieu; il s'agit
charges made against us of having disturbed the de dire s'ils peuvent justifier l'accus,ation formtilee
·peace. Anyone wishing tD be objective and to look contre nous d'avoirtrouble lapaix. Si l'on veut
at things in historical perspective must admit that etre objectif et reg;irder les choses dans la perspecour conduct was correct and even irreproachable. tivede l'histoire, on est oblige d'admettre que
I would add that som~ frontier crossings- notre conduite fut correcte, et meme irreprothough we repudiate thel~~ very emphatically- chable. J'ajoute que les quelques passages de
could be held to be the inevitable consequences of frontiere ,- que nous contestons, d'ailleurs, avee
, .the disturbed situation in Greece. Anyone will uu; toute la vigueur possible _. pourraient etre taxes
. derstand that, even if a few incidents, did occur, de consequence inevitable des troubles existant en
they can easily be explained as the repercussion Grece. Tout le monde· peut £Omprendre que,
, of engagements which took place in Greece and meme si quelques incidents se sont produits, ils
ac ~ue to Greece~s inal>ility to guard her frontiers sont facilement explicables comme etant la reproperly, as the Commission hasalso remarked.
percussion des combats qui ont lieu en Grece et
comme restiltant dufait que la Grece n'est pas en
etat de bien garder ses' frontieres - ce que la
Commission a egalement pu constater.
The report suffers from a marked uncertainty;
Le rapport souffre d'une incertitude marquee;
fivecountrit;s did not agree that the neighbouring cinq pays n'ont pas accepte que les pays Hmicountries should be declared, responsible. True, trophes de la Grece fussent declares responsables;
they all gave different reasons, but five couI).tries chacun d'eux pour d~ motifs difi'erents, 'certes,
did not want the neighbouring States to be de- mais, je le repete, cinq pays n'ont pas vou1,' l.ue
clared responsible. We were therefore adjudged les pays liInitroph~s fussent declares respoI:;ables.
responsible only by six representatives. If I may Notre responsabilite n'a done ete affirmee que par
say so, that is a rather meagre restilt, and not at six representants. Permettez-moi de dire que c'est
all impressive. .
la un resultat assez maigre, et qui ~t loin de
s'imposer.

---~--~

ff56
I shall end with a few remarks on the proposals
Je terminerai par quelques remarques sur les
which have been submitted.in the report of the propositions contenues dans le rapport de la ComCoriumssion of Investigation. I think· that the miSsion d'enquete. Je crois que la proposition
proposal which ,appears in paragraph Ais ac- figura1'lt sous la lett.re A1 est acceptable iusqu'a la
ceptabl~up to the sentence beginning: "In the phrase: "A la lun.uere: ..".Cette derniere phrase
light of ..."J. This sentence contains· some dan- enumere des definitions dangereuses. Les Latins
gerous definitions; the Latins say that all denni- disent que toute definition· est dangereuse en soil
tiQ.IlS are dangerous. The 'Council should not tie .Le Conse~ n'a pas a se lier les mains par avance;
itseH down beforehand. The concept of· a threat • la notion de menace a lapaix se trouve definie
to the peace is.defined in the Charter; it need only dans'la Charte; on n'aurait, le cas echeant, qu'a
be applied, when the occasion arises, with due al- I'appliquer,en tenant comptede·l'envergure et
lowance being made for the scope ~d character- des particrilarites du fait qui pourra s'etre produit.
istics of whatever incident may have occurred.
La recommandation formulee sous la lettre Bl
\ Therecommendation formulated in paragraph
B is fully acceptable} I would remind you, how- est en tous poiJ'.ts acceptable. Nous rappelons
ever, .that, during the. investigation and eveIl· be- toutefois qu'au cours de l'enquete,et meme au;,
fore it was held, we declared repeatedly that we paravant, nous avons maintes fois declare que
were quite prepared to give effect. to the Greco- nous etions tout prets a mettre en vigueur l'accord
Bulgarian Agreement which, in practice, we have greco-bulgare que, pratiquement, nOllS nous
sommes toujours efforces d'observer.
tried always to observe.
Mais la ptoposition enoncee sous la lettre· Cl
But theproposal in paragraph C is not acceptable. 1L The sub-commission which it is proposed est inacceptab;e. La petite commission dont on
to. set. up. would encroach on the sovereignty of propose la creation constituerait une atteinte a la
States and, far from alleviating tension, would souverainete des Etats et~ loin d'apaiser la tension,
.increase it. A commission which would have the elle l'accrottrait. Une commission qui aurait le
right to impose.investigations on Governments, to droit d'imposer aux Gouvernements des enquetes,
go .wherever it pleased and to receiv~ reports d'aller part~)Ut oil bon lui semblerait et d~ recevoir
would be an institution placed over the Govetn- des rapports serait une institution placee aUmentsconcerned, the same as any international dessus des Gouvernements interesses, comme le
body which might beset up to control the refugee serait tout organisme international qui serait crc~e
pour contrOler les camps de refugies.
camps.
Nous vous prions de bien vouloir.ne pas aUer
I begyou not to go too far, to confine yourselves
, to r~commendationsA and B. That would be the trop loin et de vous borner aux recommandations
better way, and we would have the great satis,fac- A et B. Ainsi, tout ira mieux et nous aurons la
ti(1) 'of having received a fait judgment from this prafonde satisfaction ,:!'avoir ete bien juges par
ce haut tribunal.
.
.
high tribunal.
.Monsieur le President, la matiere est tres v:>ste;
Mr. President, this is a very big problem, as you
can see from the three' volumes which you have vous 'pouvez vous en rendre compte par les trois
before you, I have tried to be brief, ,!nd, in doing volumes qui sont devant vous. J'ai essaye d'etre
so, I have had to omit a great deal, reserving the bref et, ce faisant, j'ai dfi omettre beaucoupde
right, with your permission, to speak <;>nce again choses, me reservant le droit, le cas echeant, et
avec votr~ permission; d;intervenir encore une fois
if this should be necessary.
si cela etait necessaire.
(

;

The PRESIDENT ( translated frofu Fr~nch): I
thank.the representative.of Bulgaria for his statement.
The next meeting of the Security Council will
be held next Monday, 30 June, in the afternoon.
It will be devoted to the continuation of the discussion of th~ Military Staff Committee~s report.
Other meetings haye already been fixed for Tuesday afternoon and Thursday.

L;. prochaine seance du Comeil de securite
aura lieu lunc1i prochain, 30 juin, dans I'apresmidi; Ellesera consacree ala suite de la discussion
du rapport du Comite d'etat-major. D'autres
seances sont des maintenant prevues pour mardi
apres-midi et jeudi.

The meeting rose at 6p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 heures.

1 See the report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council,
part IV, chapter 1.

1 Voir le rapport de la Commission d'enqu~te sur les
incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque au Conseil de
securite, quatrieme partie. chapitre premie~'.

(

>.

Le· PRESIDENT: Je remercie le representant de
la Bulgarie de so~ expose.

;S!:<~'~~~S{)F.~NATIONS P(J]JUCATION~
·:lfJEPOSl1'AlBESDES PUBLICATIONS DESNA.TIONSUNIE~
T:.'o;:.

,

.'0'

"

':"'"

- t,

'~

' .

"

'~GENi~~:"ARGENrlNE' .' DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
.Edits#alSudamericana"
REPUBLIQUE
~ '. s. ·:·A: :
.~ .~~~
DOMINICAINE
Calle 4lsina500'
.. Buenos Aires.

Libreria Dominicana
""CalleMercedes No. 49
656
·,AUSTR.AiIA... AUSTlULIE .' , Apartado
Ciudad Trujillo
'lI: A~.Goddara'~~.I~td.·- ~~:',,2~5aGeorge,Street
.
;ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
" :Sydney:
'
" , M u i i o z Hermaaos y ·Cia.

(BEL~ltJM.iiELGIQtiE

. ..": .. '~::rri: f~.~:tubre703

~iI~~e:~d~Per8~

.. ;' j- ~'. FINL.AN~FINLANDE
~ "
Akateemi:cJ.en Kirjakauppa
2, Keskauaka~ .
.
Helsinki

;4ge!lc~et::Messagedesde.J1',· ;G.q~yaquil.

.
.

:..-

-

L;

.

"BruXelles .' .'

BOLIVIA~BOLIJ7IE

- . ~·Libr~;iaCien.tifica.y
FRANCE--'FlUNCE
. Literana
. , ' EditioDs.A..Pedone
Avenida16 de l¥o; =16
13, .r1J:eSouftlot
CaEJiJI:2972" .'
' P ! l l ' i s V~
, . L~~:~>_~·;=-==~'7~';~===:--"·"~~~~REEC~P..ECE··'
-C~'t\lADA---CA1VAD4
."Eleftheroudalds" ,
''I'heRyer$onPress .
.Librairie interilationale
PlaeeiielaConstitution-'
299 Que~nStreet West
Toronto'
l\theiles

GUATEMALA,

CmLE-:--CHILI

un,..
,;•· . ·J\o:[erced846

"~EdJnd"R'
'.
,;:',X':"J,
9·.. lzarrO

'Sm~iago

GUATEMALA" .
t~:rosc;GouhaJ!d

.'
·;4:;uubmtd~ra;~Ltda.' .

,

'Suc~~9r:

CHtNA.-4:S1NE

NETHERLANDS
PAYS·BASN. V.MartinusNijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
s'G:w.:avenhage
NEW·ZEALAND
NOUVELLE.ZELANDE
.Cordon & Gotch
Waring Taylor Street
Wellington

'NORWAY-NORVEGE
Norsk. BokimportA/S,
· Edv.StormsGate,1
Oslo
'SWEDEN--SUEDE '0'"
C. E.Fritze's Kungl.
Hofhokhandel A.-B.
Fredsgatan 2
.Stockholm

.'

.; SWITZERLA..~-$IllSSE· .....
, .~ibrairi~-Payot s~A::­
Lausanne
lIa~gRaunhardt

:it.lrchgassejl7.
Zurichl
SXIUA-'SYRIE"
Libriliie·universelle·..
Damascus
-.

>

•

, 'SaAv/Sur;No.6y 9aC. P.· . UNIONOKS()UTH·A.F:RICA
". The'C:ommercialPresllLtd. •.. Guatem~la..,
lJNIONSUD..AFRICAINE ..
~211 Illiiian -Road'
. Cent~alNews.Ag~ncyLid.
. HAITI•·.·. . HAITI
SlJ.~righa.i" :
Commissioner & RissikSts.
M;ax Bouchere~u" . /
·Johannesburg
. ./
Lilirairie '~Ala Ca~avene"
··COS.TA.JUGA
B,oitepo$'taJe 111·B
UNIT$D KINGDOM'
_',TrejosHerpumoB.
Port..au·Prince ,-.ROYAUME·UNI
/Apar t4do13J3
'
.
·II.M.;Stationery Office
., .. ,.
'-;lNPJ.Ar-.1NDE
San JM~~.",,_,~
-"P.O.
]Jo't569
···O~ord.Bl\)ok & Stat;~~el,'j .
:J:.~hdon., 8.J.!i. 1
Co.'
.,
Scindiallouse
, UNITEJ),STATESOF

,. c6ST.Aiiu:eA;-.
.... '~"""

.AMERICA - .

Newn~lhir'
:" -,
IRAN-....;...IRAN

ETATS·UNIS D:A.IJlERlQUE
I:n.ternational Documents .
SerVice··.·.
ColUliiliia UniyersityPresrj'
2960 Broadway . .'. ,'
.
. New YOl'k:27, N.Y.

Bal1g~ePiad~row .

1BISh@h¥nue
"

Teher~

mA~-IRAKi'i \:' .~<"

Mackenzie &-)t",,<~ir~i'i~l~'
TheBook!!~fui':' . >' . .'
Baghdad'
'.

LEBANON-:':"L.lB.
.ifN. ".
",..: .Libi'airietwverselle·
. ,Beirut
' .
.~,/!

!

.' YUGOSLr\?lA
XOUGOSLAVIE .'
Dl'za"iIo Preduzece
Jugolilo'venskaKnjiga'
M:oskovskaVl. 36 '
"Belgrade
