S/2020/465

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 June 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Security Council video-teleconference
convened on 27 May 2020 on the “Protection of civilians in armed conflict”. Enclosed
herewith is a copy of the briefings provided on that occasion by the Secretary-General;
the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer;
and the former President of Liberia, Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, as well as copies
of the statements delivered by the representatives of Council members: Belgium,
China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger,
the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
that video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia,
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cyprus,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, the European Union, Fiji, Georgia, Guatemala, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Ukraine and Uruguay.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the enclosed briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.

(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-07337 (E) 090620 150720

*2007337*

S/2020/465

Annex 1
Statement by the Secretary-General
I thank the Government of Estonia for convening this debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
Protecting civilians must be a joint effort by Governments, civil society and
international organizations. I look forward to hearing the views of former President
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
As we meet today, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic rages
on, causing enormous human suffering and additional stress to health systems,
economies and communities. Those already weakened by years of armed conflict
are particularly vulnerable.
COVID-19 is not only spreading sickness and death; it is pushing people into
poverty and hunger. In some cases, it is reversing decades of development progress.
As access to services and safety are curtailed, and as some leaders exploit the
pandemic to adopt repressive measures, it has become even more difficult to protect
the most vulnerable. This is particularly true in conflict zones, where civilians were
already exposed to significant risks.
COVID-19 poses a major threat to refugees and internally displaced people
crowded together in camps, and to communities that lack sanitation and health-care
facilities. Cases in a refugee camp in Bangladesh and among displaced people in a
protection of civilians site in South Sudan underline the importance of including
displaced people in preparedness and prevention efforts.
My call for a global ceasefire in March was aimed at ending fighting, so that
we can focus on ending the pandemic. A global ceasefire would create conditions
for a stronger response to the pandemic and the delivery of humanitarian aid to the
most vulnerable people, and would open space for dialogue. I am encouraged by
expressions of support.
However, that support has not been translated into concrete action. In some
cases, the pandemic may even create incentives for warring parties to press their
advantage, or to strike hard while international attention is focused elsewhere. Both
scenarios could lead to increased violence, and civilians always pay the price. The
United Nations Support Mission in Libya documented at least 58 civilians killed and
190 injured between 1 April and 18 May.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are one of the most effective means
of protecting civilians in conflict zones around the world. Our Blue Helmets are
now supporting national authorities in their response to the pandemic by protecting
health-care and humanitarian workers and facilitating access to aid and protection.
I saw for myself last year how the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo made an important contribution
to the successful efforts against the Ebola outbreak in the east of the country. Today
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) is working closely with the authorities and security
services to find new ways to serve the population while protecting themselves.
MINUSCA police are helping to increase the capacity of the internal security forces
to curb the spread of the virus while staying safe.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is fully engaged to suppress transmission of COVID-19 and control its spread,
2/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

while continuing to perform its vital roles of protecting civilians and supporting the
implementation of the peace agreement.
Where armed conflict continues, COVID-19 makes the protection of civilians
more challenging than ever — and our support more important than ever. It is only
through respect for human rights and international humanitarian law and refugee
law that we can protect civilians, including health and humanitarian workers and
infrastructure, and relieve pressure on health systems.
But the prospects are bleak. My latest report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2020/366) shows little progress on the protection of civilians,
and on compliance with international law, in 2019. More than 20,000 civilians were
killed or injured in just 10 conflicts — in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan, Syria, Ukraine and Yemen. This figure,
which includes only incidents verified by the United Nations, is just a fraction of
the total.
Last year, for the ninth year running, 90 per cent of people killed by explosive
weapons in populated areas were civilians. I urge all Governments to make a strong
commitment to avoiding the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in
populated areas.
Tens of thousands of children were forced to take part in hostilities in 2019.
Millions of people were displaced as a result of armed conflict. And, at the end of
2019, the International Committee of the Red Cross was handling some 140,000
requests from families of missing people. I commend the Council’s adoption, last
year, of the first-ever resolution on people missing in conflict (resolution 2474
(2019)), and welcome all efforts to shed light on such tragedies and trigger action.
Women and girls in places affected by conflict were subjected to appalling
levels of sexual and gender-based violence. They also suffered targeted attacks,
intimidation, abduction, forced marriage and restrictions of movement, based on
their sex.
People with disabilities are disproportionately impacted and experience even
higher levels of risks in war zones.
Conflict also remains the major driver of global hunger. Of the 135 million
acutely food-insecure people in the world, more than half live in countries and
territories affected by conflict. We expect COVID-19 to cause a sharp increase in
that number.
Throughout the year, humanitarian access was hampered by violence,
insecurity and bureaucratic impediments — often in violation of international
humanitarian law. Violence against humanitarian workers and assets was widely
reported. In Afghanistan, 32 aid workers were killed, 52 injured and 532 abducted.
In Yemen, there were nearly 400 incidents of violence against humanitarian
personnel and assets. National staff accounted for more than 90 per cent of those
killed and injured.
According to the World Health Organization, 199 health-care workers were
killed in more than 1,000 attacks in 2019 — a shocking increase from an already
inexcusable 794 in 2018. This month’s attack on a maternity hospital in Kabul, in
the middle of a major global health crisis, makes it even more essential for Member
States to take urgent measures to implement Security Council resolutions and protect
the provision of medical care in conflict.
Last year marked 20 years since the Security Council added the protection of
civilians to its agenda, and the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.
20-073373/168

S/2020/465

The year brought several important initiatives and commitments, including the call
to action to bolster respect for international humanitarian law, endorsed by 40 States.
Such pledges are an important first step. However, compliance and accountability
are essential, but lacking.
I repeat my call on States to develop national frameworks to strengthen the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. States must also ensure accountability
through strengthened efforts to prevent serious violations of international law
by prioritizing investigation and prosecution. I urge all to move beyond rhetoric
and close the accountability gap through national legislation and coordinated
international action.
My report outlines other actions that require greater global attention.
First, I urge States to review and rethink their approach to urban warfare,
committing to the protection of civilians in their doctrine, strategy and tactics.
This includes measures to condition arms exports on respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Secondly, armed drones are increasingly being used to conduct attacks in
many situations of armed conflict, including in Libya and Yemen. We need to
reassert the authority of international law over their use.
Thirdly, we must address the legal, moral and ethical implications posed by
the development of lethal autonomous weapons systems. It is my deep conviction
that machines with the power and discretion to take lives without human involvement
must be prohibited by international law.
Finally, we must tackle the malicious use of digital technology to conduct
cyberattacks on critical civilian infrastructure. Reports from several countries
indicate a rise in cyberattacks on health-care facilities during the COVID-19
pandemic. We must do more to prevent and end these new forms of aggression,
which can cause further severe harm to civilians.
Civilians caught up in violence now face a new and deadly threat from
COVID-19. The pandemic is amplifying and exploiting the fragilities of our world.
Conflict is one of the greatest causes of that fragility.
Protecting civilians requires us to do much more to ensure compliance with
international law and accountability for violations. We must also do more to prevent,
reduce and resolve conflicts. Sustainable political solutions remain the only way to
ensure that civilians are kept safe from harm.

4/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 2
Statement by the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Peter Maurer
Secretary-General Guterres’s report card (S/2020/366) on the state of
protection highlights the enormous violations and the failures to protect men, women
and children around the globe. Communities caught in the crossfire of armed conflict
suffer shock after shock, violation after violation, until their resilience is threadbare.
I am concerned for people — for the rising number of displaced people, stuck
in limbo without any prospect of a lasting solution to their plight, and for the millions
of families searching endlessly for their missing loved ones. I am concerned for the
urban poor, elderly, detainees, migrants and refugees, women, survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence, and people with a disability.
I am concerned about broken places and systems — the migration and
displacement camps and the prisons where human dignity is as absent as clean water
and sanitation.
I am concerned about emerging threats — the rapid spread of hate speech;
stigmatization of all kinds; and data being misused to suppress or control populations
instead of protecting them.
I am concerned about the shrinking space for neutral, impartial and
independent humanitarian work.
And I am concerned about the behaviour of belligerents and all those who
support them — about the violations of human life and dignity caused by persistent
disregard or expedient interpretation of international humanitarian law and other
international legal frameworks.
In particular, I raise the devastating impact on civilians when explosive
weapons with a wide impact area are used in populated areas. The death and
destruction left behind by heavy explosive weapons raise serious questions about
international humanitarian law compliance and signal the urgent need for a change
of behaviour to protect civilians, including by avoiding the use of such weapons in
populated areas. A strong, unequivocal political declaration committing States to
taking concrete action in that regard would be a good first step. The International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is working on policy and operational-level
recommendations to that end.
The divisions within the Security Council on critical concepts of humanitarian
law and work, notably access to populations in need, are increasing suffering on the
front lines. While the ICRC takes responsibility for delivering neutral and impartial
humanitarian services independently and within the legal framework of the Geneva
Conventions, it is the Council’s responsibility to facilitate access to populations in
need. Council members are obliged to proactively facilitate access and not to pile
mountains of bureaucratic and political obstacles on humanitarian organizations.
Council members are not asked to tell humanitarian organizations who is in
need, but rather to allow neutral and impartial humanitarian organizations to do
independent needs assessments in full transparency. And if there are divisions on
whether people in a specific context are in need, I would expect States to allow
humanitarians to do their jobs as a default precautionary measure unless imperative
security reasons prohibit as much.
International humanitarian laws, principles and concepts have been
developed to protect people, not to make a point against political adversaries. I
urge Council members to base their policies in this regard on the law, which is the
20-073375/168

S/2020/465

only reasonable basis for consensus, and to leave political controversies outside of
humanitarian concerns.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis is fast threatening to become a
protection crisis. At the very time they are needed most, helpers are under attack.
Health systems are being targeted and health workers abused. Since March this year,
the ICRC has recorded 208 COVID-19-related attacks against health-care targets in
more than 13 countries.
The socioeconomic impacts will cause further waves of despair, leaving people
facing hunger and poverty exposed to abuse and exploitation. States’ responses
to the pandemic show the risk that, without checks and balances, emergency
health measures can become abusive tools to control a population’s movement or
withhold services.
We fear that some groups — perhaps those considered to be the enemy —
may be excluded from life-saving measures. For example, the distribution of any
vaccine in volatile and contested places will be difficult, but it must be available to
all equitably.
On a more positive note, States have also stepped up in response to the
pandemic, implementing more humane policies. If I have optimism during this bleak
crisis, it is because I see the potential for actors to take measures during this crisis
that spark a recommitment in support of humanitarian protections. For example,
we have seen the safe release from detention of many people deprived of liberty,
decisions to regularize non-documented migrants to ensure they can access health
care, and the adoption of unilateral ceasefires.
Arms bearers remain engaged with the ICRC in crises, with new opportunities
for dialogue and advice arising. As police forces and military personnel are called
on to maintain public order, the ICRC has maintained a dialogue with public forces
to ensure that international law is upheld when conducting operations. And as part
of our broader dialogue with hundreds of non-State armed groups across the world,
the ICRC is engaged with Islamist and Salafi scholars in the Sahel on a fatwa on
COVID-19, giving guidance on respect for the deceased and on health protocols.
I am also encouraged by the potential for multi-stakeholder responses to
influence behaviour. This week, 40 global leaders joined the ICRC’s call for
Governments to work together to stop cyberattacks on the health sector.
It cannot be overstated that the extreme vulnerability of people in conflict
zones to repeated shocks is, in large part, due to States and other belligerents
disregarding, over many years, their legal obligations towards populations under
their control.
International humanitarian law protects civilian life, essential services and
the environment. It prohibits torture and ill-treatment, like rape and sexual violence.
It protects those not participating in hostilities and provides special protection for
health services and health workers. It protects those living under occupation, those
in detention, the missing, the dead and their families, and it prioritizes restoring
family links.
Respecting and ensuring respect for international humanitarian law in all
circumstances would protect people from the impact of war and shield them against
the subsequent health, economic or environmental shock waves.
We call on the Council to ensure in all situations, whether while enforcing
exceptional measures in response to public health emergencies or during hostilities
or public unrest, that its responses are guided by the utmost respect for the protection
6/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

of civilians. We also call on the Council to respect the dignity and rights of the
deceased, the families of missing persons and persons deprived of liberty.
We understand that consensus is difficult, but human life and dignity cannot
be the price of inertia. We ask that the Council be stronger in word and deed in
encouraging better behaviour on the battlefield and ensuring that human life and
dignity is protected, without exception.

20-073377/168

S/2020/465

Annex 3
Statement by Nobel Laureate and former President of Liberia,
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
I thank the Council for this opportunity and wish to make a few points I
believe to be relevant to our purpose.
The first is to congratulate the President on her country’s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council, and to commend her on her leadership during this
high-level open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also extend
special greetings to the Secretary-General and the entire United Nations family as
we mark the seventy-fifth year of the formation of this pre-eminent multilateral
Organization, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action, as
well as the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security.
Those milestones offer an opportunity for reflection. My hope is that this
reflection will further pave the way for increased women’s leadership and strengthen
our efforts to protect traditionally marginalized and vulnerable groups — often
women, children and persons with disabilities — trapped by conflict.
Unfortunately, some conflicts are so protracted that we have seen multiple
shifts in the parties concerned, and many people have been born and died without
experiencing what it is to be a child or an adult with fulfilled aspirations and rights.
Instead, their lives have often been defined, shortened and narrowed by conflicts
they had no part in creating. It is time to take bold action, because unless we do so
now we will lose many more lives, many others will sustain life-changing injuries
and millions more will be forcibly displaced. We must find a way to end this cycle of
immeasurable loss and human tragedy.
The truth is that unless we put an end to these ongoing conflicts, there can
be no semblance of a just compact between these States and their peoples nor any
possibility of addressing the inequalities and injustices that have often fuelled the
conflicts — both prerequisites for developmental transformation. Even worse, that
opportunity may be lost for generations to come. That is also why I could not agree
more with the Secretary-General that “[t]he most effective way to protect civilians is
to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of armed conflict”
(S/2020/366, para. 67).
That brings me to my second point. A conflict averted often does not make
the headlines, but it saves lives and livelihoods. In that connection, nothing should
weigh more heavily on our collective consciences or on the desk of the Council than
the urgent need to stop ongoing conflicts and preventing new ones.
I know that preventing a conflict is never easy, and yet our collective
experience shows that it is less costly, if not easier, than ending one. Consequently,
whenever peacekeeping mandates need to be changed, we must change them. When
missions need to be reassessed, we must reassess them. When the Council needs
to be broadened and strengthened to reflect the changing reality of our world, we
must adapt and reform it. When individual members are holding the Council back
with their narrow self-interests and using the veto power in ways unintended, we
must find a workable formula to preserve the collective interests of all. What we
simply cannot do is resign ourselves to a sense of hopelessness by settling for and
accepting the continuation of numerous situations of prolonged carnage. After all,
the United Nations and its many organs, especially the Security Council, represent
hope for peace.

8/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Seventy-five years ago, our nations acted with courage to end a global war.
The Council now represents the hope and aspirations of the global community for
international peace and security. We must find the political will and commitment
that has been long absent and we must act now.
Today, our world is beset with more conflicts, the growing threat of
violent extremism and a young population that is increasingly less hopeful about
the possibility of living in peace. We simply cannot continue this way. It is time
for change.
I understand that the United Nations cannot end all conflicts alone. It requires
a multitude of actors and commitments, including the involvement of women through
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which remains a key ingredient
for peace. But I also know that the role of the Security Council is pivotal, especially
one that is more representative of all the peoples of the world so as to be more
effective in ending and preventing conflicts.
As a Liberian, I am grateful to the Security Council and the larger United
Nations for supporting the interventions that helped to broker and bring peace to my
country. However, in my country, like in many places of ongoing conflict, the fault
lines and signs were visible for many years. Simply put, protecting human rights,
ending impunity and engaging in preventive diplomacy are crucial to stopping
conflicts before they rage into full conflagrations. We must not ignore the many
signals today or delay necessary action to prevent conflict.
Finally, the coronavirus disease pandemic — with more than 5 million infected
and more than 300,000 deaths worldwide — is a painful human tragedy. I extend my
deepest condolences to all who are grieving for loved ones, and pray for a speedy
recovery for those infected.
Yet, even in this period of sadness, we are reminded of many important lessons
that may help us prevent conflict and war.
The first is that women’s leadership and participation in gender-balanced
governance have often made the difference in this fight.
Secondly, we must remember that the virus is a pandemic. Only regional and
global solidarity can protect the whole world from further tragedy. From global health
and human development to peace and climate change, we need more multilateralism,
not less. Only by working together can we overcome our common challenges and
make the world safer, better and more peaceful.
Thirdly, excluding impoverished nations from ongoing medical research and
the development of needed cures does not mean that wealthier ones can continue to
live in a protected bubble.
Fourthly, we face an urgent need to reset the world to higher standards of
international cooperation and peace as the most enduring and sustainable path to
successfully confronting our common challenges, ending ongoing conflicts and
preventing future ones.
This pandemic has humbled us all and it represents our greatest test in living
memory. The truth is that it is not beyond our ability to pass this test. However, how
we pass it will redefine the course of human history. Let us not fail — for our own
sake and that of posterity.
I do not know how many will be infected, how many lives will be lost or where
growth projections and human development indices will be when this pandemic ends.
But I do know — as if further proof were needed — that we are more connected
and interdependent than we have allowed ourselves to believe and that we have
20-073379/168

S/2020/465

committed to acting together. As others have mentioned, I also know that the world
and life as we know it will change. It is now upon us to ensure that those changes are
for the better, for the good of humankind.
Indeed, we face the test of a lifetime. May we find the courage, as we did in
1945, to find the answer of a lifetime.

10/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
China highly commends the initiative of convening this open debate via
video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome
President Kaljulaid to the meeting and thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing. We also welcome the participation of President Maurer and Ms. Sirleaf.
The international community, including the Security Council, has made
tremendous efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict. The Council has adopted
a number of resolutions and presidential statements in that regard. Nevertheless, our
work still faces multiple challenges, compounded by evolving situations of conflicts
and new risks, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
As they account for the vast majority of casualties, civilians bear the brunt of
wars and armed conflicts. The Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2020/366)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict presents a bleak picture of ongoing
civilian suffering in armed conflicts. In 2019, the United Nations reported more than
20,000 civilians killed and injured and millions of civilians displaced as a result of
attacks in 10 conflicts.
China strongly believes that the paramount importance of protecting civilians
in armed conflict can never be overemphasized. We therefore call for in-depth
discussions and concrete Council action on this issue.
First, we must address the root causes of conflicts and promote development
for peace. That is the best way to protect civilians. In many cases, abject poverty
and hunger trigger violence and conflict, which in turn undermine development and
exacerbate poverty and food insecurity. Only by addressing the root causes can we
break this vicious circle.
Sustainable and inclusive development is key to achieving long-term stability
and sustaining peace. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development must be
effectively implemented, with poverty eradication as the first priority. There are
only 10 years left for us to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. It is time for
action. China firmly supports the Secretary-General’s Decade of Action initiative
and calls on the international community to jointly pursue innovative, coordinated,
green, open and shared development.
Secondly, the Security Council should work tirelessly to prevent and peacefully
resolve conflicts through political dialogue, mediation and negotiation. Preventing,
de-escalating and resolving conflicts by peaceful means is the most effective way
to protect civilians. At present, armed conflict continues in certain areas, resulting
in a high number of civilian casualties. We urge all parties concerned to respond
positively to the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and to move towards
political settlement through inclusive dialogue.
The fundamental principles of international law, such as the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the prohibition of the threat or use of force, must be
upheld. Many prolonged conflicts are a product of violations of the Charter of the
United Nations and other basic international law. For example, the people of Syria
and Iraq have endured years of suffering due to the use of force unauthorized by the
Security Council. That should not happen again.
Thirdly, all parties to conflicts must fulfil their obligation, under international
law, to protect civilians. The Geneva Convention, international humanitarian law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1265 (1999),
20-0733711/168

S/2020/465

and other resolutions concerning women, children, medical personnel and missing
persons, must be fully implemented. We urge all parties to conflicts to refrain
from the asymmetric use of force in densely populated areas. There should be
zero tolerance of harming civilians. It is also critical for all parties to give special
attention and care to vulnerable groups — particularly women and children — and
to facilitate safe and unimpeded humanitarian access.
The COVID-19 pandemic civilians in armed conflict at further risk. All
parties should prioritize the interests of the people and take proactive measures to
combat the virus. Unilateral sanctions severely undermine the capacity of vulnerable
countries to respond to the pandemic, thereby exacerbating civilian suffering. We
call on relevant countries to lift unilateral sanctions immediately and join global
efforts to combat the virus, including by supporting the leading role of the World
Health Organization.
China has provided medical assistance and sent medical teams to countries
in armed conflict in order to help them fight COVID-19. At the recently held World
Health Assembly, President Xi Jinping announced five significant measures to boost
international cooperation against the pandemic. We will continue to deliver support
to countries in need.
Fourthly, national Governments must bear the primary responsibility to protect
their civilians. United Nations peacekeeping operations should work closely with
Governments and strictly follow their mandate when fulfilling the responsibility
to protect civilians. United Nations agencies and other humanitarian entities need
to engage actively with affected Governments and respect their sovereignty so as
to develop trust and facilitate humanitarian operations. The guiding principles
of humanitarian emergency assistance, as set out in General Assembly resolution
46/182, must be respected and upheld. The International Committee of the Red Cross
has served as a role model in that regard.
Any violation of international humanitarian law, such as threats or attacks
against civilians in armed conflict, should be investigated and punished in accordance
with the law. Meanwhile, the international community should respect the national
judicial system of countries concerned and not impose external measures. We should
bear in mind that foreign occupation and interference, terrorist activities, unilateral
sanctions and many other factors also lead to civilian suffering, and its perpetrators
must be held accountable.
The protection of civilians should not be politicized or used as an excuse for
interference in internal affairs or even regime change. Those who invoke international
law must also submit to it. The Security Council should adopt a consistent position
in all situations on its agenda. Double standards or selective approaches will only
damage the authority of the Council.
A human life is of greater value than anything else. We must take a peoplecentred approach in dealing with any issue on the Council’s agenda. It is the moral
obligation of the international community to do whatever it can to take pragmatic
and effective measures in order to ensure the safety and dignity of civilians in
armed conflict.

12/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 5
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We thank the Secretary-General and President Johnson Sirleaf for their
briefings as we explore concrete ways to address the remaining pressing challenges
in the protection of civilians in armed conflict as well as the new challenges that
are emerging. We also thank Mr. Maurer and, through him, the men and women
who are tirelessly working as promoters of the principles enshrined in the Geneva
Conventions to protect the life and the dignity of civilians in armed conflict.
In his report (S/2020/366) the Secretary-General refers to the current
coronavirus disease pandemic as the “greatest test that the world has faced since
the establishment of the United Nations” (S/2020/366, para. 1). It is clear for the
Dominican Republic that the pandemic has brought many underlying and systemic
vulnerabilities to the surface, particularly in countries affected by armed conflict,
where the absence of timely and adequate actions to address the root causes of
conflict creates greater challenges for the prevention and response measures required
to protect the most vulnerable.
And the pandemic adds yet another layer to the suffering of civilians already
paying the highest price in so many contexts: the elderly, people living with
disabilities, men, children and women living with other underlying diseases, the
displaced, refugees, those living in overcrowded internally displaced person camps
and those held in detention centres. All people need to be protected — in dignity,
justice and solidarity and with respect for their fundamental rights.
Due to the severe impact of the pandemic in conflict-affected countries, we
continue to call for sustainable and long-lasting ceasefires in current situations of
armed conflict. Attacks on health-care and humanitarian workers, hospitals and
schools and the use of explosive weapons in highly populated civilian areas are gross
violations of international humanitarian law that clearly undermine the prevention
and response efforts aimed at overcoming the pandemic.
The emergence of such atrocious methods of warfare as the use of starvation
of civilians and the unlawful denial of humanitarian access to affected populations
are just a few of the other violations that require our urgent attention and action.
Violations to international humanitarian law should not be the norm; they should be
the exception.
We agree that respect for international law and accountability for serious
violations are the two most pressing challenges to strengthening the protection of
civilians. Without concrete actions in these areas, we will have little ability to make
progress in building a culture of protection across the entire United Nations system,
embracing, inter alia, parties to conflict, humanitarian organizations, United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions and national armed forces, in order to strengthen
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This is our collective responsibility.
In recent years, and despite the calls of international organizations and States
Members of the United Nations, urban warfare has continued to have a devastating
impact on civilians and critical civilian infrastructure. We join others in reiterating
the necessity of all parties to conflict to immediately refrain from using urban settings
as battlefields. Such use provokes massive displacements and has an increased and
disproportionate impact on women and children.
Allow me to highlight some additional points that require our decisive
attention when considering this critical issue.
20-0733713/168

S/2020/465

There is mounting evidence that conflict-affected populations are especially
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. At the same time, climate change
acts as a risk multiplier, when competition for scarce resources becomes the root
cause of conflict and violence between communities. For instance, the combination
of conflict, extreme weather events, economic shocks and natural disasters is a major
factor in food insecurity and mass displacement. Accordingly, for the Dominican
Republic, it is crucial that we achieve a better and more holistic understanding
of how these factors interact and come up with possible actions to strengthen the
protection of those affected by them.
The protection of civilians is not a one-size-fits-all issue. The United Nations
system, including its peacekeeping and political missions, needs to be equipped to
address the specific protection needs of the populations it serves, particularly, and
most important, in armed conflict.

14/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 6
Statement by the President of the Republic of Estonia, Kersti Kaljulaid
First of all, I thank the briefers for their comprehensive and insightful briefings.
My statement today starts with a confession: I feel helpless — and responsible
for not being able to do more to put things right.
Europe in the twenty-first century is sitting on the safe side of the conflict line
in Ukraine, taking in some of the 1.4 million Ukrainians who have fled the war in
that country. But some 3.5 million Ukrainians have been left behind, in dire need of
humanitarian assistance and protection.
Visiting an International Migration Organization shelter in order to try to
comprehend the suffering of the minors gathered there, some bearing wounds that
life should never have inflicted on young people to begin with, I feel inadequate. All
the things I have brought them feel inadequate too. All of us leaders, collectively,
feel so inadequate. When I look into these young people’s eyes, which are full of
acceptance of their fate, I cannot fully comprehend. Time stands still at this point in
their personal timelines, where the past was suffering and the future is insecurity.
Estonia has put the principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, at the centre of our work in the
Security Council. The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2020/366) indicates that
the normative framework for the protection of civilians is not really working in real
life. Indeed, we have inadequately implemented what we have already agreed. The
pandemic adds a new layer of risk that we must be develop the ability to mitigate.
Estonia supports the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Security Council must really
do something on this subject, making sure at least that State actors heed the
call. I am particularly concerned about the most vulnerable — women, children
and adolescents.
In Africa, midwives are presented daily with fears of becoming infected
with various diseases, not just COVID-19, while attending to mothers. Patricia
Mwenyeheri, a midwife in Malawi, has access to only one hand-washing basin in her
maternity ward. Is this adequate? Two weeks ago, a four-year-old girl was raped in
Mogadishu. Is this gruesome sexual violence acceptable?
Tomorrow a virtual “Every Woman, Every Child” high-level round table will
discuss what can we do specifically in these trying times, when the only positive is
that the health threats people constantly face in less developed parts of the world that
are ravaged by conflict are more palpable for all of us because of COVID-19.
Estonia has contributed to the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response
Plan and to the International Red Cross appeals.
In Libya, 221 schools are non-functional. Unlawful attacks against schools,
universities, students and teachers are frequent in conflicts around the globe.
In February, journalists Abdel Nasser Haj Hamdan and Amjad Aktalati were
killed in an air strike on Idlib while they were providing us with primary-source
information about the conflict in Syria.
We must protect civil society organizations and human rights defenders. They
are our partners, and in delivering on their mandates, are risking their lives.

20-0733715/168

S/2020/465

The war has an ever-changing face — urbanization of conflict, climate
change — but the new aspects confirm the significance of the fundamental framework
of international law.
New technologies can improve humanitarian assistance. Artificial intelligence
is already reuniting lost family members separated by conflict, as people participating
in the Red Cross Trace the Face website can attest.
At the same time, we have seen cyberattacks targeting critical infrastructure,
including health care. Existing international law therefore needs to be applied to
cyberspace, and cybersecurity must be made part of both conflict prevention and
conflict resolution. Estonia has promised to bring cybersecurity to the Security
Council, and I believe we have delivered on that promise.
The Council has a number of tools at its disposal to enhance compliance with
international law and ensure accountability: investigative and judicial mechanisms,
peacekeeping-mission mandates and targeted sanctions. These tools need to be
applied consistently across all conflict situations. When it comes to sanctions, we
observe with concern how the global pandemic is used as a pretext to call for their
termination. Sanctions are built so as not to hinder humanitarian aid. There are other
developments that do.
Estonia calls for unimpeded humanitarian access in Syria. All arguments not
to extend the cross-border mechanism in July do not correspond to the reality on
the ground.
We must value accountability. Member States must cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court. United Nations monitoring missions also raise valuable
awareness about the perpetrators in conflicts and their actions on the ground.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly pointed to the key element of political
will in moving from normative commitments to actual improvement in the protection
of civilians. It is sometimes hard to comprehend how blatantly lacking this will can
be. Each and every time I hear that we could not agree on wording in the Security
Council I see in my mind’s eye that girl with one hand, trying to care for her little
sister — an image of pure, innocent suffering. Aided by international law and good
people around the world, we are powerful together if we want to be.

16/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
I thank the Estonian delegation for today’s debate and welcome the participation
of the President of Estonia. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2020/366) and express appreciation to the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and former President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf for their briefings.
Civilians are the target of unacceptable violence. From Afghanistan to Libya,
from South Sudan, Mali and the Central African Republic to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and from Yemen to Iraq, tens of thousands of civilians have been killed
or injured and millions forcefully displaced. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
exacerbated the vulnerability of the most vulnerable in conflict zones, in particular
refugees and displaced persons. Together with Tunisia, we will continue our efforts
within the Security Council to support the Secretary-General’s call for a cessation
of hostilities to facilitate the fight against the pandemic.
The Security Council has developed tools to address the protection of civilians
in a more systematic and effective manner.
First, the Security Council has repeatedly condemned violations committed
by all parties. We regret that the Security Council has not been able to condemn
violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law taking place in
Myanmar and Syria. It is absolutely necessary that the Security Council renew the
cross-border mechanism and that populations in need, including in the north-east of
Syria, be able to receive aid through the most effective and direct routes.
Secondly, the Security Council has mandated peacekeeping operations
to protect civilians, which are carrying out their mandate in a more robust and
innovative manner. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic has developed three surge teams composed
of police and civilian personnel specialized in the protection of civilians. These
teams can be deployed in hotspots. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali has set up temporary bases close to civilian populations
to strengthen social cohesion.
The protection of civilians has become key when assessing the performance
of United Nations missions. Unfortunately, women and girls continue to be subject
to appalling sexual and gender-based violence, and children continue to be recruited
by armed groups. It is paramount that United Nations missions be given sufficient
capacity and human resources to respond to their specific needs.
I will now turn to four challenges.
First, the issue of attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel is
particularly worrisome in the context of COVID-19. Parties to armed conflicts
must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law to protect
humanitarian and medical personnel and units and to ensure humanitarian access.
The Humanitarian Call for Action, initiated by France and Germany last September,
addresses this issue through different concrete commitments. France is planning to
launch a national plan of action aimed at strengthening international humanitarian
law training of State and non-State actors. We encourage all Member States to sign
onto the Humanitarian Call and welcome the endorsements of the Call by Chile and
the Maldives, bringing the number of signatories to 45.

20-0733717/168

S/2020/465

Secondly, there is the question of the use of weapons, which is addressed
in the Secretary-General’s report. Much of the harm and destruction in current
conflicts appears to be the result of violations of international humanitarian law
provisions including, but not limited to, the indiscriminate and disproportionate use
of explosive weapons in populated areas.
France is engaged in the ongoing negotiations towards the development
of a political declaration to improve the protection of civilians. To that end, this
political declaration must address the issue of the indiscriminate use of explosive
weapons. But the declaration will not stigmatize explosive weapons alone. Indeed,
the declaration must affirm that the core challenge is to improve the implementation
of international humanitarian law principles by promoting appropriate policies and
practices for the conduct of military operations in urban contexts and by encouraging
States to exchange good practices.
France is also engaged in efforts aimed at addressing the possible challenges
associated with the development of lethal autonomous weapons systems. Substantial
progress has been made through the work of the dedicated Group of Governmental
Experts, which includes the adoption of 11 guiding principles reaffirming that
international humanitarian law continues to fully apply to all weapons systems.
Thirdly, it is crucial that the protection of journalists in armed conflict become
effective. We commend the four Groups of Friends on the Safety of Journalists and
their efforts to support the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Finally, we must redouble our efforts aimed at supporting justice for victims.
The arrest in France two weeks ago of Félicien Kabuga, one of the highest-profile
remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, is a
reminder that those responsible for mass atrocities can be brought to justice.
France will also continue to support the fight against impunity of perpetrators
of atrocities committed in Syria, through national proceedings and support for the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

18/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 8
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Indonesia, Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi
I thank the President for organizing today’s important meeting. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their insights.
Last year, I presided over the open debate that commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the protection-of-civilians agenda and the seventieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions (see S/PV.8534). Our message at that time remains relevant
today, particularly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The Council must continue exercising its moral weight to protect civilians in
armed conflict. Indeed, the pandemic has not stopped conflicts from playing out
in many parts of the world. In sub-Saharan Africa, violent attacks increased by
37 per cent between mid-March and mid-April. Armed conflict has also displaced
at least 661,000 people over the past two months. COVID-19 places an extra burden
on the shoulders of people in conflict-affected countries and complicates our efforts
to protect civilians.
Against that background, I have three key messages.
First, it is important to implement a humanitarian pause. The pandemic
provides the momentum to put a break on the fighting. Laying down weapons
would ensure unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance, create a space for
credible peace processes and allow us to focus on fighting COVID-19. For those
reasons, Indonesia reiterates the Secretary-General’s appeal for an immediate global
ceasefire in all conflict situations, including Afghanistan. Together with Norway,
Germany, Qatar and Uzbekistan, Indonesia launched a joint statement on a ceasefire
in Afghanistan. A global ceasefire requires political will, putting aside animosity, as
well as unity in the Council.
Secondly, it is critical to ensure compliance with international humanitarian
law at all times. All parties to conflict must honour their obligations. Civilians are not
targets. Greater protection must be given to those who are already in dire situations,
women, children, refugees and displaced persons. Continued attacks on health-care
facilities in conflict-affected countries further impairs their already fragile capacity
to fight COVID-19. This has to stop.
Palestine is a textbook example of where compliance with international
humanitarian law is desperately needed now. The ongoing imminent threat of
annexation and the COVID-19 pandemic have hit Palestine together. The world
and the Council have a duty to restore the Palestinians’ rights over their territory
in accordance with the 1967 borders. We must not let further annexation happen
from various standpoints. It will threaten regional stability and security. It will
undermine the two-State solution. It will do away with all international consensus
and parameters on the issue of Palestine. Moreover, it will shift the world’s focus
away from fighting the COVID-19 pandemic.
Thirdly, it is also crucial to place women’s empowerment at the heart of the
protection of civilians. Indonesia is a strong proponent of community engagement in
protecting civilians. Local communities, particularly women, must become part and
parcel of the development and implementation of the protection of civilians strategy.
As agents of civilian protection, women have greater access to communities. Women
are essential enablers of trust- and confidence-building and help to prevent and
reduce conflict and confrontation. Inclusive participation of women would also
benefit any peace process as they have a unique perspective to offer. Empowering
women means empowering the whole nation.
20-0733719/168

S/2020/465

That was evident when I led Indonesia’s women leaders in dialogue with
Afghan women in Kabul last February to encourage their greater contribution in
the peace process. The Afghanistan Indonesia Women’s Solidarity Network was
launched during the visit. Later this year, we aim to establish a southeast Asian
network of women peace negotiators and mediators. Indonesia is also committed to
increasing the number of female peacekeepers, thus contributing to gender parity
among Blue Helmets. There are currently 154 Indonesian women peacekeepers on
the ground, all of whom will contribute to the implementation of mission mandates
around community engagement and the protection of civilians.
COVID-19 is unlike any global crisis in the United Nations 75-year history.
However, during this dark moment of our time, we cannot neglect the imperative to
protect civilians in armed conflict. After all, the United Nations was established to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Protecting civilians is one of
the most important tasks to avoid us failing.

20/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
Allow me first to congratulate you on the choice of this topic, which is
particularly important for your presidency of the Security Council.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome Ms. Kersti Kaljulaid,
President of the Republic of Estonia. I thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
as well as Her Excellency Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and Mr. Peter Maurer, for
their statements.
As mentioned by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has always been the concern of the United
Nations and its Member States. It has now been two decades since the Security
Council put that topic on its agenda, thus officially recognizing it as a matter of
international peace and security. Resolution 1265 (1999), the Council’s first resolution
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, established the parameters of what is
today considered a guiding principle on the issue.
Two months have passed since the Secretary-General called for a global
humanitarian ceasefire in the wake of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). However,
the situation on the ground in many conflict areas is deteriorating at an alarming
rate, especially for women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities. In recent
weeks, women and babies have been massacred in Afghanistan. Sub-Saharan Africa,
for its part, has seen a 37-per cent increase in violence, with dozens of civilians
killed in Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso. Fighting continues in Yemen and Syria,
causing casualties and displacement. In Libya, the already grave situation is at risk
of deteriorating further with the over-armament of the protagonists, in flagrant
violation of the embargo imposed by the Council itself.
In the face of those various tragedies, the members of the Council continue to
maintain their divergent positions instead of adopting a posture of unity that would
have sent a clear message to the various actors committing the violence. Moreover, in
those two months, armed conflicts forced more than 660,000 people around the world
to flee violence, making them more vulnerable to infection and further complicating
the global fight and recovery efforts against the virus. The Sahel and Lake Chad
region has seen a sharp increase in the number of internally displaced persons, with
Chad and the Niger being the most affected. The region is plagued by all kinds of
attacks carried out through asymmetric warfare that spares neither the defence and
security forces of our countries nor even peacekeepers, let alone civilians.
The Niger would like to stress that, with regard to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, respect for and the promotion and implementation of international
humanitarian law and other applicable legal and political frameworks by both
State and non-State actors are essential. In that regard, I would like to reaffirm the
Niger’s deep commitment to the principles of human rights and its adherence to the
international legal instruments for the protection and promotion of those rights, as
signed and ratified by our country and promoted by the President of the Republic of
the Niger, His Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou.
Respect for the law of armed conflict is particularly important, especially by
the armed forces, which are responsible for ensuring full application in theatres of
operation. To that end and with the aim of integrating those international commitments
into the doctrine of its armed forces, the Niger, in collaboration with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, has developed a manual on international humanitarian
law for its defence and security forces. In the same vein, the Niger fully subscribes
20-0733721/168

S/2020/465

to the human rights compliance framework in the context of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, in particular pillars 4 and 5, relating to the integration
of the protection of civilians into the planning and conduct of operations and the
feedback to assess the impact of operations on the population. Respect for the law
of armed conflict cannot be complete unless perpetrators and offenders are held
accountable for their actions before the courts.
In this time of crisis, we must ensure that the public health response to the
pandemic and respect for fundamental legal protections complement each other.
As mentioned by the International Committee of the Red Cross, that can be done
only by facilitating unhindered humanitarian access for medical personnel and
humanitarian workers, protecting access to food and water, protecting vulnerable
persons and detainees and ensuring access to education for children, especially for
young girls. As the current pandemic requires the mobilization of resources, both
economic and humanitarian, countries in armed conflict often lack the means to deal
with the situation. We would like to echo the Secretary-General’s statement that it is
time to show solidarity, not exclusion and to call for economic mitigation measures
and humanitarian exemptions wherever necessary.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the role of peacekeeping missions at a
time like this is particularly crucial. In Mali, for example, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali, Mr. Mahamat Annadif, stressed in his recent
briefing to the Council (see S/2020/286) that exemplary cooperation has been
established between the United Nations system and the Government of Mali in the
fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. We should encourage and welcome such a
commitment, which strengthens strategic communication to counter disinformation
and rumours.
We should also bear in mind that the success of the protection of civilians
lies in an inclusive consultative process that is locally owned and engages local
communities, as we saw in the recent debate organized by Ireland on the issue of
pastoralism in the Sahel. Such people-centred peacekeeping should take into account
the voices of women, youth, political parties and civil society. Only thus can lasting
solutions be achieved as they would be based on a participatory process that would
then be accepted and shared by all.

22/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 10
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Gennady Kuzmin
I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
for their contributions to today’s meeting.
Indeed, the work of the Security Council over the years has helped to
strengthen the protection of civilians, thereby saving lives. Unfortunately, despite
all our efforts, thousands of civilians, especially women, children, the elderly and
persons with disabilities, continue to suffer. To our great regret, the unprecedented
politicization of the humanitarian issues in international relations still dominates.
Now, the plight of civilians is becoming even harsher, the threats and
challenges they are facing are multiplied owing to the unprecedented global health
crisis, coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which indeed leaves no one behind. It is
high time to unite our efforts to achieve the noble goals of protecting people and
minimizing their suffering. In that regard, we find the Secretary-General’s appeal
for a global ceasefire of 23 March highly relevant. But his call would be incomplete
without reference to his appeal to waive sanctions, which can undermine countries’
capacity to respond to the pandemic. The same appeal was made by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, who stressed that, in the context of
a global pandemic, the policy of impeding medical efforts in one country heightens
the risk for all of us.
We agree that protecting health-care workers and facilitating access for
humanitarian assistance are important in the fight against COVID-19. But the fight
will not be effective if there is no access to essential health-care services or to
good quality, safe, effective and affordable essential medicines, vaccines, personal
protective equipment and food. International cooperation and solidarity might not be
inclusive or exhaustive while unilateral sanctions remain in effect.
Let me refer to the situation in Syria, where suffocating sanctions afflict
ordinary Syrians, including by preventing the authorities from purchasing necessary
medical equipment and by intimidating international humanitarian non-governmental
organizations, which fear penalties. Yes, I refer to civilians — women and children —
about whom many of my colleagues like to speak so much in the Council and who
suffer the most from the coercive measures imposed by their countries.
Coercive measures can be even more shameful when they are used by
a Government against its own people. And now I am referring to Ukraine. Kyiv
continues to pursue its brutally repressive policy towards Donetsk and Lugansk,
which has already negatively affected more than five million civilian residents of
the conflict area, has deprived hundreds of thousands of pensioners of access to
their pensions and has prevented access to education and health services. Again, our
Western colleagues prefer to not pay attention and shift responsibility.
Armed conflicts in various parts of the world remain a reality, though their
nature has been changed by new threats and potential dangers, such as increased
activity by terrorist groups, which use modern communication technologies, and the
spreading practice of using combat drones. The answer to the problem is full respect
for international law, and first and foremost, international humanitarian law. We
concur with the Secretary-General on the importance of safeguarding the authority of
international humanitarian law. The norms of international humanitarian law should
not be used for political manipulation. There is no need to develop new international
legal concepts that allegedly fill so-called gaps in the protection regime. In practice,
such ideas can only weaken the protection we give civilians. We are convinced that
20-0733723/168

S/2020/465

implementation problems lie not in the weakness of international humanitarian
law, but in the disinclination or reluctance to implement its principles and norms
in practice.
I would like to also touch upon the issue of accountability. Nobody argues
the importance of taking measures to bring to justice those responsible for the most
heinous crimes. However, we can neither share the positive assessments of the work
of the International Criminal Court nor support the call for increased cooperation
with it. We have expressed in detail our position on the activities of the Court on
many occasions. Since then, unfortunately, nothing has changed. The Court has
proven to be the wrong instrument to fight the most severe crimes under international
humanitarian law.
We have repeatedly said that, for a civilized level of criminal prosecution,
reports by non-governmental organizations alone and information from other socalled reliable but never disclosed sources are not enough. Numerous international
investigation mechanisms work under the very same principle, sometimes without
even entering the country where the crime was committed. It makes a mockery of
justice when such information-gathering structures are imposed, against the will
of the State concerned. By establishing them through an illegitimate decision, they
are themselves illegitimate. I am talking, first and foremost, about the so-called
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and
similar initiatives.
I would like to end by recalling the words of the Secretary-General whereby
the COVID-19 pandemic is the greatest test the world has faced since the formation
of the United Nations and severely impacts the protection of civilians. In order to
pass that test we all, namely, Security Council members, should put aside fleeting
differences, egoism, messianism and the temptation to pursue their interests to the
detriment of others and should work together to ensure peace and security for all.

24/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 11
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Trade and Regional Integration of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sir Louis Straker
I wish to thank Her Excellency Ms. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of the Republic
of Estonia, for her opening statement. I also welcome the insightful briefings from
Their Excellencies Secretary-General António Guterres, Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf,
Nobel Peace Prize Laureate and member of The Elders, and Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Protecting civilians from the harsh realities and consequences of armed conflict
is a central priority of our international system. Yet, as conflicts become more complex
and dynamic in nature, our efforts to protect civilians are increasingly tethered to
this multidimensional-threat landscape. The scale of attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure remains unacceptably high, particularly in densely populated
settings where urban warfare is a defining feature of armed conflict. High numbers
of civilian fatalities and injuries, forced displacement, conflict-related sexual
violence against women and girls in particular, but also men and boys, and grave
violations against children, including abduction, forced labour and recruitment to
armed groups, are also equally appalling. The situation for civilians is exacerbated
by the denial of humanitarian access and attacks against peacekeepers and members
of civil society working to alleviate the impact of conflict, as well as deepening
social and economic inequality in many conflict-affected States.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to amplify an already dire
situation for civilians, especially those in internally displaced persons camps with
compromised access to health care, proper nutrition and sanitation. With lockdown
measures impeding humanitarian service delivery and heightening exposure to
sexual and gender-based violence, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes that
COVID-19 mitigation strategies must centre on the diverse socioeconomic needs of
civilians in conflict-affected areas.
The urgent and ever-growing challenges of the climate crisis further
compound the protection of civilians agenda. We are all aware of the increasing
accounts of extreme weather phenomena, including erratic precipitation, flooding,
prolonged heat waves and desertification, affecting countries from the Sahel to
the greater Horn of Africa. This is further compounded by the expanding desert
locust infestation. These challenges lead to increased vulnerability, intensify food
insecurity and forcibly displace many at-risk populations in situations of conflict.
The complications of climate, conflict and COVID-19 must be systematically and
simultaneously addressed to ensure durable security and development outcomes for
all civilians in these regions and beyond.
Efforts to safeguard the lives and livelihoods of civilians must adhere to
the principles enshrined in international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly
condemns the ongoing and flagrant violations of this body of international law,
established to secure the dignity and well-being of all persons.
We recall all relevant Security Council resolutions that embed the protection
of civilians agenda in our efforts to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuance and
recurrence of armed conflict. We also emphasize that human dignity must remain
the cornerstone of any credible attempt to promote lasting peace and security.
As we contemplate the calls for greater specificity in the protection of civilians
agenda to reflect the diverse groups and individuals affected by armed conflict
20-0733725/168

S/2020/465

versus the supposed threat of fragmentation of this agenda, let us not renege on
our collective responsibility to all humankind. The exigencies of our time demand
precision, care, specificity, prudence and inclusivity to achieve the transformation
envisaged by those civilians on whose behalf we serve.

26/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
It has been an honour to have Her Excellency Ms. Kaljulaid, President of the
Republic of Estonia, address the Council today. I wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Guterres, for his annual report on the protection of civilians (S/2020/366), which
underpins our discussions today. I wish to also thank Mr. Peter Maurer and Ms. Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf, former President of Liberia, for the opportunity for us to benefit
from their knowledge and experience in the field of the protection of civilians.
Our discussion on the protection of civilians is taking place at a time when
we are faced with, arguably, the biggest global challenge since the end of the Second
World War. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has impacted all of us,
irrespective of our levels of development and whether or not we are experiencing
conflict. However, countries in conflict will require additional support to mitigate
the impact of COVID-19 on the population, in particular, internally displaced persons
and refugees, who will be in dire need of humanitarian assistance.
Armed conflicts continue to have a devastating impact on civilians, with
millions being forced from their homes and thousands killed or injured. Children
are growing up knowing nothing else but war, while women and girls continue to be
subjected to sexual and gender-based violence and other forms of violations. Access
to humanitarian assistance is being compromised, with the destruction of hospitals,
attacks on medical transport and essential services and the military use of medical
facilities and schools having become common place in countries experiencing
conflict. It is important that the protection of civilian facilities maintain their civilian
character and not be misused by parties to a conflict.
The advent of the COVID-19 pandemic is further compounding efforts aimed
at protecting civilians. In this regard, South Africa wishes to reiterate its full support
for the call by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire in order to focus on the
fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Security Council is mandated to maintain international peace and
security. If innocent children, women and men continue to suffer on our watch and
the Council fails to take meaningful action, we will be failing in the responsibility
entrusted to us. It is regrettable that the plight of civilians in protracted conflict
situations, such as in Palestine and Western Sahara, seems not to receive adequate
attention and that accountability for violations against civilians in these territories
is lacking.
The protection of civilians during armed conflict is a cornerstone of
international humanitarian law. South Africa underlines that the primary
responsibility of States is to protect civilians within their borders. In this regard,
we reiterate our call on all parties to armed conflict, State and non-State actors, to
comply with the obligations applicable to them under international humanitarian law
and to take the required steps to protect civilians.
In order to deter the threats to civilians and foster greater compliance with
international humanitarian law, we believe that the necessary accountability
mechanisms at the national level are essential. Broader regional and international
mechanisms should continue to support these, based on the principles of
complementarity and subsidiarity.
United Nations peacekeeping is one of the most recognized mechanisms for
the protection of civilians. Peacekeeping operations, whatever their mandate, are
essential to ensuring the protection of civilians. However, it is also important to
20-0733727/168

S/2020/465

recognize the changing environment in which peacekeepers currently operate and
the emerging threats to international peace and security in order to execute the
protection of civilians mandate. Needless to say, we should ensure that the protection
of civilians mandate is adequately funded. If the Council is going to issue mandates
to protect civilians, we have to provide the necessary resources to those executing
the mandate.
Finally, greater coordination and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, such as the African Union, which continues to develop its
framework on the protection of civilians for its own peace support operations, are
necessary to create an enabling environment for the protection of civilians. The
comparative advantage of regional organizations can enable closer collaboration and
coordination with local communities, including creating the necessary environment
for the return of refugees and internally displaced persons on a voluntary basis and
in accordance with the principle of non-refoulement.

28/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 13
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia,
Noureddine Erray
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this high-level open meeting on
such a highly important topic as the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Let
me take this opportunity to congratulate Estonia on a successful presidency of the
Security Council this month, despite the difficult work conditions imposed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I would like also to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for
his comprehensive briefing and report (S/2020/366) and commend his leadership and
tireless efforts to uphold the protection of civilians, especially in this particularly
difficult COVID-19 context, which severely impacts populations already afflicted
by conflicts, including refugees and displaced people, as well as those living
under occupation.
My thanks and appreciation go also to Mr. Peter Maurer for the long-standing
commitment and action of the International Committee of the Red Cross related to
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and other situations of violence for
more than a century. I salute the participation in this meeting of the Nobel Peace
Laureate Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a leading actor in the promotion of peace, justice
and democratic rule.
It is important on such occasions to recall that protection for the civilian
population is a basic element of humanitarian law. Civilians not taking part in
hostilities must, on no account, be attacked and should be spared and protected.
The 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols contain
specific rules to protect civilians. In situations that are not covered by these treaties,
such as cases of internal violence, civilians remain legally protected by other
instruments of international law, mainly human rights law, as well as by national
laws compatible with international laws and by the principle of humanity.
Unfortunately, despite this adequate and comprehensive legal framework,
today’s reality shows that the civilian population continue to suffer most from the
consequences of armed violence. In the various ongoing conflicts, whether in Africa,
the Middle East or elsewhere, civilians are increasingly caught up in hostilities,
including in urban populated areas. Even worse, in many instances, we witness
military operations by armed groups deliberately targeting civilians as a retaliation
for perceived support to their adversaries.
The Secretary-General’s report contains disturbing information about tens of
thousands of civilians killed, physically injured or traumatized in 2019. It reveals
that millions of people continue to be forced from their homes or displaced. It is
regrettable to recognize also that conflict-related sexual violence persists in many
armed conflicts, where women and girls, in particular, are still subject to appalling
sexual violence. It is equally deplorable to acknowledge that conflicts continue to
have a devastating impact on children, as tens of thousands of boys and girls are
being forced to take part in hostilities, including on front lines, and are being exposed
to a multitude of other violations, including killing, maiming and sexual violence.
The protection of civilians may even deteriorate under COVID-19, a context
that might be seen by some parties to conflicts as an opportunity to strike while
Governments and the international community are absorbed by the health crisis.
Such a scenario could lead to increased violence and civilian suffering.
We have to admit that more than 70 years after the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions and more than 20 years after the Security Council added the protection
20-0733729/168

S/2020/465

of civilians to its agenda, the results are way below expectations. The truth is that
the terrible suffering that continues to be inflicted upon civilians caught up in armed
conflicts is due not to an inadequate legal framework, but to poor compliance by
actors and an absence of accountability for serious violations. Such suffering would
be highly diminished if parties to conflicts respected international humanitarian
law and international human rights law or if perpetrators of serious violations were
held accountable.
The lack of action against violations of international humanitarian law has
unfortunately led to the perception of a free ride for parties to a conflict to commit
atrocities. As a party to the Rome Statute, Tunisia is strongly committed to the
fight against impunity and reiterates its full support to the International Criminal
Court to investigate, prosecute and try individuals accused of committing the most
serious crimes of concern to the international community. Criminal justice is badly
needed to prevent the recurrence of violations of international humanitarian law.
Justice should be based on credible investigation and prosecution, and not be subject
to politicization.
A number of other factors have also contributed to the deterioration of the
protection of civilians, including the growing intercommunal, ethnic and religious
tensions and violence, the increasing involvement of armed groups and nonState actors in the conduct of hostilities, including foreign terrorist fighters and
mercenaries, the widespread availability of weapons, mainly as a result of illicit
trafficking in small arms and violations of arms embargoes, in addition to the use
of armed remotely piloted aircraft or drones by an increasing number of States and
some non-State armed groups to conduct indiscriminate attacks in places such as
Libya, Somalia and Yemen. We believe that it is urgent to initiate a debate around the
growing acquisition and use of armed drones in order to address concerns not only
over compliance with international humanitarian law and accountability, but also
over their use by non-State actors in terrorist activities.
Beyond calling for promoting respect for international humanitarian law and
accountability, the protection of civilians requires that we strive to put an end to
the hostilities and silence the guns everywhere. In this regard, we reiterate our full
support for the call launched on 23 March by the Secretary-General for a global
ceasefire. We believe that the Security Council has a moral obligation to support
this call, particularly in the COVID-19 pandemic context, and we look forward to
the unanimous adoption of the draft resolution presented by Tunisia and France in
this regard.
However, stopping hostilities is not enough. It is also our responsibility to
find durable solutions to many protracted conflicts and disputes, which continue to
inflict suffering upon civilians in the Palestinian territories, Libya, Yemen and many
parts of Africa. It is our responsibility, too, to ensure full compliance with arms
embargoes and prevent the flow of arms, which perpetuates hostilities and leads
to more civilian casualties. It is our responsibility to prevent the outbreak of armed
conflict and to address its root causes before hostilities take the lead over preventive
diplomacy and before it is too late to save civilians.
To conclude, let me say that ensuring the protection of civilians needs a
united Security Council take up its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security more efficiently. It needs its members to prioritize
the global common interests of the international community. It needs all of us to
uphold our commitment to multilateralism and to the Charter of the United Nations.
As an elected member, Tunisia will spare no effort during its mandate to contribute
to these goals.

30/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 14
Statement by the Special Representative of the Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict and Minister of State for
the Commonwealth and the United Nations, Lord Ahmad
I thank our briefers, Peter Maurer, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and, of course,
Secretary-General Guterres.
The stark reality of today’s debate is that despite all our efforts — our
collective efforts — civilians still bear the brunt of conflict. States have the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, but too often they and other parties to conflict
flout their obligations. The indirect consequences are death, injury, violence against
children, torture and much more.
In this year’s report (S/2020/366), the Secretary-General has again noted the
appalling use of sexual and gender-based violence and attacks on places of worship.
As the British Prime Minister’s Special Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict, and also as Minister for Human Rights for the United Kingdom, I can
assure the Security Council that our commitment to leading global action to tackle
these horrific crimes and support all survivors remains solid. It remains steadfast.
When the United Nations emerged from the ashes of global conflict 75 years
ago, we all collectively resolved to end such horrors. The United Nations has since
become the heart of our international system based on our shared values and rules.
Together, we have developed responses to conflict and measures to protect civilians,
and we now recognize that our interventions must go beyond physical pain and
that we must protect access to basic services and address psychological harm and,
indeed, family separation.
One of the most pivotal steps we have taken together was the establishment
of the Blue Helmets and the Blue Berets, deploying peacekeeping missions and
special political missions to conflicts all over the world. To strengthen them further,
the United Kingdom continues to support the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. It is important we deliver on the commitments we made in
the shared declaration and fully implement resolution 2436 (2018).
Accountability is also essential for the United Nations, for our peacekeepers
and, indeed, for ourselves. It is a fundamental part of providing protection for civilians.
The United Kingdom Government values the contribution of the International
Criminal Court to the fight for justice and unity by holding perpetrators to account
for the most serious crimes of international concern. We shall together shine the
spotlight on individual responsibility and deter future atrocities.
Our work together at the United Nations over many decades has furnished us
with the necessary tools to stem conflicts. Yet too often we still hesitate to use them,
even when the need is great. Nowhere is that need greater than when we look at the
conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Myanmar.
Protecting civilians in Syria should be an urgent priority for all of us. The
United Kingdom Government continues to urge all parties to the conflict to do
just that and the forces to uphold international humanitarian law. More than half
the pre-war population is now displaced, and it is unacceptable that the Al-Assad
regime continues to prevent aid from reaching millions of people who need it. It is
imperative that all parties engage constructively and provide unfettered access to
humanitarian organizations. The humanitarian situation in the north-west remains
particularly dire. It is therefore important that we, the Security Council, come
20-0733731/168

S/2020/465

together behind resolution 2504 (2020), on cross-border aid, when it is renewed in
July. It is also crucial that we act on the findings of the United Nations Headquarters
Board of Inquiry investigation into the appalling attacks in Idlib in 2019 and hold
those responsible to account.
The protection of civilians is also of paramount importance in Yemen. The
ongoing conflict has claimed more than 100,000 lives, and we must all continue to
push the parties to the conflict to uphold international humanitarian law and protect
human rights. With 80 per cent of the population reliant on humanitarian aid, it
is crucial that parties comply with resolution 2451 (2018) and facilitate safe, rapid
and unhindered access for humanitarian response. In the long term, the best way to
protect Yemen’s civilians is a comprehensive political solution to the conflict, and
we therefore urge the parties to engage constructively with the peace process led by
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths.
In Myanmar, the recent escalation of the conflict between the military and
the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army has led to a spike in civilian casualties,
further internal displacement and restrictions on humanitarian access. We urge an
immediate cessation of hostilities in Rakhine and Chin states. Those who commit
human rights violations, including against the Rohingya, must be held to account,
and there must be unhindered humanitarian access to protect all communities from
the effects of COVID-19.
With regard to COVID-19, its potentially catastrophic impacts mount on top
of the challenges facing civilians living amid armed conflict. We must now redouble
our efforts to protect them, including from those who would seek to use the pandemic
to their advantage.
When opportunity to end conflict lies before us, let us reach for our tools, not
our excuses. Let us get behind the Secretary-General’s call for a global humanitarian
ceasefire. Let all parties to armed conflict lay down their weapons at this time and
use the space to shield their people from COVID-19. Let us work collectively to build
towards peace. Diplomacy can make that a reality. Working together, we could make
it a reality.

32/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Sven, the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and President Sirleaf for
their informative presentations today. This annual briefing is especially timely in the
context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
As the Secretary-General’s report on the protection of civilians (S/2020/366)
states, the pandemic has the potential to devastate conflict-affected countries
and overwhelm already weak health-care systems. It will continue to exacerbate
vulnerabilities for women and girls, refugees, displaced persons, and older persons,
making conflict mediation more challenging.
The United States has already provided over $1 billion in health and
humanitarian aid to combat COVID-19. Our foreign assistance is saving lives and
helping address economic devastation around the world. Consistent with the United
States strategy on women and peace and security, we are working to ensure that our
assistance includes local strategies to mitigate COVID-19’s acute risks to women
and girls, including conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence.
The United States strongly believes that all parties to conflict must comply
with international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Promoting
training and sensitization to these laws, consistent with the United Nations Human
Rights Due Diligence Policy, as applicable, will be critical. The United States has
shared and built upon best practices, including bilaterally and during coalition
operations. We encourage others to do the same.
Globally, attacks on civilians are all-too common. For instance, the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(S/2020/210) notes that anti-Government elements were responsible for the majority
of civilian deaths. In Myanmar, the United Nations Independent International FactFinding Mission on Myanmar documented the security forces’ long-standing practice
of attacking civilians from ethnic and religious minority groups.
In Syria, the Al-Assad regime and its military allies, Russia and Iran, continue
to put civilians at risk by using barrel bombs and improvised rocket-assisted
munitions. These have killed countless children.
We applaud the efforts of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which is collecting and preserving evidence of crimes
committed in the country, and the United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry,
which recently investigated perpetrators of attacks on civilian infrastructure. In line
with resolution 2254 (2015), we call for the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in Syrian political and peace processes.
Protecting civilians in armed conflict is a collective effort. We support
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire to enable health officials
to address COVID-19, and for unhindered and safe access for human rights and
humanitarian workers. It is critical that access be ensured for humanitarians, healthcare personnel and supplies to all people in need in order to provide life-saving
humanitarian assistance.
Civil society, including journalists and human rights defenders, plays an
important role in investigating violations and abuses. The Council must help to
protect these individuals from reprisals. Member States must also address violations
20-0733733/168

S/2020/465

and abuses of international humanitarian and human rights law through relevant
national, regional and international legal mechanisms.
The United States supports the Secretary-General’s call for national protection
frameworks to strengthen respect for international humanitarian law and promote
monitoring and reporting mechanisms. Leveraging technology for more robust
crisis-mapping and data analysis will be needed to establish early-warning systems.
Likewise, we support the Department of Peace Operations revised protection
of civilians policy. Peacekeeping creates the space for political and peace processes
to take shape, enabling host States to find durable solutions to armed conflict. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Security Council has adapted the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to meet the difficult challenge of protecting civilians in the eastern
part of the country. The new mandate enhances and clarifies the role of the Force
Intervention Brigade, addressing the concerns of Congolese civilians who wanted
a more immediate response to attacks by armed groups. The Security Council’s
willingness to adapt and refine mandates to meet needs on the ground helps to ensure
that missions are fit-for-purpose.
To better protect civilians in conflict, the United States and 46 Member States
have endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. We encourage all
Member States to join us so that we can help peacekeepers effectively implement
their protection of civilian mandates. While we know that COVID-19 has restricted
movement and troop rotations, it is important that peace operations continue to fulfil
their protection of civilian mandates while ensuring the safety, security and health
of all United Nations personnel.
The United States believes that efforts to protect civilians and build peace
cannot be achieved without the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.
Peace is more durable when women are at the table for peace talks. Additionally,
increasing women’s meaningful participation in peacekeeping improves operational
effectiveness and a mission’s ability to fulfil protection of civilian mandates.
Today’s video-teleconference is an opportunity to discuss how, collectively,
we can better protect civilians in conflict. The Security Council cannot accept
attacks on children, infrastructure and civilians as normal. Especially amid the
COVID-19 pandemic, we are compelled to demonstrate the political will to promote
implementation of protection frameworks and pursue accountability for violations
of international law. The United States will continue to seek mechanisms to better
protect civilians from barbaric acts — the acts that the United Nations was created
to prevent.

34/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank the Estonian presidency for convening this timely debate. I am also
grateful for the statements by the Secretary-General and other briefers.
We note with serious concern the continued suffering of civilians in
armed conflicts in 2019, when more than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured
in 10 countries. Civilians continue to account for the vast majority of deaths and
injuries in armed conflicts. Women and children remain targets of violence and
abuse, accounting for 42 per cent of casualties and injured. Millions of people remain
displaced, facing the increased risk of starvation and fatal contagion.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts has been an arduous task for
the international community and for the Security Council. Last year, the Security
Council marked the twentieth anniversary of the addition of the protection of civilians
on its agenda. It was highlighted that the Council’s actions had undoubtedly saved
civilians’ lives, yet much more needed to be done. One year later, we are saddened
to hear that the reality on the ground tells a vastly different story. It is high time we
redouble our efforts and transform our political will and commitments to actions. In
this regard, I would like to make the following observations.
We continue to stress the paramount importance of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. An ounce of prevention in this case may save hundreds or even
thousands of lives. Addressing the root causes of conflicts and ensuring equity,
justice and development are the best ways to prevent conflicts from occurring or
recurring. We support the full and meaningful participation of women in conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Regional organizations should play a leading
role in promoting preventive diplomacy and confidence-building measures. In that
regard, we are proud to share that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations has
made a major contribution to turning Southeast Asia into a region of friendship
and cooperation.
When an armed conflict breaks out, it is the primary responsibility of States
to protect their own citizens. States should not start addressing this responsibility
from scratch. We support enhancing national ownership of this issue, including
through strengthening awareness among national entities regarding their obligations
under international humanitarian law, and through building national capacity.
United Nations peacekeeping operations, while abiding by the principles of
peacekeeping, can assist in certain cases. It is essential that they be given clear
protection of civilians mandates and have adequate resources and training to meet
the mandate’s expectations.
Enhancing and ensuring respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law, by all parties to armed conflicts, especially the principles
of distinction, necessity and proportionality, is crucial. We strongly condemn
attacks against civilians and civilian objects. Those violations must be addressed
appropriately at the national and international levels, in accordance with applicable
laws and the Charter of the United Nations. It is extremely distressing to hear reports
of attacks against health-care facilities and schools. Other infrastructure critical to
the survival of civilians and communities should also be protected, such as that
linked to water and food security. With increased urban warfare, extra care should
be given to ensuring the well-being of innocent civilians in densely populated areas.

20-0733735/168

S/2020/465

It is imperative that all civilians have access to assistance. We call on all
parties to armed conflicts to ensure unhindered access of humanitarian agencies
that operate in accordance with the guiding principles of humanitarian assistance.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is exacerbating the
vulnerability of civilians in conflict situations. Access to and supply of necessary
assistance should take precedence. We reiterate our support for the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global humanitarian ceasefire to allow for an adequate response
to COVID-19. All parties should join forces to fight this common enemy, and
make every effort to plan and implement concrete and meaningful steps to peace
and recovery.
As a country whose people have first-hand experience of such suffering, we
fully empathize with the plight of civilians in armed conflicts around the world. The
protection of civilians will remain among the top priorities of Viet Nam during its
membership of the Security Council and beyond.

36/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan to the United Nations, Adela Raz
Allow me to start by thanking the Estonian presidency for having convened
today’s Security Council open video-teleconference meeting on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Let me also thank Secretary-General António Guterres;
the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer; and
Nobel Peace Laureate, member of The Elders and former President of Liberia Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf for their insightful briefings on this matter.
As a country affected by protracted conflict and imposed wars, Afghanistan
is deeply aware of the devasting, long-lasting impacts that conflict has on civilians.
For more than four decades, my country and people have endured the severe social,
economic and psychological impacts of war. As a result, we have seen increases
in poverty and instability, and millions of Afghans have been forced to migrate,
becoming internally displaced, while countless others have lost their lives. Owing
to the surges of violence perpetrated by the Taliban, the Afghan people are not safe
at sports fields, hospitals, mosques, weddings and funeral ceremonies, or now, as a
result on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, at home.
The Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and their affiliate
terrorist groups continue their indiscriminate attacks on all segments of Afghan
society, targeting civilians and even using them as shields. The last few months have
seen a series of heinous and inhumane crimes that have further exemplified that
disregard for innocent lives.
Just last week, in a mosque attack, 12 worshippers lost their lives while waiting
to break their fast. Three weeks ago, terrorists linked to ISIL and the Taliban attacked
a maternity ward at a hospital in Kabul, killing 24 people, including nurses, newborn
babies and their mothers, while a further 24 people were killed in a suicide strike at
a funeral in Nangahar, in eastern Afghanistan. On 25 March, another brutal terrorist
attack took place on the Dharamshala Sikh Temple in Kabul, in which 25 people
from our Sikh community lost their lives while a dozen others were injured. Those
acts not only constitute war crimes and flagrant violations of international human
rights law but also are deep and profound losses that have shattered families and
communities. And they are only examples from a long list of acts perpetrated by
these groups.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/366), in 2019
Afghanistan accounted for the largest number of recorded civilian casualties, having
seen 10,392 civilians killed or injured, with women and children representing
42 percent of the victims. The most recent United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) quarterly report recorded 710 civilian casualties by antiGovernment elements between January and March 2020, with 39 per cent of those
being attributed to the Taliban alone. Following a brief period of reduction in
violence, attacks by the Taliban increased after the signing of the peace agreement
between the Taliban and the United States.
The situation has been further exacerbated by the outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic, which requires immediate preventive, curative and humanitarian measures
in conflict-affected areas to protect and safeguard vulnerable people. In line with
the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global ceasefire, the Government has
been insistent in calling for a lasting ceasefire with the Taliban that could effectively
create an environment that is both conducive to peace talks and that could allow us
to effectively address the humanitarian situation created by the pandemic. On that
20-0733737/168

S/2020/465

note, we hope that the recent three-day Eid al-Fitr ceasefire can lay the foundation
for a more sustainable cease of hostilities.
The Government of Afghanistan is committed to the protection of civilians in
conflict and to avoiding the ultimate collateral damage from operations and expects
the same of our partners from the international coalition. In 2017, we adopted a
national policy on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation, and the Government
continues to exhaust efforts to ensure that such incidents do not take place. Efforts
have included strict rules of engagement in our armed forces and the establishment
of the post of Deputy National Security Adviser to oversee civilian-protection issues.
Violence against humanitarian workers and the targeting of medical personnel
in the face of COVID-19 are egregious acts that must be stopped. Of the 18 attacks
that were recorded by UNAMA over the past few months, 17 were attributed to
the Taliban. The group has ignored all calls from the Government to enter into a
ceasefire to effectively address this pandemic, thwarting not only our ability to end
the pandemic but putting further strain on our health-care systems and resources,
which we must divert to addressing their repeated attacks. Most recently, on
22 March, the Taliban abducted a group of health workers and their driver as they
were on their way to evaluate a health facility, releasing them two days later.
The Government of Afghanistan underlines the role of the Security Council
in the resolution and prevention of conflicts and the protection of civilians through
the implementation of recommendations of the Secretary-General and of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on the matter, as well as the effective
implementation of sanctions regimes. We welcome the three-day ceasefire agreed by
the Taliban and the Government and will continue to implement confidence-building
measures, such as our pledge to release 2,000 prisoners to finally bring peace to our
country and ensure we can respond to the new challenges brought by the pandemic.
The people of Afghanistan are war-weary and eager for peace. My Government
understands that now is not the time for continued conflict. Now more than ever,
it is important that Afghans come together to address the various impacts of the
pandemic so that we can create a peaceful, secure and stable future.
I would like to reiterate the commitment of my Government to ensuring
the safety and security of our people, in line with our national and international
obligations, and our strong belief that resolving conflicts remains the most effective
way to ensure the protection of civilians. To that end, we remain committed to
working towards reaching a long-lasting resolution of the conflict in Afghanistan
and hope that the United Nations and our international partners will continue to
support us in achieving an objective that is desperately longed for and deserved by
the people of our country.

38/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations, Maria de Jesus dos Reis Ferreira
I wish to thank and congratulate the Estonian presidency for having convened
this debate on the critical issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/366) and take good
note of the recommendations therein, and we avail ourselves of this opportunity to
reiterate Angola’s commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Geneva Conventions of international humanitarian law and the
international human rights framework.
Angola is of the view that prevention is the most effective tool for addressing
potential conflict situations; that States bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of their civilian population; and that the international community has a
subsidiary but very important role to play in addressing the very serious problem of
threats against civilians.
As the world faces an unprecedented challenge in responding to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, those living in conflict-affected countries remain
among the most vulnerable and at risk from the consequences of the disease. It is
crucial that we discuss the impact as well as the repercussions on protection activities
and humanitarian assistance of the public-health measures adopted subsequently to
mitigate its propagation.
While the COVID-19 pandemic revealed the fundamental fractures and
societal deficits in many countries and significant resources are being diverted
to respond to the health crisis, containment strategies have amplified the existing
vulnerabilities of civilian populations caught up in conflict and humanitarian
crises, and they have created new protection challenges for humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers, while conflict actors have continued to engage in violent attacks
against civilians and vulnerable groups.
It is important that Governments and the international community, while
absorbed by the health crisis, do not neglect protection activities and adjust their
actions in the field in order to continue to fulfil critical functions, respond to
emerging needs, support public-health efforts and discourage parties to conflict
from pressing their advantage or seeking opportunities to perpetrate attacks or
increase the violence and civilian suffering.
The world continues to experience prolonged conflicts that lead to economic
and humanitarian crises and require urgent long-term solutions. Furthermore,
terrorism, violent extremism and proxy wars waged by outside Powers continue to
pose an existential threat to civilians. We cannot allow armed conflicts to derail
our common development agenda. It is urgent to promote conflict prevention and
conflict resolution centred on dialogue, with the true aim of silencing weapons and
creating conditions favourable to development.
Unfortunately, despite the establishment of a robust normative framework
by the Security Council, the United Nations and other international bodies, the
protection of civilians and the strengthening of protection in peacekeeping missions
have not been translated into significant improvements to the protection of civilians
where conflicts are rampant.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilian
points to widespread civilian deaths and injuries and estimates that more than 20,000
civilians were killed or injured in 2019 as a result of attacks in conflicts. With an
20-0733739/168

S/2020/465

increase in the number of civilians killed or injured by improvised explosive devices,
ground engagements, air strikes or other tactics, children, women, older people,
people with disabilities and humanitarian personnel continue to account for the vast
majority of recorded victims.
In that context, we remain particularly concerned about three critical
issues: first, referring to humanitarian access, which remains a key challenge in
many armed-conflict situations, with warring parties obstructing the delivery of
assistance, as a tactic of war, putting additional strain on civilians; secondly, the
brutalizing of civilians and the targeting of civilian infrastructure, in total disregard
of international humanitarian law, and the lack of accountability enjoyed by most
parties to armed conflict has become an endemic feature in ongoing conflicts,
further aggravating the plight of civilian populations; and, thirdly, the fact that the
widespread use of explosive devices is having a devastating humanitarian impact on
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
In this regard, Angola joins the Secretary-General’s call for the wide
ratification of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and for States to
endorse and implement the Safe Schools Declaration.
This open debate is a clear sign that we are not doing enough to implement
existing policy regarding the protection of civilians. As the Secretary-General
correctly emphasizes in paragraph 50 of his report, the principal challenges regarding
the effective protection of civilians remain respect for the law and accountability for
serious violations, and our shared responsibility for preventing violations continues
to be as essential as ever.
We call on the Council and all international actors to move beyond rhetoric,
demand respect for international humanitarian law and lead international efforts
to end impunity by holding perpetrators to account and to facilitate the taking of
decisions and actions that respond to the present global reality and challenges.

40/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for having convened this
Security Council open high-level video-teleconference on the theme of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. The participation of the President of the Republic
of Estonia, Kersti Kaljulaid; Secretary-General António Guterres; the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Peter Maurer; and Nobel
Peace Laureate and member of The Elders Ellen Johnson Sirleaf in this videoteleconference demonstrates the persistent relevance of the topic, in particular in the
light of the recent new challenges.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2020/366) and for the recommendations contained therein. The
crisis caused by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
had a severe impact on the protection of civilians in conflict situations. Armenia
has extended its unequivocal support to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global
ceasefire, which is a key prerequisite for facilitating efforts to address the pandemic
in conflict contexts. The Secretary-General’s appeal was also supported by the
authorities of Nagorno Karabakh.
The report points out the devastating impact of conflicts on civilians, with
tens of thousands of casualties, gender-based violence targeting women and girls,
violations of the human rights of children and indiscriminate attacks on civilian
infrastructure. We share the Secretary-General’s view as to the urgent need to facilitate
rapid, unimpeded and safe humanitarian access to the conflict-affected population
in order to prevent the suffering of civilians. Attempts to deny humanitarian access
aimed at meeting the protection needs of people living in conflict areas should be
identified and effectively addressed. International humanitarian law and international
human rights law remain crucial frameworks for the effective protection of civilian
populations. Armenia attaches the utmost importance to the full compliance by all
parties to conflict with the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional,
without any political preconditions.
The promotion of the norms of international humanitarian law is an important
element of Armenia’s security-sector governance and reform. International
humanitarian law is incorporated into the curriculums of Armenia’s military
educational institutions. The Government of Armenia prioritizes the safety of
children and the protection of their right to education, in line with its commitments
under the Safe Schools Declaration. The protection of women and girls affected
by conflict is another important priority of the Government of Armenia, reflected
also in the national action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security.
Armenia appreciates the close involvement of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in protecting schools through the construction of safe rooms and
protection walls and the implementation of other programmes. Full and unimpeded
access by the ICRC to conflict areas, including to places of detention, is vital to
ensuring the protection of civilians.
The civilian population of Armenia’s border regions and Artsakh (Nagorno
Karabakh) continue to face serious humanitarian risks, which may be further
exacerbated owing to the spread of the pandemic and the suspension of the activities
of conflict-related field operations. Strict adherence to the 1994 trilateral ceasefire
agreement concluded by Nagorno Karabakh, Azerbaijan and Armenia and the 1995
20-0733741/168

S/2020/465

agreement on consolidation of the ceasefire regime is essential to ensuring the
protection of civilians and preventing violations of international humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn Azerbaijan’s continual attempts to escalate the situation
along the line of contact between Artsakh and Azerbaijan and the ArmenianAzerbaijani border, including the targeting of civilians, border settlements and
infrastructure, infiltration attempts and large-scale, unnotified military exercises
of an offensive nature. At a time when the international community is consolidating
its efforts in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, such actions display total
disregard for the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire and the calls
made by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group
co-Chairs to refrain from any provocative action that could further raise tensions
during this period.
For a long time, Armenia has been raising the need to address the manifestations
of racial and ethnic profiling, the glorification of hate crimes and the denial and
justification of past crimes, especially those led and incited by State leaders.
On 26 May, the European Court of Human Rights made its ruling on the
case Makuchyan and Minasyan v. Azerbaijan and Hungary in relation to Azerbaijan’s
release and glorification of its officer, Ramil Safarov, who murdered Armenian
officer Gurgen Margaryan when he was asleep by axing him to death while
participating in a training course within the framework of the 2004 Partnership for
Peace programme in Budapest. Here is an excerpt of that ruling:
“The court is particularly struck by the fact that, in addition to immediate
release, upon his return to Azerbaijan R.S. was granted a number of benefits,
such as salary arrears for the period spent in prison, a flat in Baku and a
promotion in military rank awarded at a public ceremony.”
The release of the convicted murderer by decree of the President of Azerbaijan
and the glorification of Mr. Safarov is an affront to the standards of civilization and
human dignity.
Today resolute action by the United Nations and regional organizations to
advance prevention, including the prevention of hate speech and identity-based
crimes, is more critical than ever to ensure the effective protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

42/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina thanks Estonia for organizing this open debate in the Security
Council and welcomes the briefings made by Secretary-General António Guterres,
Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate.
In our view, it is critical that the Council continue to be committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict through the promotion of full respect for
international law — particularly humanitarian, human rights and refugee law — and
the fight against impunity.
As expressed by the Secretary-General in his most recent report (S/2020/366)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
crisis has put the most vulnerable members of society at even greater risk. Argentina
therefore reiterates its full support for the Secretary-General’s call, on 23 March, for
an immediate global ceasefire in order to help create the necessary conditions for the
provision of humanitarian assistance, facilitate diplomacy and bring hope to those
most vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition, all parties to conflicts must make every effort to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian assistance, including cargo and materials. Such
assistance enjoys special protection under international humanitarian law. It is
therefore of concern that in many situations access to humanitarian assistance is
impeded or even denied.
Furthermore, we must collaborate and combine efforts to protect and promote
the access of civilians, especially the most vulnerable, to all health services, including
medical care and maternal and reproductive health services. This population is now
more vulnerable than ever due to the pandemic, which is overburdening systems and
facilities already devastated by conflict.
We must continue to include and promote the protection of civilians in the
mandates of United Nations field missions, and ensure that such provisions are clearly
developed and that said operations are effectively and efficiently resourced. At the
same time, we note that all peacekeeping operations must comply with international
humanitarian law.
Argentina echoes the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
in stressing the importance of ensuring that the protection of civilians during
peacekeeping operations is carried out in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the guiding principles of peacekeeping
operations. Similarly, any use of force in response to threats of physical violence
against civilians must be in keeping with applicable legal obligations, the mandate
established by the Council and each mission’s specific rules of engagement
and intervention.
We believe that non-military strategies to protect civilians in peacekeeping
operations are very valuable political tools that can help to end violent conflicts
while building trust among the parties in their search for peaceful solutions and in
their efforts to advance the peace process.

20-0733743/168

S/2020/465

Host Governments also bear the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians. That is why it is essential to maintain close cooperation and open dialogue
with national authorities.
The Argentine Republic supports the vision of prevention and early warning
for civilian protection mandates, as promoted by the Secretary-General, as well as
its connection with the second pillar — the responsibility to protect. That vision also
enjoys the support of the Independent High-level Panel on Peace Operations.
We believe that it is necessary to elaborate a robust strategy for the prevention
of atrocity crimes that includes an impartial analysis of the facts. Such a strategy
must include the necessary financial resources and political support to ensure that
the international community’s response reaction is never again late or weak.
Our country is a member of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict and, since the 2005 World Summit, has supported the progressive
development on this issue and participated actively in the various areas in which it
was discussed, particularly in the framework of the General Assembly.
We believe that the protection of civilians should be understood within the
framework of a political and humanitarian perspective that focuses on creating a
safe environment. That is why the protection of civilians in a peace mission requires
the cooperation of its military, police and civilian components. States need to have a
clear and common understanding of the characteristics, modalities and implications
of the protection of civilians. That is especially important in cases where the use of
force is necessary to protect civilians from physical violence, in accordance with
each mission’s mandate and rules of engagement.
In addition, we consider it essential to advance the mainstreaming of the
women and peace and security agenda in peacekeeping operations.
As the Secretary-General’s report indicates, the scourge of conflict-related
sexual violence persists in many armed conflicts, especially among women and
girls. Despite special measures to protect people from sexual exploitation and abuse,
including more robust measures and victim-centred efforts within the Organization
to ensure accountability amid allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations personnel, many major challenges remain. These require constant
vigilance to ensure that systems are in place to identify and mitigate risk, select and
train personnel and deliver on a timely and robust victim-centred response when
allegations are made.
It is worrisome that some counter-terrorism measures continue to adversely
affect humanitarian activities. In that regard, we reiterate the call made in General
Assembly resolution 72/284 for States to ensure, in accordance with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, that anti-terrorist legislation and measures do
not impede humanitarian activities.
Under international humanitarian law and the resolutions of the Council,
attacks of any kind against civilians, especially women and children, or other
protected persons, schools, cultural property and places of worship, as well as
child recruitment and the impeding of humanitarian access, are all violations of
international law.
Argentina shares the international community’s concern that armed conflict
promotes the proliferation of organizations engaged in various forms of international
crime, such as the smuggling of migrants and human and arms trafficking, all of
which directly affect the civilian population.

44/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

In recognition of the fact that young people constitute a large part of
civilians harmed by armed conflict and that disrupting the access of children and
young people to education and economic opportunities has a decisive impact on
the potential for lasting peace and reconciliation, Argentina once again urges those
States that have not done so to adhere to the Safe Schools Declaration, which has
already been endorsed by 105 countries. Together with Norway, Argentina led the
intergovernmental process to draw up the Safe Schools Declaration, and we had the
honour of hosting the second International Conference on Safe Schools in 2017 in
Buenos Aires.
The Security Council must remain committed to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, including through additional consideration of certain elements
such as children, women, journalists or medical personnel, as well as to promoting
respect for international law and ending impunity for serious violations committed
against civilians. In that context, we stress the system’s role with regard to children
and armed conflict. Fulfilling that role requires adequate support. In addition,
we support the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, which aim to prevent the recruitment and
use of child soldiers.
Argentina reaffirms the preventive role of accountability mechanisms.
Impartial mechanisms are essential for the investigation of violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
work of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic, pursuant to Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions, as well as
the central role played by the International Criminal Court. We note that, pursuant to
the Rome Statute, the Court has jurisdiction over many attacks on civilians.
Argentina considers it a priority to continue the debate on the creation of
new mechanisms to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law
and to generate constructive, transparent and inclusive dialogue among States and
other interested parties. We also agree with the Secretary-General on the need to
reduce the implementation gap between the normative framework and realities on
the ground.
With regard to the challenges new technologies pose for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, as identified in the Secretary-General’s report and in
the concept note (S/2020/402, annex) for this open debate, Argentina stresses that
international law, including human rights law and international humanitarian law,
applies to cyberspace. The increase in cyberattacks on the health sector in the context
of the pandemic has highlighted the potential human cost of cyberoperations, as well
as their impact on the civilian population. As societies go digital, the need to protect
critical infrastructure and maintain a safe, stable, open and peaceful cyberspace
increases significantly. In that regard, Argentina supports all efforts being made
to advance the implementation and consolidation of the framework for responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace.
Argentina expresses its deep concern about the threat posed by the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. Such use results in death, injury and trauma
to civilians, damage and destruction to essential infrastructure and critical services
and unintentional displacement. In addition, it leaves behind explosive remnants
of war, which pose a long-term threat to social coexistence and economic activity,
as they potentially compromise the safety of inhabitants. Argentina welcomes the
Secretary-General’s approach to addressing that threat, as set out in his Agenda
for Disarmament.

20-0733745/168

S/2020/465

In December 2018, Argentina, along with more than 20 countries of the
region, signed the Santiago Communiqué, which supports the process culminating
in the negotiation and adoption of an international political declaration on the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas.
With regard to the section of the Secretary-General’s report on the effects of
conflict and climate change on the environment, Argentina agrees that this issue
must be addressed on a case-by-case basis when a specific threat to peace and
security arises, in accordance with the Council’s mandate under the Charter of the
United Nations. However, we reiterate that we must not undermine the role of the
Security Council by considering issues that exceed its mandate, nor, as a general
rule, should environmental issues be linked to security issues.
In the light of the foregoing, it is up to the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme, United Nations Water, the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development, the Regional Economic Commissions,
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the specialized
agencies to address environmental issues.
Likewise, Argentina would like to clarify that there is no consensus in the
international community about the concept of water security. States must work
towards food security and access to water for their populations.
In this unprecedented global crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we
stress the importance of compliance with the ceasefire and international humanitarian
law and human rights law in order to ensure and support an effective response to the
crisis and the protection of the most vulnerable.
Argentina joins with the Secretary-General’s in his vision to reaffirm, today
more than ever, how critical it is for the international community, including the
Security Council, to launch a joint response in support of all States Members of the
United Nations and affected communities.

46/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Austria to the United Nations
Austria would like to thank Estonia for convening this open debate via videoteleconference on the protection of civilians.
My country fully aligns itself with the statements made by the observer of the
European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict. In our national capacity, we would like to highlight a few of our
national priorities.
As we all know, the current coronavirus disease pandemic has been changing
the lives of people around the world. Regrettably, it has also compounded the
numerous challenges that civilians in armed conflict have been facing for a long
time and threatens the livelihoods of already vulnerable people. That is why Austria
did not hesitate to join the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. We call
on all States Members of the United Nations and parties to conflicts to follow suit.
As in previous years, we thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report
(S/2020/366). His assessment therein that the past year brought another 12 months
of suffering unfortunately reflects the dire reality on the ground. Independent
journalism is one way of exposing this human suffering. It can also serve as a means
for promoting accountability and advocating solutions. We are therefore concerned
about the decline in the number of journalists and media workers reporting from
conflict zones as a result of the high degree of insecurity and the rising number of
targeted attacks against them.
Austria would especially like to underline the report’s call for new approaches
to urban warfare. The fact that more than 90 per cent of the victims of the use of
explosive weapons with wide area effects in populated areas (EWIPA) are civilians
is unacceptable. To this end, in October 2019, Austria organized an international
conference to raise awareness of the humanitarian impact of the use of such weapons
and to start drafting a political declaration on the subject. The participation of 133
States, international organizations and civil society showed that there is interest in
this topic. We look forward to the adoption of the declaration and the elaboration of
a toolbox of good practices, to be followed up by workshops, including workshops
directed at the armed forces.
Another subject of great concern to Austria in this context is the fact that
the rapid progress in artificial intelligence enables the development of autonomous
weapons systems. Austria has developed the concept of human control as a central
guideline, and in 2018 introduced a draft mandate for the start of negotiations on
the Chemical Weapons Convention for a legally binding protocol that prohibits
autonomous weapons systems, which are not subject to meaningful human control
in critical functions.
Despite many strong statements issued last year on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the protection-of-civilians agenda (see S/PV.8534), we continue to face
myriad difficulties concerning the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Women
and girls still must endure horrendous acts of sexual and gender-based violence, and
they remain particularly vulnerable in various conflict settings. Civilians in armed
conflict should not be considered mere victims; more important, their contribution
in peacebuilding and humanitarian relief efforts should be acknowledged. In this
regard, we condemn the numerous acts of violence and intimidation against women
and youth peacebuilders, human rights defenders and humanitarian first responders
in armed conflicts.

20-0733747/168

S/2020/465

The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), both occurring this year,
can serve as a reminder and a chance to link the valuable work on women and peace
and security and youth, peace and security more closely with the protection-ofcivilians agenda. Furthermore, Austria welcomes the adoption, in 2019, of resolution
2475 (2019), on the situation of persons with disabilities in armed conflict. We
encourage the Security Council to take the needs of persons with disabilities into
account throughout its entire agenda.
Moreover, we cannot lose sight of the specific situation of minorities or their
needs for protection and assistance. We have unfortunately witnessed throughout
history that discrimination and prejudice against minorities lie at the root of many
conflicts around the world. In his call to action on human rights at the opening of
the Human Rights Council in March, the Secretary-General emphasized that a new
agenda for human rights must also focus on the protection of minorities against any
form of discrimination. In Austria’s view, it is essential that the protection of the
rights of minorities be adequately incorporated in the overall United Nations agenda
for the prevention of conflicts.
As the protection of civilians has in recent years become an integral part of
many United Nations peacekeeping missions, we need to make sure that peacekeepers
are well prepared to fulfil their protection-of-civilians mandates, and we highlight
the importance of disseminating international humanitarian law, particularly to
the armed forces. In the light of this, Austria continues to offer United Nationscertified courses aimed at creating better awareness of the protection of civilians at
the operational level. These courses include several topics pertinent to the women
and peace and security agenda.
We repeat our call for full compliance with international humanitarian
law. The strict and consistent implementation of the principles of international
humanitarian law remains a necessity in all conflict settings. Austria continues to be
a strong supporter of the intergovernmental discussions on strengthening compliance
with international humanitarian law. We believe that accountability and the fight
against impunity for violations of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are central to ensuring lasting peace.
We wish to highlight the important role that the International Criminal Court
(ICC) plays in that regard. In December 2019, the Assembly of States Parties of the
ICC adopted an amendment to article 8 of the Rome Statute concerning the crime
of starvation of civilians in non-international armed conflict. We believe that this
amendment strengthens the Rome Statute system and the protection it provides.
Finally, Austria welcomes the opportunity to contribute to this open videoteleconference by submitting this written statement. However, we hope to see the
Security Council return to its full functions as soon as circumstances permit, and
we look forward to resuming the delivery of oral statements at the next open debate
on the protection of civilians.

48/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations, Yashar Aliyev
At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Estonia for convening
this open high-level video-teleconference meeting on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and for sharing its concept paper on the topic (S/2020/402, annex I).
We also thank the Secretary-General for submitting his report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) and wish to express appreciation to the
briefers for their briefings.
The issue we are discussing today is of the utmost importance for the Security
Council, the entire international community in general and for my country in
particular. Civilians continue to suffer from armed conflicts, whether they be new
or protracted, active or suspended under ceasefire accords. During the reporting
period, tens of thousands of civilians were killed or injured, millions of people were
forced from their homes and direct or indiscriminate attacks damaged and destroyed
homes, schools, hospitals, places of worship and other civilian infrastructure.
Moreover, millions of displaced persons have been prevented from returning to their
homes and are facing limited prospects for early solutions. Alarming numbers of
people continue to remain missing in connection with armed conflicts.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the coronavirus-disease crisis
has created incentives for some parties to conflict to press for an advantage. Their
actions may envisage not only the recourse to force, but also attempts to use the
current health crisis and appeals for an effective humanitarian response to the
pandemic as a shield for consolidating military gains resulting from the use of force,
ethnic cleansing and other serious violations of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Spurious peacefulness and commitment to truce and ceasefire
are among the tools that aggressors frequently employ to freeze territorial seizures
and promote and enhance their scorched-earth policies.
Accordingly, the most effective way to prevent the outbreak, escalation and
continuation of armed conflict, and thereby to protect civilians, is to prioritize
respect for international law in all circumstances and by all available means,
and by ensuring the earliest resolution of conflicts and accountability for serious
violations. In a similar vein, humanitarian relief actions, by definition, should be
exclusively humanitarian in nature. They must be carried out in conformity with the
guiding principles of the United Nations on humanitarian assistance, namely, the
principles of neutrality, impartiality and the consent of the affected country, while
fully respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of States in
accordance with the United Nations Charter.
The forcible deportation of some 250,000 Azerbaijanis from their homes
in Armenia at the end of the 1980s was accompanied by killings, enforced
disappearances, the destruction of property and pillaging. At the end of 1991 and
the beginning of 1992, the full-scale war that was unleashed by Armenia against
Azerbaijan claimed the lives of tens of thousands of people and caused considerable
destruction of civilian infrastructure, property and livelihoods in my country. A
significant part of the territory of Azerbaijan, including the Nagorno Karabakh
region, the seven adjacent districts and some exclaves, was seized by Armenia and
remains under its occupation, in violation of international law and resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993).
The occupied territories were ethnically cleansed of all Azerbaijanis, as a
result of which more than 1 million people in these territories were forced to leave
their homes and properties. Furthermore, Armenia has pursued the deliberate policy
20-0733749/168

S/2020/465

of strengthening its military build-up in the seized territories and of changing their
demographic, cultural and physical character, in clear violation of international law.
These activities undermine the rights and freedoms of hundreds of thousands of
people uprooted from their homes and pose an imminent threat to peace, security
and stability in the region.
Furthermore, as of the beginning of 2020, 3,889 citizens of Azerbaijan were
registered as missing as a result of the conflict, including 719 civilians. Among the
civilians, 71 are children, 267 are women and 326 are elderly persons. It has been
established that 871 of the 3,889 missing persons were either taken as prisoners of war
or hostages, including 604 servicemen and 267 civilians, of whom 29 are children,
98 are women and 112 are elderly persons. Armenia is in breach of international
law for refusing to account for the missing persons within its control, as well as for
refusing to conduct a prompt and effective investigation into the fate of the missing
persons and into the existing evidence that at least 871 of them were taken into its
custody and have not been seen since.
The recently published comprehensive report on war crimes in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan and on Armenia’s responsibility (S/2020/90, annex)
provides convincing evidence as to the range, variety and consistency of Armenia’s
commission of multiple war crimes, including those relating to civilian deaths and
injuries; civilian property; the mistreatment of detainees and prisoners of war; the
taking of hostages, ethnic cleansing and forced displacement leading to changing the
character of the occupied territory; the destruction of cultural heritage; and damage
to the natural environment. Some of the offences examined in the report amount
to the crime of genocide, as ethnic Azerbaijanis have been targeted because of
their nationality and/or ethnicity, and the relevant intent has in part been to destroy
the group.
The facts contained in the report necessitate prompt action by the United
Nations, its relevant organs and mechanisms, Member States, other relevant
international organizations and the international community as a whole to ensure
accountability, in accordance with the international law of State responsibility and
with international criminal law. As the Secretary-General makes clear in his report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, to prevent the recurrence of war
crimes and provide justice to victims, allegations of war crimes require credible
investigation and prosecution wherever and whenever they occur.
In conclusion, it is critically important that the Security Council consistently
maintain its focus on the protection of civilians affected by armed conflicts and
systematically reiterate its demand that parties to armed conflict comply fully with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.

50/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations, Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
First, I would like to thank the permanent delegation of Estonia, which holds
the presidency of the Security Council in this month of May, for holding this important
meeting. It comes at a time when conflicts and armed struggles are multiplying
around the world and the international community is facing the challenges of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which particularly affects civilians in
conflict-affected countries. We welcome the participation in this meeting of Her
Excellency Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of the Republic of Estonia.
I must also thank the briefers, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, SecretaryGeneral; Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross; and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, former President of Liberia and member of
The Panel of the Wise.
The Secretary-General, in his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2020/366), presents a picture of the human suffering of civilians,
especially children, women, the elderly and people with disabilities, in conflicts
around the world. They are compelled to migrate or are displaced and face food
insecurity; in some countries, civilian facilities and populated areas come under
attack. The COVID-19 outbreak has only added to the suffering of civilians caught
up in armed conflicts and poses a direct threat to them, given the destruction of the
health sector, the proliferation of crowded camps that provide an ideal environment
for spreading the virus, and the various obstacles hindering access to humanitarian
aid, especially now with the pandemic. Bearing that in mind, Bahrain supported
the Secretary-General’s sincere appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and the
harnessing of international efforts to counter and eliminate COVID-19.
The possession by non-State armed groups and terrorist organizations of the
very latest weaponry serves only to worsen and prolong conflicts, and results in
heavy casualties among innocent civilians. Bahrain condemns terrorism, whatever
form it may take, in particular when it is backed by States that fund, arm and equip
terrorist groups and provide them with mercenaries and political and media coverage.
Modern technology has helped such groups to create platforms from which
to spread their poisonous ideology, stoke violence, recruit followers and launch
cyberattacks on official institutions. Member States must therefore make a concerted
effort to tackle hate speech and share security information. In that regard, we must
also take note of the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech.
The protection of civilians is a key priority for Bahrain and its sovereign, His
Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa. Bahrain is party to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and two of their Protocols Additional, which are the cornerstone of
international humanitarian law. In 2004, it acceded to the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and
child pornography, and on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In 2018,
it passed Decree Law No. 44 on international crimes, underlining the importance
of combating the most egregious of international crimes: genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression.
Prompted by the noble initiative of the Prime Minister, His Royal Highness
Prince Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa, the United Nations, at the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly, declared 5 April as the annual International Day of
20-0733751/168

S/2020/465

Conscience. The initiative arose from the belief of His Highness that the international
community must shoulder its moral responsibility to put an end to the wars and
conflicts afflicting the world today, which have had such tragic consequences for
whole peoples plagued by poverty, hunger, disease, epidemics and displacement.
In conclusion, Bahrain affirms that the protection of civilians, in particular
that of the most vulnerable groups, in armed conflict must remain a priority for the
international community. We renew our support for the Secretary-General’s appeal
for a global ceasefire, for which there is now a more pressing need than ever.

52/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open video-teleconference
and for the opportunity to share our perspectives. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the other briefers for highlighting some key issues on the protection of
civilians from conflict situations around the world.
We welcome the report (S/2020/366) of the Secretary-General that came out
earlier this month. We cannot agree more with the report’s renewed emphasis on
respecting international law and ensuring accountability. The report highlights,
inter alia, continued casualties among civilians, the displacement of people and the
destruction of civilian objects in various parts of Myanmar, including in Rakhine
state, to which we would particularly like to draw the Council’s attention.
In Bangladesh we value the notion of protecting civilians in armed conflict
as a matter of principle. We have the haunting memory of the genocide committed
against our people during our war of liberation in 1971. We are therefore inspired
by the promise of “never again” anywhere in the world. As a demonstration of
that unwavering commitment, we have been part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in some of the most difficult places in the world. We are aware of the
growing and complex challenges related to the protection of civilians in operating
environments. Nevertheless, our peacekeepers are committed to discharge the
protection of civilians tasks mandated by the Council without any caveat.
During the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, for example, our
peacekeepers have taken up additional humanitarian responsibilities to support
local efforts to contain the pandemic’s spread. They are facilitating humanitarian
assistance and medical care and raising awareness about health and hygiene. Where
hopes and aspirations are on the brink, these courageous peacekeepers are leading
by example and continuing to win the hearts and minds of the people they serve.
They are also getting infected by the disease in the line of duty. It needs to be
ensured that they receive the best possible medical care. We must factor in pandemic
challenges in future planning and mandate-setting for peacekeeping missions.
Additional capacities and adequate equipment will need to be built into mandates to
ensure the safety requirement of peacekeepers in pandemics and health emergencies.
We reiterate that protection-of-civilians mandates in peacekeeping contexts
need to be backed by certain enabling factors, such as viable strategies and adequate
resources. Over the years, the norms, strategies and guidelines for protecting civilians
in peacekeeping operations have matured significantly. The latest 2019 Department
of Peace Operations policy is an important addition to that normative framework.
Yet there remain gaps between policies and practices. Our troops have been tackling
those challenges with professionalism and the necessary degree of creativity.
The Security Council has a responsibility to ensure that protection-of-civilians
mandates are also supported by meaningful political processes to prevent conflicts
and sustain peace. We therefore urge the Council to regularly review the mandates
in close consultation with the host Governments, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. On our part, we remain committed to further
mainstreaming the protection of civilians in the predeployment training programmes
designed for our troops and police. Furthermore, we are also championing the Action
for Peacekeeping protection-of-civilians agenda along with other partners.
Today’s debate is taking place against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The crisis has aggravated manifold the situation in conflict-affected countries and
20-0733753/168

S/2020/465

exacerbated further the vulnerability of marginalized populations. Keeping that in
mind, we joined many other partners to strongly support the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire. In many parts of the world it has strengthened the ongoing
peace processes and prevented relapses into violence. However, in many other places
the call is being totally ignored.
Regrettably, in Myanmar the situation has worsened amid the pandemic.
On 29 April, the outgoing Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar, Ms. Yanghee Lee, expressed serious concern over escalating violence in
Rakhine and Chin states, stating that
“[w]hile the world is occupied with the COVID-19 pandemic, the Myanmar
military continues to escalate its assault in Rakhine state, targeting the
civilian population.”
The Myanmar authorities’ actions are in total disregard for international
humanitarian law and human rights law, to say the least. Even the International
Court of Justice provisional measures of 23 January seem to have no positive impact
on Myanmar’s attitude and actions. Unfortunately, the suffering of those being
persecuted remains unheeded by the international community. For the 1.1 million
Rohingyas stranded in Bangladesh, those chilling developments further intensify
their despair and hopelessness. Needless to mention, the incidents also severely
undermine our efforts towards ensuring their safe, dignified and voluntary return to
their own land and finding a durable solution to the crisis.
The lingering Rohingya crisis has once again revealed the various facets of
the challenges in ensuring the protection of civilians when the State concerned is
unwilling to do so. Also, being a part of most of the highly challenging United Nations
peacekeeping missions, we have gained a wealth of experience in implementing the
protection-of-civilians mandate first-hand on the ground. Guided by the lessons
learned, we wish to take this opportunity to stress the following points.
First, States should take the primary responsibility for protecting civilians
in their territories. Developing national policy frameworks, as rightly underlined
by the Secretary-General, is critical in that regard. It is a long-term endeavour and
an integral part of nation-building efforts. Prevention is at the heart of protection.
States should therefore take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance and
harmony that contribute to long-term prevention and ensure peaceful coexistence
among different religious and ethnic groups.
Second, the vulnerable situation of civilians in post-conflict societies needs
special attention. For peace to be sustained, people affected by conflict must be
rehabilitated and reintegrated into mainstream society more effectively. At the same
time, States need to invest more in building a culture of peace by addressing the root
causes of conflicts, eliminating hate speech and ensuring equal opportunities for
growth and prosperity for all. In doing so, it is also important to integrate the opinion
of ethnic minorities and marginalized groups in the decision-making process.
Third, for the effective protection of civilians in vulnerable settings, continued
political support from the Security Council and commitment on the part of host
Governments and the parties to the conflict are critical. In that regard, my delegation
would like to re-emphasize the importance of the responsibility to prevent harm to
civilians in armed conflict.
Fourth, protection-of-civilians mandates in peacekeeping settings need to be
fully supported by viable strategies, capacities, adequate resources and coordinated
efforts by all actors on the ground. The new developments and trends make that
more imperative. The United Nations country team and peacekeeping missions
54/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

should further develop the capabilities for early warning signs, situational awareness
and evidence-based reporting of facts and should work more closely with host
Governments and other stakeholders to deter the possible escalation of violence.
Fifth, unhindered safe passage for relevant humanitarian personnel and
supplies to civilians in need must be ensured by all parties to armed conflicts.
Medical facilities, educational institutions, especially schools, and places of worship
should be left out of harm’s way during violence and conflicts.
Sixth, States should establish appropriate legislative and institutional
arrangements to fulfil their disarmament commitments, including those on
conventional weapons, such as landmines and other explosive devices. Such lethal
weapons with the capacity to kill indiscriminately and large-area effects must not be
used against civilians. Those who commit such violations must be held accountable.
Seventh, the global norms for ending violence against women and children
during armed conflict need to be translated into action. Bangladesh was associated
with the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council. We are now one of the front-runners in terms of our contribution
of women peacekeepers. We believe that uniformed women personnel can play a
pivotal role in protecting women from violence and supporting them in crisis. We are
therefore championing the Action for Peacekeeping women and peace and security
agenda. In the same vein, we also see merit in redoubling our efforts to promote
the youth, peace and security agenda in order to advance protection-of-civilians
mandates in vulnerable settings.
Last, ensuring accountability and justice for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law is crucial to enhance compliance and prevent
a culture of impunity for the commission of atrocity crimes against civilians. The
Security Council should make appropriate use of the tools at its disposal to that end,
including through duly considered options for imposing sanctions and referrals to
international criminal justice mechanisms.

20-0733755/168

S/2020/465

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
I would like to thank Estonia for organizing this year’s debate on the protection
of civilians, as well as to extend our gratitude to the briefers for their presentations.
Brazil associates itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/366) once again reminds us of the
heavy toll of armed conflicts on civilians. Each year, the number of civilians reported
killed or injured in hostilities surpasses 20,000, which, as the report itself recognizes,
is almost certainly an underestimation. Beyond casualty figures, the report is about
families left in mourning, children losing hope and people living in fear. The concept
note (S/2020/402, annex I) for today’s debate stresses that the question is not one of a
lack of legal norms but, rather, one of compliance. I would like to take one step back
to highlight that perhaps the greatest problem lies somewhere else — in the need for
lasting peace. We may continue to strengthen the protection-of-civilians normative
framework and enhance compliance, but it will be only a palliative measure if we do
not address the root causes of each armed conflict.
When conflict erupts, compliance with international humanitarian law is
key to protecting civilians. Unfortunately, indiscriminate attacks, the destruction
of cultural heritage, the targeting of medical facilities and access restrictions for
humanitarian workers have been the sad rule rather than the exception. Brazil
strongly condemns any violation of international humanitarian law and calls on
all parties to armed conflicts to respect their obligations under international law.
Furthermore, when violations do occur, they must be investigated impartially, and
perpetrators must be held accountable.
In his report, the Secretary-General identifies the following risks and
opportunities for the protection of civilians in the new decade: urban warfare,
developments in weapons technology and malicious use of digital technologies, the
impact of armed conflict on the environment and climate change, and peacekeeping
operations. While Brazil shares many of those concerns, we must give a word of
caution against the impulse to discuss all of them in the Security Council, unless
they are related to a specific situation or country. The well-crafted division of labour
among United Nations organs is not a suggestion in the Charter of the United Nations
but, rather, the most legitimate and efficient way to achieve the main objectives of
the Organization.
More often than not, contemporary armed conflicts are carried out near or in
urban areas, thus posing new challenges to the protection of civilians. International
law already provides the normative framework to regulate military conduct in urban
warfare, particularly through international humanitarian law. At the same time, the
nature of the urban environment adds an extra layer of complexity in distinction
and proportionality assessments. In those scenarios, the principles of humanity and
precaution play an instrumental role. Brazil endorsed the Santiago Declaration,
signed by Latin American and Caribbean States, in favour of a political declaration
on the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. For Brazil, such a political
declaration should establish common standards, promote policies to reduce the risk
of civilian harm and facilitate the exchange of good practices.
Some new technologies could be beneficial for protecting civilians,
improving casualty monitoring and clarifying cases of missing persons. However,
they might significantly change the nature of armed conflicts and the way they are
56/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

fought. Therefore, while international humanitarian law is fairly well equipped to
answer many questions associated with new technologies, there is an urgent need
for additional regulation on the matter, especially regarding lethal autonomous
weapon systems.
The third issue raised in the Secretary-General’s report is the impact of
armed conflict on the environment and climate change. Armed conflicts have
long-lasting impacts on all three pillars of sustainable development: they hinder
socioeconomic development and affect the environment, generating considerable
human suffering. Nevertheless, one should be cautious not to expand ad infinitum
the already comprehensive protection-of-civilians agenda, particularly with issues
that fall outside the mandate of the Security Council. While remaining sensitive to
the impact of climate change on the most vulnerable countries, we must be wary
of proposals to address non-military challenges through security lenses. Climate
change and environment challenges are phenomena that lack military context and
can have no possible military solution. They fall primarily under the development
domain, and therefore require development-focused responses.
Finally, the report touches upon one of the most visible faces of the United
Nations in its efforts to protect civilians, namely, peacekeeping operations. When
protection-of-civilians mandates are authorized, they should be clear enough so that
peacekeepers on the ground, especially commanders, understand precisely what is
expected of them, without hampering the autonomy that leaders in the field require. It
is also important to provide realistic mandates, with feasible tasks from the military,
political and legal perspectives. We must also ensure that peacekeeping missions
have both the capabilities and the resources they need, including appropriate tailored
training, to fulfil their protection responsibilities as effectively as possible.
Brazil highlights the proven benefits that an increased presence of women
in peacekeeping brings to areas including, but not limited to, the protection of
civilians. We also underscore the essential role of gender advisers on the ground
and the importance of promoting standards for their work within missions. Brazil
is proud of the recognition achieved by our women peacekeepers for their work on
the ground, especially in the fulfilment of protection-of-civilians mandates. Last
year, Brazil was honoured when Frigate Captain Marcia Braga received the United
Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award for her work in the Central
African Republic. It is immensely gratifying to learn that Brazilian Commander
Carla Castro de Araujo, the current gender and protection adviser of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, will be sharing this year’s award with Indian Major Suman Gawani, a
military observer to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
This year’s debate takes place amid a pandemic that has brought about
additional risks to the lives and security of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
It exacerbates their vulnerability and creates additional hurdles to humanitarian
assistance in conflict zones. Brazil supports the Secretary-General’s call for an
immediate global ceasefire in the light of the coronavirus disease. Ceasing hostilities
is a major step to effectively protect civilians and minimize their suffering in these
trying times.

20-0733757/168

S/2020/465

Annex 26
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada,
François-Philippe Champagne
[Original: English and French]
I thank Estonia for convening today’s important open debate, and I am
grateful to you, Madam President, for your efforts to make the Security Council
more open and transparent during your country’s presidency. Canada welcomes the
report of Secretary-General António Guterres on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2020/366). I could not agree more with the Secretary-General’s appeal
for political will to prioritize the protection of civilians and to ensure accountability.
He has our full support.
In two days, the world will mark the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers. They are the most visible manifestation of the collective commitment
of the United Nations to protect civilians and pursue peace in times of conflict.
Canada is particularly proud to support and empower women in peacekeeping,
including through the innovative Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations.
We wholeheartedly thank the civilian, military and police peacekeepers around the
world for their service and great sacrifice.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a global threat that does
not recognize borders. The virus continues to claim lives and livelihoods all around
the world. We know that civilians are already at disproportionate risk in times of
conflict and humanitarian strife. These risks will only be exacerbated by COVID-19
and subsequent measures to respond to the pandemic.
This is why Canada has mobilized 59 countries to support the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire. This call remains the right call, even if the
Security Council has failed to support the appeal. This is why we are leveraging
our role as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission to put the needs of fragile and
conflict-affected countries facing COVID-19 at the top of the agenda. It is also why
we have committed $87 million in humanitarian assistance to meeting the needs of
the most vulnerable people affected by COVID-19.
Our support to trusted partners that are responding to the global COVID-19
appeals will reach civilians around the world based on needs, including in countries
such as Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African
Republic, as well as Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. Upholding the rights
and dignity of the most vulnerable civilians in these trying times is not an optional
endeavour. This is because no one will be safe until everyone is safe. Building back
better means ensuring that everyone is safe, everywhere.
There is no denying that COVID-19 has brought about new challenges,
including for the protection of civilians. Yet we should not lose sight of the suffering
experienced by civilians in conflicts that persisted long before this pandemic began,
or of our shortcomings in addressing these challenges.
Parties to conflict continue to perpetrate unlawful, indiscriminate and
targeted attacks against civilians, humanitarian and medical workers, hospitals and
schools. Children suffer grave violations, including recruitment and use as child
soldiers. Rape continues to be used as a weapon of war. Women and girls face sexual
and gender-based violence.
Overtasked and underresourced United Nations peacekeepers struggle to
protect civilians. These trends are painfully clear in the Secretary-General’s report,
and they must serve as a wake-up call.
58/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

The good news is that we have the tools at our disposal to address these
egregious violations and chronic protection challenges. What we need is the political
will. Canada will bring this political will to bear if elected to the Security Council for
the period 2021-2022, just as we did when we first placed the protection of civilians
in armed conflict on the Council’s agenda back in 1999.
We will work tirelessly to uphold the rules-based international order and to
advocate for scrupulous adherence to international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international refugee law. We will push for the full and effective
implementation of Security Council resolutions on the protection of civilians, and
we will build bridges across different agendas, such as those on children and armed
conflict and on women and peace and security — two other issues that Canada is
proud to have helped pioneer.
Answering the call of the Secretary-General’s report, we will spare no
effort in pursuing accountability for violations against civilians, including through
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court.
We believe that it is our collective responsibility to adapt and respond to new
threats and challenges that cause or exacerbate conflict and imperil the lives and
livelihoods of civilians. As warfare continues to evolve, and with threats such as
climate change knocking at the Council’s door, there is no time to wait.
One issue that Canada firmly believes must be explored further is the link
between economic security, conflict and peace. This is particularly relevant in
countries undergoing fragile or nascent transitions, where economic insecurity,
including limited access to economic opportunity, risks reversing peace gains or
exacerbating drivers of conflict.
If we are fortunate enough to be elected to the Security Council for the
2021-2022 term, Canada will call attention to the vital links between sustainable and
inclusive economic growth, job creation, conflict prevention and peace and security,
while fully considering the unique needs of civilians and ensuring our responses are
gender- and conflict-sensitive.
Just as more than 20 years ago, we remain principled in our approach and
unwavering in our advocacy to uphold and advance the protection of civilians
agenda. We use our voice for good, and we do so in true partnership with others.
This is the spirit and intent of our bid for a non-permanent seat on the Council, and
what drives our multilateral engagement.

20-0733759/168

S/2020/465

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
First and foremost, Chile would like to thank the Permanent Mission of
Estonia for convening this timely debate in the context of the protection of civilians
week. We also take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for presenting to
us the report on protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366).
The protection of civilians has been a duty bestowed upon us that deserves the
utmost scrutiny and commitment in the way we approach it. To that end, we recognize
its centrality on the agenda of the Security Council, as it is reflected in both the
thematic and the country-specific Council discussions and decisions. Nevertheless,
as the Secretary-General rightly points out, while the normative framework for the
protection of civilians has been expanded, enforcement remains insufficient.
Challenges to ensuring the safety and security of civilians continue to become
increasingly complex and interrelated. Civilians are vulnerable to intersecting
factors for conflicts, such as the negative impacts of climate change, food insecurity
and the adverse effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Despite international efforts to overcome these obstacles, the reality in the
field keeps directing our attention towards women and girls, who are subject to
appalling sexual and gender-based violence, civilian casualties by improvised
explosive devices, ground engagements and air strikes, and the thousands of people
who experience conflict-induced hunger caused by those who use starvation as a
method of warfare. Just as troubling remains the situation of children in several
areas, where tens of thousands of boys and girls no longer go to school but instead
are forced to take part in hostilities, including on the front lines.
It is true that the COVID-19 pandemic and its social and economic
consequences are an aggravating factor for those challenges. However, it also
presents an opportunity for us to step up to the challenge and, accordingly, move
to strengthen the implementation of the international law framework, such as
international humanitarian law and all relevant instruments, which shall be respected
by all parties and actors in order to ensure effective protection for conflict-affected
populations. Similarly, accountability measures should be enforced, while putting
victims at the centre of all efforts, as the goal remains not only to protect, but to
empower and support them, not as victims but as agents of their own stories.

60/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the United Nations
I wish to thank Estonia for organizing an open high-level video-teleconference
meeting on this particularly important issue.
Cyprus fully subscribes to the statement of the European Union and would
like to add the following remarks.
Over the past seven decades, international humanitarian law has established a
comprehensive legal framework for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. As
the Secretary-General mentions in his latest report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2020/366), despite the stated commitment, by a chorus of Member
States, to international humanitarian law and the protection of civilians, the reality
on the ground tells a vastly different story. As the report indicates, in the past year
there were instances in which parties to conflict sought to respect international
humanitarian law in their operations, but there were also countless situations to the
contrary, where the rules of international humanitarian law and international human
rights law were regularly flouted.
Civilians bear no responsibility for a conflict, but they pay the highest price.
They are the most vulnerable populations in the world and, on top of that, are even
deliberately targeted. Death, injury, violence, including sexual violence and rape,
forcible displacement as a direct consequence of war, disease, hunger, socioeconomic
adversity and lifelong trauma make up a non-exhaustive list of the fate of civilians
in armed conflict. The coronavirus disease crisis has only exacerbated their
vulnerability and precarious situation.
It is widely understood that the main obstacles to better protecting civilians in
armed conflicts primarily relate to the ways in which international humanitarian law
is implemented, a general lack of respect for the rules by parties to conflicts, and a
lack of accountability when these rules are ignored. As a victim of foreign aggression,
Cyprus is all too familiar with the long-lasting effects and consequences of conflict
on civilians — not only due to civilian fatalities and the physical, psychological and
sexual violence suffered by its civilians during armed conflict, but also due to the
egregious violations of their human rights and the ongoing violations of international
humanitarian law, with the enforced disappearance of civilians and the refusal to
reveal the fate and whereabouts of the missing, all with complete impunity.
My country would like to especially emphasize the humanitarian tragedy of
missing persons, including civilians, who disappear during armed conflict after
being seized by enemy troops, never to be seen again. Despite the strenuous efforts of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the special commissions designed
to uncover the fate and whereabouts of missing persons, many of them are never
found and their loved ones are left searching for them for decades. Many ultimately
perish, with no information as to what happened to them. All parties should ensure
respect for international humanitarian law relating to missing persons and should
take all measures to account for those reported missing and to uphold the right of
their families and loved ones to be informed of their fate and whereabouts.
To this end, the Republic of Cyprus supports by all means possible the
Committee on Missing Persons, set up in Cyprus in 1981, which has led to the
identification of hundreds of missing persons, and stresses the importance of
enhancing the Committee’s work with regard to the many more hundreds of missing
persons whose fate has remained unknown for so many years, including through
obtaining full access to all relevant archival information by all parties, as well as

20-0733761/168

S/2020/465

possible burial sites. As the Council has already called for this, most recently in
resolution 2506 (2020), it should follow up with more robust demands.
We believe that the Security Council should be at the forefront of effectively
ensuring better protection for civilians by insisting on compliance with international
humanitarian law, addressing impunity, improving access for, and the safety of,
humanitarian personnel and, of course, redoubling its efforts to prevent conflict and
uphold the prohibition of the use of force. These principles should also permeate
the Council’s cooperation with other international and regional organizations, since
they have a significant role to play in crisis management and operations not only for
compliance with international humanitarian law principles, but also in establishing
safe and secure environments, positive civil–military relations and humanitarian
support, as well as the efficient and effective delivery of humanitarian aid, medicines,
equipment and supplies.
With regard to impunity, I would like to reiterate that Cyprus is a staunch
supporter of accountability, and to recall that the Council has the power to refer
cases to the International Criminal Court, thereby closing a significant vacuum that
existed prior to the Rome Statute.
Finally, the Republic of Cyprus, as a host country of a United Nations
peacekeeping force since 1964, wishes to stress the importance of the protection
of civilians as part of United Nations peacekeeping mandates, as outlined in the
policy on the protection of civilians in United Nations peacekeeping, and follows
the developments on this important aspect with great interest. As the primary
responsibility to protect civilians always lies with the host countries, the Government
of Cyprus is ready to cooperate with the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus, if necessary, within the framework of the latter’s mandate, to support the
Government’s efforts and policies to protect civilians within the territory of Cyprus.

62/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Luis Gallegos Chiriboga
[Original: Spanish]
I express my delegation’s appreciation for the convening of this meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which is even timelier in this global context
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This is one of the key issues that
justify the existence of the Security Council and the United Nations: the protection
of civilians and of their lives, their rights and their dignity.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres, the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and the Nobel Peace
Laureate and member of The Elders, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for their presentations
this morning.
The year 2020 is the first year of the decade of action towards a world of peace
in 2030. It is also the first year of the third decade since this topic was included on
the Security Council’s agenda in 1999.
Only last year, we celebrated the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions, and yet we have achieved little as an international community in these
past 12 months, despite a robust normative framework.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/366), which I appreciate, describes
an extremely fragile and tragic situation, as well as huge gaps and challenges,
including that of COVID-19. In the current context of the global health crisis, all
Members of the Organization and all its entities, including in particular the Security
Council, must rise to this existential challenge. To that end, it is essential to ensure
the implementation of a global ceasefire. In that connection, the Security Council
must adopt a resolution that brings this body into line with international efforts to
combat the pandemic. That is key to facilitating access and corridors for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.
We regret and condemn that women, children and internally displaced persons
and refugees continue to be among the populations most affected. I also highlight in
particular resolution 2475 (2019), which recognizes the disproportionate impact of
armed conflict on persons with disabilities.
In the context of this issue, it is imperative that the Council consider the
disproportionate impact of violence and conflict on women, and promote and ensure
the participation of women in conflict-prevention and peacebuilding processes,
including in efforts for the protection of civilians.
In just two months, it will be the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005) and the origins of today’s Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict, chaired by Canada. My delegation wishes to express its interest in
joining that Group to support its work in this area.
Ecuador rejects and condemns the continuing attacks against health-care
infrastructure, including the destruction of hospitals, as well as the use of schools
for military purposes and attacks against schools.
At the First Committee of the General Assembly in October 2019, Ecuador
supported the statement delivered by the representative of Ireland on behalf of a
group of countries on explosives in populated areas (see A/C.1/74/PV.15), and we
take this opportunity to reiterate our condemnation of the use of such weapons as
well as our commitment to continue supporting the efforts of the United Nations, the
20-0733763/168

S/2020/465

International Committee of the Red Cross and civil society to promote the effective
implementation of international humanitarian law and alleviate the impact and
suffering caused by conflict .
Among immediate steps to effectively strengthen the protection of the
civilians, Ecuador has been supporting the development of an international political
declaration on this issue that aims not only to strengthen but to guarantee the
protection of civilians. We therefore support, as priorities, political and practical
commitments intended to prevent and stop the use of explosives in populated areas.
I also highlight here the commitment undertaken by Latin America and the
Caribbean through the Santiago communiqué of December 2018 to protect civilians
from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
As a land of peace, Ecuador champions peaceful coexistence and the
peaceful resolution of disputes, and rejects the use of weapons with indiscriminate
effects prohibited by international humanitarian law. We are in favour of universal
disarmament. We therefore also reject the use of lethal autonomous weapons.
Autonomous weapons, in addition to lowering the threshold for triggering new
conflicts, are incompatible with full compliance with international humanitarian
law, which requires absolute human control.
Responsibility and accountability are key. That is why in January Ecuador
joined the Franco-Mexican initiative proposing suspending the use of the veto in
cases of mass atrocities. In addition, in November 2018 we signed the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We urge all the
countries to join these efforts.
I must not fail to mention the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons.
For any international framework for the protection of civilians to be comprehensive
and adequate, it must encompass the total prohibition of nuclear weapons. The mere
existence of these weapons threatens the existence of humankind. Not even the most
sophisticated mechanism in the most developed country could contain or mitigate the
devastating impact of nuclear weapons on the population; therefore, their existence
undermines the protection of civilians.
Finally, I reiterate the full support of the Government of Ecuador for the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire as the most effective way to protect
civilians and as a first step towards lasting peace.

64/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Representative of El Salvador to the
United Nations, Egriselda López
[Original: Spanish]
We thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this important open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. For El Salvador, this provides an
invaluable opportunity to renew collective commitment on this issue, since it is
civilians who still account for the vast majority of the victims of conflict and who
suffer its effects in the short and long terms.
El Salvador takes this opportunity to reiterate its firm commitment to the
implementation and application of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, the principal
norms of international humanitarian law, resolution 1265 (1999) and other related
resolutions, which together provide the international framework underpinning
obligations to ensure the protection of, and respect for, human rights, especially of
those not participating in, or who can no longer participate in, hostilities.
Based on our commitment to this international framework, my country
has worked towards its application through the Interinstitutional Committee on
International Humanitarian Law of El Salvador, whose main objective is to serve as an
advisory body to the Government of the Republic on the measures to be taken for the
effective adoption, application and dissemination of international humanitarian law.
Various ministries of the executive branch participate in this Committee, in
the fields of foreign relations, justice and security, education, national defence and
public health, together with the Office of the General Prosecutor of the Republic,
the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, the Office of the Attorney for
the Defence of Human Rights, and the Salvadoran Red Cross. To ensure effective
functioning, the participation of these institutions is coordinated through a permanent
secretariat and working subcommittees in the areas of legislation, awareness-raising
and training in the matter, and protection of cultural heritage.
After more than 20 years’ work, we can highlight its following main
achievements: guiding the ratification of international instruments of international
humanitarian law, most recently the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, and the consequent harmonization of national law with international
requirements; awareness-raising and training on international humanitarian law,
including for personnel of the armed forces, especially Salvadoran contingents to
Security Council-mandated peace missions, other State institutions, and members of
the academic community; developing the international humanitarian law handbook
for the armed forces of El Salvador, containing information on the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Protocols Additional, as well as other relevant instruments;
and progress in implementing The Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.
Moreover, that Committee also assisted in establishing a national monitoring
committee on resolution 1325 (2000), as well as in the creation and application of
a national action plan for the period 2017-2021 for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, the implementation of which brings together
many State institutions, civil society and academia. Given the changing dynamics
we face at present, this plan is currently undergoing a revision process so as to adapt
it to respond more efficiently and effectively to national needs. Similar processes are
under way with regard to children and young people, to ensure better implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015) and subsequent resolutions.
20-0733765/168

S/2020/465

Among the civilian population, vulnerable groups such as women, children
and young people are the most affected. We therefore stress the importance of
continuing to ensure the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. In this regard, we support in particular, given the specific needs of the
most vulnerable sectors of the population, the adoption of resolution 2475 (2019), on
special protection for persons with disabilities in situations of armed conflict.
We reiterate the call to continue strengthening and incorporating special
provisions and personnel into peace missions to ensure the protection of these
groups — such as increasing the number of women in peace missions, since women
have been shown to help strengthen relationships with local communities, helping
build trust, which is an essential condition for protection. In this regard, El Salvador
will continue working to see an increase in the number of women professionals in the
peace missions where we have a presence, given their major contributions to meeting
the objectives of achieving peace, security and international stability.
My country remains deeply concerned about the humanitarian damage caused
during hostilities in populated areas. The protection status of civilians, despite all
efforts to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, remains at risk. It is
civilians who account for the majority of casualties in conflict situations; likewise
for the effects of conflict — it is civilian children, women and men who continue
to endure forced displacement, famine as a method of war, denial of access to
humanitarian aid, and sexual and gender-based violence. At the same time, we
continue to observe attacks on humanitarian personnel, medical facilities, civil
infrastructure, property and the livelihoods of the civilian population. Against this
backdrop, my country wishes to share the following considerations.
First, as the Secretary-General mentioned a year ago, while the normative
framework for protection and guarantees of international humanitarian law have been
strengthened, continuing violations reflect low compliance with those measures.
That highlights the importance that protection instruments under international
humanitarian law be binding in nature, and the Security Council has a key role to
play to that end.
Secondly, given the continuing rise in reports with credible and documented
evidence of violations, there is an urgent need to apply, whenever possible, more
effective and robust approaches through national policies for the protection of civilians
in all Member States of this Organization. These could establish civilian damagemitigation teams, prepare risk and impact analysis of any such actions in populated
areas and incorporate the principles of international law into all defence policies.
Thirdly, one of the areas of greatest deficit on this topic is accountability. In
this regard, it is important to strengthen the capacities and resources of institutions
involved in the administration of justice at the national and international levels alike,
based on principles of impartiality and integrity, and this includes the International
Criminal Court. Accountability must respond to the need to offer reparations to
survivors of violations of international humanitarian law. We believe that linking
local, national and regional accountability mechanisms with those with a broader
international scope could provide significant advantages and show results more
effectively and efficiently.
Fourthly, in our view it is important to adopt measures to protect civilians not
only from physical harm but also from the irreversible psychological harm caused by
abuses such as sexual violence or torture during detention, as well as for victims of
forced disappearance and to provide assistance to their relatives.
Fifthly, peacekeeping operations are one of the main mechanisms for upholding
international peace and security, carrying out their functions in hostile countries and
66/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

regions. We welcome the inclusion of approaches to protect civilians and vulnerable
groups in the mandates set by the Security Council, and call for their continued
inclusion in all current and future missions. We also believe that improving the
protection of civilians in peace missions will require systematic evaluations of
relevant regulations and system-wide accountability guarantees. In that regard, we
welcome the recent review and launch of the United Nations policy on the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping operations.
Sixthly, there is overwhelming evidence that the use of weapons can have
a long-term impact on the recovery and development of communities affected.
Therefore, it is essential to assess the links between the indiscriminate use of
weapons and violations of human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Without prejudice to the right to guarantee their national defence, States must refrain
from exporting arms, ammunition, parts and components of conventional weapons
to places where they are likely to be used to commit or facilitate serious violations
of international humanitarian law.
In other words, the implementation of international humanitarian law goes
hand in hand with respect for, and the universalization of, international instruments
on arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation, including the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects; the Arms Trade Treaty; the Ottawa
Convention; the Convention on Cluster Munitions; the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons and all its Protocols; and all instruments for the prohibition
of weapons of mass destruction — the Treaties on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, and the Conventions on Chemical
and on Biological Weapons, among other international and regional instruments.
We would like to make special mention of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, as this year marks 50 years since its entry into force and
25 since its indefinite extension. In this regard, we stress the need for the urgent
application of concrete, transparent, verifiable and irreversible measures for nuclear
disarmament, in order to comply with the obligations contained in the Treaty. The
forthcoming review period is an opportunity to maintain and uphold the credibility,
viability and effectiveness of the Treaty.
In the same vein, we welcome the priority given in the Secretary-General’s
new Agenda for Disarmament to the issue of the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas, and we recognize the call for all States to support the development
of measures to address the humanitarian impact in this area. We firmly believe
that, with sufficient political will, this can be achieved through the development of
common operating policies and standards, and the exchange of good practices. We
hope that the Security Council will take the initiative of preparing a draft political
declaration in these terms, thereby moving from words to concrete action.
El Salvador firmly believes that the most effective way to protect civilians is
to prevent conflict by investing in development, promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes, responding to the needs of post-conflict countries and regions and
building stability by promoting a culture of peace and respect for international law.
The protection of civilians must be a priority of the work of the Organization
and must override any geopolitical interest that is opposed to it. Genuine protection
requires a commitment on the part of all Members of the United Nations to
safeguarding the human dignity of all peoples without discrimination.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak represents the greatest
challenge worldwide since the founding of the United Nations. The pandemic, which
has reached all regions of the world, is also present in countries that are already in
20-0733767/168

S/2020/465

crisis owing to conflict or natural disasters or that are affected by the consequences
of climate change. We must not forget that those countries need support to strengthen
their health-care systems, particularly in view of the large number of people who
need emergency assistance.
In these difficult times, we call on those countries that, to the extent of their
capacity, are able to support initiatives aimed at maintaining life-saving efforts to
continue to do so. Furthermore, we commend the work of the specialized agencies
of the United Nations system, especially in ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
assistance with equal access to all peoples, without any discrimination.
We would not want to miss this opportunity to express, on behalf of the
Government of El Salvador, our gratitude for the support received through the
Secretary-General’s United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund,
launched by the Secretary-General and its donors. The resources granted to El
Salvador will be invested in facing that health emergency, minimizing the social
impact and supporting efforts towards an economic recovery.
Before concluding, we wish to thank the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement for the support that they
provide to States to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflict situations and for
the efforts made to ensure compliance with international humanitarian law, as it has
been doing in my country through the Inter-Institutional Committee on International
Humanitarian Law in El Salvador.
We wish also to acknowledge the laudable work carried out by humanitarian
workers, including medical personnel, in conflict zones. We condemn all attacks
against them, which are unacceptable and may constitute war crimes; and, finally,
we acknowledge the efforts of civil society to empower and give voice to those
affected by armed violence.

68/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atske-Selassie Amde
Let me at the outset express our sincere appreciation to the Estonian presidency
for having organized this important high-level meeting on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We thank Secretary-General António Guterres, President Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf and Ambassador Peter Maurer for their comprehensive briefings.
More than two decades after the Security Council formally adopted resolution
1265 (1999), taking up the protection of civilians as an important thematic issue,
civilians continue to suffer disproportionately from the devastating consequences
of armed conflict. The United Nations reported more than 20,000 civilian deaths or
injuries in 2019 alone as a result of armed attacks.
Indeed, there has been some progress. The protection of civilians is now a
key pillar of all peacekeeping operations mandates. The Council has also embraced
the conceptual evolution of the protection-of-civilians mandates, taking concrete
actions relating to the situation of religious minorities, missing persons and persons
with disabilities in armed conflict, as well as the protection of civilians from
hunger. There have also been efforts to advance the protection agenda through the
development of policy tools and guidance at the United Nations and by Member
States. However, those conceptual commitments are yet to be sufficiently translated
into consistent implementation on the ground.
The implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative is serving
as a vehicle to improve mandate delivery, including the protection of civilians.
However, the following areas continue to require greater attention and more
robust commitments.
First, conflict-affected civilians, particularly women and children, continue
to bear significant direct and indirect consequences. Their livelihoods, places of
worship, schools, hospitals and civilian infrastructure continue to be targeted.
Conflict-driven hunger is on the rise. These already vulnerable populations also have
to cope with the dire consequences of climate change, including low productivity of
subsistence farms, droughts, flooding and other natural disasters.
Secondly, non-State armed groups are increasingly employing explosive
devices to inflict incalculable suffering on populated areas, resulting in at least
17,904 civilian casualties in 2019. Terrorists such as Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram
continue to recruit and forcibly abduct children to use in asymmetric warfare.
Thirdly, sexual crimes and gender-based violence against women and girls
are being deployed as instruments of war. Taken together, these changing dynamics
of contemporary conflicts pose diverse and complex protection challenges for all
peacekeeping operations.
Unfortunately, these protection challenges have been further complicated by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As countries turn inward to save
lives and mitigate the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, armed groups are
eyeing an opportunity to expand their reach and influence. The pandemic has also
impacted the capability of States, including by weakening trust in institutions that are
providing service to the general public. Digital technologies are being weaponized to
spread misinformation, sow discord and incite violence.
Despite the overwhelming support from States Members of the United Nations,
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire received mixed responses. In that
regard, it is regrettable that the members of the Security Council are not able to reach
20-0733769/168

S/2020/465

consensus on sending the right signal. Furthermore, multilateral institutions and the
rules-based international order are under increasing pressure.
To keep pace with these changes, peacekeeping must continually evolve and
adapt to the changing global situation as well as to conflict and security dynamics.
That means that we must be willing and ready to go beyond rhetorical commitments.
The Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing countries
must work together in line with our shared commitments under the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative to reinforce efforts towards a better protection of civilians
and, most importantly, to ensure the full implementation of that solemn objective.
That entails making sure that peacekeeping missions are properly resourced and
sufficiently equipped to fulfil their mandates, including by removing caveats.
Ethiopia attaches great importance to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. As a major troop-contributing country to United Nations peace operations
and African Union-led peace support operations, Ethiopia places great emphasis
on deploying troops who have been adequately trained, vetted, equipped and
instructed. We are also committed to the full implementation of our obligations
under international human rights and humanitarian law.
As one of the signatories to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians, a set of pledges covering the whole gamut of peacekeeping — assessment
and planning, force generation, training and equipping personnel, performance and
accountability — we have incorporated the protection of civilians into the training
modules for all contingents. All our peacekeeping activities are also being evaluated
in accordance with the principles of the protection of civilians and the Kigali
Principles. We have established a continuous feedback loop and use the experience
from the field to proactively improve training modules. We are also taking concrete
steps to increase the participation and leadership role of women peacekeepers.
We believe that the protection of civilians, while important, cannot substitute
for the primacy of politics to prevent the outbreak, escalation and recurrence of
armed conflict. Building sustainable peace requires, first and foremost, addressing
the root causes of conflicts such as poverty, socioeconomic marginalization and the
exclusion of women, youth and minorities.
I also wish to highlight that, as one of the largest refugee-hosting countries,
Ethiopia continues to provide international protection to hundreds of thousands
of refugees who have been forcibly displaced by grave violations resulting from
armed conflicts. Our revised refugee policy, which grants refugees more rights and
the opportunity to be better integrated into society, has been hailed by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as one of the most progressive refugee
policies in Africa and a model for other refugee-hosting countries.
Let me conclude by reiterating Ethiopia’s support for efforts to silence the
guns in Africa and our firm commitment to fully implementing existing protection
standards and strengthening compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law.

70/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and
Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict remains of utmost concern for
the EU and its member States, and we welcome the opportunity today to speak on
this important topic. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/366).
The recent outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has not only
created a global health crisis but has also had a severe impact on the protection of
civilians. The direct and indirect effects of the pandemic are felt most strongly by
populations already affected by humanitarian crises and conflict, including refugees
and internally displaced persons as well as women, children, the elderly, people with
disabilities and other persons in vulnerable situations.
It is also a human rights crisis. A joint response that puts people at its centre,
under the leadership of the United Nations, and that addresses the needs and the
protection of the most vulnerable is the only way to address the magnitude of
the COVID-19 crisis. The EU is committed to combining all efforts to tackle the
pandemic’s impact on those most vulnerable across the world through both targeted
and direct local support as well as by ensuring the continued provision of life-saving
health and essential services, including sexual and reproductive health-care services
and responses to violence, inter alia, sexual and gender-based violence.
The EU recalls that parties to armed conflicts bear the primary obligation to
respect international humanitarian law and to meet the needs of populations under
their control. They also bear the primary responsibility for human rights violations
and abuses. It is vital that all parties to armed conflicts, State and non-State alike,
respect their obligation under international humanitarian law to allow and facilitate
the free passage of humanitarian relief. Unimpeded, fast and safe access to the
people affected is the critical enabler to ensure the efficient and effective delivery
of humanitarian aid and the unhampered flow of life-saving medicines, equipment
and supplies. It is important that these be free of any taxes and levies and not subject
to bureaucratic restrictions. It is also essential that sanctions and counter-terrorism
measures not impede the delivery of principled humanitarian assistance in violation
of international law and that they be in accordance with international humanitarian
law, including through the introduction of humanitarian exceptions, as appropriate.
While measures to contain the virus and mitigate its effects are taken, we must
all ensure that adherence to international law prevails. The EU underlines the need
for security forces to comply with international human rights law and the principle of
non-discrimination and to exercise restraint when enforcing Government guidance
as well as the importance of preventing harm to civilians.
Looking at the broader context presented in the report, the EU is gravely
concerned by the ever-growing number of deliberate violations of international
humanitarian law and the continued high prevalence of civilian deaths and injury, as
well as the destruction or damage caused to civilian objects such as schools and health
infrastructure, including maternities, and religious sites. We are also concerned
by the growing number of attacks on humanitarian personnel as well as those on
20-0733771/168

S/2020/465

medical personnel and facilities, including the recent attacks in Libya, Myanmar,
Afghanistan and South Sudan. Such attacks are to be resolutely condemned. These
also have a devastating impact on the safety and health of civilians and strongly
undermine the fight against the global pandemic.
The EU is fully committed to supporting collective efforts to strengthen
the protection of civilians, by taking all appropriate measures to ensure respect
for international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights;
by taking all appropriate measures to address the protection needs of those most
vulnerable; and by supporting the fight against impunity for serious violations.
The EU and its member States urge universal respect for international
humanitarian law. We call on all parties to conflict to respond to the appeal by the
Secretary-General and to ensure that an immediate global ceasefire in the light of
the pandemic is observed.
Moving from the rhetoric of demanding respect for the law to its actual
implementation and respect therefor requires constant engagement and concrete
actions. At the thirty-third International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent,
the EU and its member States specifically pledged to strengthen the implementation
and dissemination of international humanitarian law and the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Among other things, the EU will continue its efforts to strengthen
the protection of humanitarian workers and health care facilities from attacks and to
promote the full implementation of resolution 2286 (2016).
Work is also being conducted with the armed forces to better institutionalize
the protection of civilians in conflict by advocating the introduction of a protectionof-civilians component in training courses and exercises through the capacitybuilding of the military, the mobilization of local communities and civil-societyled tailored advocacy. The EU equally recognizes that the provision of trainings
on international humanitarian law, including to non-State armed groups, is key
to ensuring compliance with the law and should be pursued. On the occasion of
the twentieth anniversary of the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, we reiterate the importance of protecting children during armed
conflicts, taking all the appropriate and necessary actions to reduce the impact of
armed conflicts on their lives. The mainstreaming of a gender perspective is, in
this context, of particular importance to sensitizing all actors on the differentiated
impacts, specific needs and situation of women and girls in conflict situations.
We strongly condemn the attacks against schools and universities, including
the burning of facilities, the destruction of school equipment and the threats of attacks
to which teachers and students are exposed. As such, we urge Member States and
non-State actors to respect international humanitarian law and to facilitate access
to education in armed conflict. In that respect, we also promote the protection of
schools and education accessible to all in situations of conflict, supporting initiatives
to roll out the Paris Principles and related commitments, and we take positive note
of the efforts to promote and protect the right to education, including the efforts of
Member States that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration.
The EU underlines that the protection of civilians must be at the core of
peacekeeping mandates. Taking a three-tiered approach to protection is key in that
regard, as outlined in the Department of Peace Operations Policy on the Protection
of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping. We also recall the adoption, five years
ago, of the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians as an important tool for
strengthening the effective implementation of protection mandates in peacekeeping.
Peacekeeping, crisis management and political missions can also play a key
role in the protection of civilians, in general, and the most vulnerable segments of
72/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

the population, in particular, through their engagement with national authorities,
security and military forces and capacity-building activities. We welcome that the
reprioritization of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative commits us to launch and
roll out a revised handbook on the protection of civilians and a new one on conflictrelated sexual violence within the next six months to mission personnel in order to
enhance mandate implementation.
International humanitarian law and the protection of civilians are included in
the planning and conduct of all civilian and military EU crisis-management missions
and operations that promote peace and security in the context of the EU’s common
security and defence policy. In particular, the EU promotes increased systematization
of international humanitarian law training within the armed forces, with an emphasis
on the concept of training the trainers, and welcomes initiatives aimed at identifying
concrete ways to strengthen international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians, especially by reinforcing linkages and coordination between civilian and
military components.
The EU is committed to addressing the root causes of climate change and
environmental degradation through an ambitious global climate change mitigation
and environmental protection policy, enshrined in the recent European Green Deal.
Protecting the environment and safeguarding access to clean drinking water and
sanitation can also help protect civilians, especially in humanitarian crisis and
conflict settings, where people in particularly vulnerable communities tend to be
most dependent on natural resources for food and livelihoods.
The EU will continue to prioritize the protection of civilians in its humanitarian
missions. We are committed to better addressing the needs of the most vulnerable,
including women and children and those at increased risk due to disability, gender
identity, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, age, religion or belief.
The EU is concerned that sexual and gender-based violence continues to be
employed as a tactic of war, terrorism, torture and repression in various crises. The
victims — women and girls, men and boys — often belong to the most vulnerable
groups. The EU continues to support projects aimed at preventing and responding
to sexual and gender-based violence and remains committed to the Call to Action on
Protection from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies initiative. In addition, we
also reaffirm the importance of comprehensive and timely sexual and reproductive
health-care services.
The EU is equally committed to better addressing the needs of persons with
disabilities in armed conflicts and to promoting their empowerment and meaningful
participation in decision-making processes in all phases of humanitarian action.
The EU welcomes the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Guidelines on Inclusion
of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action, adopted last year, and fully
supports their implementation.
Armed conflict leads to forced displacement, internally and across borders, thus
forcing people to ask for international protection and asylum. The EU is committed
to supporting the assistance and protection of persons displaced by conflict, but
also to assisting local host communities and their already scarce resources to help
meet the challenges arising from protracted displacement. The EU closely follows
and supports the work of the High-level Panel on Internal Displacement and actively
advocates for the protection of the rights of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees. We also support durable solutions, including voluntary repatriation efforts
of IDPs to their homelands through a humanitarian-development nexus approach and
in accordance with international law, notably international refugee law.

20-0733773/168

S/2020/465

We recall that international law, in particular international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, fully applies to the use of all weapon systems
and that those who employ them remain responsible and accountable for their use.
Ensuring compliance with international humanitarian law is particularly crucial as
armed conflicts are increasingly being fought in urban areas, exposing civilians and
civilian infrastructure to substantial risks. We recognize the challenges associated
with the use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas and their impact on
civilians. We call on all parties to armed conﬂicts to fully comply with the principles
and rules of international humanitarian law. Promoting compliance with international
humanitarian law and respect for humanitarian principles remains a top priority for
the EU and its member States.
We also reiterate our grave concern about the increasing harm and humanitarian
consequences worldwide of attacks with improvised explosive devices, as well as
their indiscriminate use and disproportionate effects in the perpetration of terrorist
acts, in particular.
The EU also remains gravely concerned about the situation in Syria, which is
causing unacceptable suffering for civilian populations. The EU strongly condemns
the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Air Force, as concluded by the
recent report of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. The use of chemical weapons by anyone — be it
a State or a non-State actor — anywhere, at any time and under any circumstances
is a violation of international law.
We condemn the unlawful alleged continuing use of incendiary weapons
against civilians or military targets within a concentration of civilians in Syria. We
call on all States not yet party to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
to join Protocol III, which prohibits the use of air-delivered incendiary weapons in
concentrations of civilians, and we urge all States to fully comply with its provisions.
In that context, we also urge the Security Council to renew the crossborder mandate in July so that life-saving assistance can reach populations in need
throughout Syria.
The fast pace of technological developments provides many opportunities
but also entails risks. With regard to emerging technologies in the area of lethal
autonomous weapon systems (LAWS), the EU emphasizes that human beings must
control their use and must remain accountable for decisions over life and death
in order to ensure compliance with international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. We encourage the Group of
Governmental Experts on emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous
weapons systems to make progress in clarifying, reviewing and developing aspects
of the normative and operational framework on LAWS.
The fight against impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern is one of the shared values of the EU. The EU strongly supports international
justice and accountability mechanisms. We promote the work and independence of
the International Criminal Court as an important actor in the global fight against
impunity, and urge all States Members of the United Nations to do the same,
including by ratifying the Rome Statute.
The extensive recommendations on accountability contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on the protection of civilians remain very relevant today.
Their implementation is our collective responsibility. Let us not shy away from
our commitments.

74/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
I thank the President of the Security Council for this opportunity to address
the Council on this important topic of protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In 2003, the General Assembly designated 7 April as the International Day
of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda. On this day, we the international
community remember and pay our deepest respect to the victims. This day also
serves to remind us that the United Nations and the Security Council must act with
unanimity, determination and speed if such tragedies are to be avoided in future.
The Secretary-General’s 2019 report (S/2020/366) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict shows that civilians continue to suffer the most from armed conflict.
The report highlights that “more than 20,000 civilians had been killed or injured in
2019 as a result of attacks in conflicts in 10 countries” (S/2020/366, para. 7). The
trend lines highlighted in the report are tragic and alarming.
On 23 March, the Secretary-General called for an immediate global ceasefire.
He did so because he understood the scale of the impending crisis. If armed groups
were to stop fighting, authorities in some of the most challenging environments might
be able to focus their resources and efforts to responding to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which has led to far-reaching challenges for authorities with
regard to protecting civilians in regions affected by armed conflicts.
Fiji supports the Secretary-General’s call to silence the guns. A substantial
part of the responsibility for making that happen falls on the Security Council. The
Council is underpinned by an architecture of international frameworks and has the
political legitimacy to bring ceasefires into effect. The Charter of the United Nations
and its Member States have placed that huge responsibility solely on the Council and
nowhere else.
As a proud troop contributor to United Nations peace operations for more
than 40 years, Fiji would like to respond to one specific area where the Council has
requested guidance. How can peacekeepers be better prepared for deployment in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic?
Fiji welcomes the Secretary-General’s Action for Peace initiative, which aims
to strengthen the role of peacekeepers in protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Fiji also welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and the Department of Peace
Operations to protect peace missions and host countries from the COVID-19
pandemic and to prevent its spread. Fiji notes that the outbreak of the virus within
peace operations is still small, even if it is broader in the communities in which they
operate. Allow me to make three proposals.
First, COVID-19 preparedness should become a core part of training for peace
operations — not only to protect peacekeepers, but also to allow them to operate in
contexts where the virus has spread significantly.
Secondly, the budgets of peace operations should properly reflect the
additional resources and equipment they need to fulfil their mandates in the context
of COVID-19.
Thirdly, the predeployment expertise and experience of forces should be
considered when deciding the composition of any new deployments. Several forces
already have extensive hands-on expertise in managing and responding to COVID-19
in their national settings.

20-0733775/168

S/2020/465

The COVID-19 pandemic, like climate change, has transformed peace
operations. In climate catastrophes, civilian lives are lost when armed groups
weaponize food and water. In the COVID-19 pandemic, access to health care and
essential medicines is being increasingly weaponized by armed groups.
Both phenomena are rapidly transforming conflicts. Protecting civilians and
reducing civilian deaths and casualties requires expanded skill sets, repurposed
capabilities and new ways to structure peace operations.
Fiji reminds the Council of the Rwandan genocide, which we have
commemorated on 7 April every year since 2003. It is a reminder of the need for
timely interventions, the need to deter and prevent. This year, 7 April occurred
during the peak of the pandemic in our host city. I take a moment to remember the
thousands of deaths in this great city, New York, in the most powerful country in
the world. I now ask the Council to imagine, by comparison, the scale of challenges
faced by authorities in conflict-affected areas in order to protect their civilians
from COVID-19.
As Fiji pays tribute to all peacekeepers and to all those involved in protecting
civilians in armed conflicts around the world, we urge the Council to find consensus,
harness goodwill and act with the utmost urgency to protect civilians during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

76/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
At the outset, let me express my sincere gratitude to the Estonian presidency
for convening today’s open high-level debate via video-teleconference on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their comprehensive and insightful speeches.
My country aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would also like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
Armed conflicts continue to have a deleterious impact on the civilian
population worldwide. That troubling trend is thoroughly reflected in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/366). While we welcome the report and
embrace its recommendations, we remain disturbed by the hardships that have been
systematically borne by civilians during armed conflicts, including killing and
maiming, sexual violence, denial of humanitarian access, and forced displacement.
It is particularly worrisome that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has further compounded existing challenges in the protection of civilians. With the
whole world entangled in an unprecedented health crisis, instead of caring for waraffected communities, one of the permanent members of the Council has seized
new opportunities to advance its strategic interests in conflict situations, thereby
inflicting further suffering on ordinary citizens.
The blueprint for reducing civilian suffering, however, rests on the simple
notion of respecting international humanitarian and human rights law and ensuring
accountability for grave violations in that regard. Therefore, it is up to us, the United
Nations, to break the vicious cycle of disregarding international law, which claims
thousands of civilian lives, or to continue in the same vein.
In that connection, Georgia spares no effort to ensure respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law at the national and international levels.
That is why the four 1949 Geneva Conventions are part of Georgian legislation.
Georgia’s Inter-Agency Commission of International Humanitarian Law, a standing
governmental body, leads efforts and coordinates the work of relevant entities aimed
at ensuring respect for international humanitarian law. One of the key areas of the
Inter-Agency Commission is the promotion of international humanitarian law through
different types of outreach and educational activities, including in cooperation with
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
In close cooperation with the ICRC, the Georgian military personnel’s
educational training programmes incorporate the key aspects of strengthening the
protection of civilians during armed conflict. Furthermore, we are particularly
thankful to the ICRC for providing assistance to Georgia in locating the whereabouts
of missing persons, as well as in identifying and handing over their human remains
to their families.
When it comes to the question of accountability, Georgia is committed to
fully cooperating with the International Criminal Court on investigation into crimes
committed during Russia’s full-scale military aggression in 2008, which represents
the Court’s first case regarding Europe’s legal geography. However, the occupying
Power’s lack of cooperation and refusal to allow access to the occupied regions
promotes impunity.
Georgia’s commitment to strengthening the universal application of
international humanitarian law also includes an endorsement of global initiatives,
20-0733777/168

S/2020/465

such as the Safe Schools Declaration, which is a key instrument for taking concrete
action to achieve safe schools for all; the French-led political declaration on the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel in armed conflict; and, most
recently, Bringing international humanitarian law home: A road map for better
national implementation of international humanitarian law, adopted at the thirtythird International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent.
Yet in spite of the Government of Georgia’s efforts to strengthen the protectionof-civilians framework globally as well as nationally, we are continuously prevented
from extending protection to the population residing in the Russian-occupied regions
of Georgia — Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia. The protracted occupation of
these two regions by the Russian Federation leaves ethnic Georgians continually
deprived of such basic human rights as the freedom of movement, freedom to own
property, the right to health and the right to education in their native language. To
make matters worse, ethnically based human rights violations, such as killings,
abductions, torture and inhumane treatment, have become an everyday reality for
thousands of ethnic Georgians living in the Russian-occupied regions, as well as in
areas adjacent to the occupation line.
Moreover, even throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the Russian occupation
forces have, against the norms and principles of international law and contrary to
the call of the Secretary General for an immediate global ceasefire in the world’s
conflict zones, been continuing to install barbed-wire fences and so-called border
signs, while digging so-called anti-fire trenches along the Russian occupation line
in the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia. The Russian
occupation forces have been continuing the closure of the so-called crossing points,
which has blocked and impeded humanitarian access to the conflict-affected people
living in the Russian-occupied regions of Georgia, thereby further aggravating
the humanitarian and human rights situation on the ground. Only last week, the
so-called process of borderization was simultaneously taking place in as many as
13 villages in the vicinity of the Russia-occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia.
It is alarming that, owing to the irresponsible and inhumane closing of the
so-called crossing points along the Russian occupation line, thereby preventing
humanitarian access to the Russia-occupied regions of Georgia, the dire humanitarian
situation on the ground has been worsened and the death toll of innocent people living
in the conflict-affected areas of the country continues to rise. Just a few days ago,
on 20 May, yet another ethnic Georgian resident of the Russian-occupied region of
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, Mr. Jumber Miladze, died owing to the Russian occupation
regime’s disallowance of his medical evacuation until the most critical moment,
bringing to 14 the death toll of ethnic Georgians since the closure of the occupation
line in September last year. The severe security, human rights and humanitarian
situation on the ground is particularly alarming, given that the Russian Federation
allows no international monitoring mechanisms entry into the two occupied regions
of Georgia.
Against this background, it is imperative that the Russian Federation, as the
occupying Power that exercises effective control over the two occupied regions of
Georgia — Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia — end the humanitarian crisis by
allowing immediate and unconditional access of health and humanitarian services to
these Russian-occupied territories, which as a result of the spread of COVID-19 are
in extraordinary need of assistance. Important first steps towards meeting the basic
protection needs of civilians living in the Russian-occupied regions of Georgia would
include urging the Russian Federation to immediately cease its provocations against
Georgia and respect its international obligations, first and foremost, by starting
78/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

the implementation of the EU-mediated 12 August 2008 Ceasefire Agreement
and withdrawing its occupation forces from Georgia’s territory. This only can be
achieved with the joint supportive efforts of the international community.
Unfortunately, as has already been mentioned, cases of dire humanitarian
crisis are happening in many parts of the world today, not just in Georgia, and
civilians are being affected on a daily basis by armed conflict, exposed to conditions
in which grave human rights violations are being committed and living in constant
fear of aggression and the resumption of hostilities. As has been stated numerous
times, the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic makes the terrible plight of conflictaffected civilians even worse. We all know that the world will not be able to avoid
humanitarian emergencies in future if we cannot tackle the basic humanitarian needs
of conflict-affected areas in the world today.
Therefore, and in conclusion, I would like to reiterate my call on the international
community to join together to urge all parties that are involved in armed conflicts
or are exercising effective control in conflict areas to ensure complete, immediate
and unconditional removal of any impediments to humanitarian workers’ access and
delivery of assistance to civilians living in conflict-affected areas. For its part, my
country once again welcomes the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and
states that it stands ready to contribute to efforts aimed at mobilizing international
community support for strengthening the protection of civilian populations in
armed conflicts.

20-0733779/168

S/2020/465

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala would like to express its gratitude to the Estonian delegation for
convening, in its capacity as President of the Security Council for the month of May,
today’s open high-level Security Council video-teleconference on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the participation of Her Excellency
Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of the Republic of Estonia, in this meeting and
thank her for her statement.
As shown in the annual report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366), the world is living at a juncture characterized
by a threat to peace in which tens of thousands of innocent civilians continue to suffer
the horrifying short- and long-term consequences of armed conflict. Accordingly,
Guatemala emphasizes the importance of preventing conflict and addressing its root
causes, including by strengthening the rule of law, good governance and the respect
for and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. These are the most
pertinent means with which to protect civilians.
As a country contributing troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Guatemala takes this opportunity to recall that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests on the host countries that receive the support of the
international community through United Nations peacekeeping operations. In this
regard, it is crucial to continue strengthening cooperation between United Nations
peacekeeping operations, where mandated, and the national authorities to support
their respective efforts, taking into account the importance of national ownership
as a key principle. Guatemala reiterates that the protection-of-civilians mandate
in United Nations peacekeeping operations should be implemented as a whole-ofmission objective. This requires all relevant stakeholders, including civilian, police
and military components, working in coordination with national authorities, to adopt
a comprehensive and integrated approach.
Considering that armed conflicts are being waged in urban centres using
weapon systems originally designed for open battlefields, my delegation calls upon
all States to fulfil their commitment to the application of international humanitarian
law in armed conflicts. Experience has shown us that the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas (EWIPA) causes serious damage to civilians and civilian objects
and has an overall impact on services essential for civilians’ survival. The use of
EWIPA is an urgent matter that compels the international community to adopt
measures towards the adoption of a framework for the protection and safety of
people who suffer the consequences of the use of weapons in that context. The use of
such weapons in this context causes death, injury and trauma, damages and destroys
essential infrastructure and critical services, drives involuntary displacement,
leaves in place explosive remnants of war that pose a long-term threat, disrupts
social coexistence and economic activities, and affects overall human security.
Furthermore, Guatemala reiterates its firm support for protecting medical
facilities and workers and for preventing attacks on education, including violence
against students, educational facilities and personnel. Attacks and threats of attack
can cause severe and long-lasting harm to individuals and societies. We stress that
education can help to protect children and youth from death, injury and exploitation,
alleviate the psychological impact of armed conflict by offering a sense of normalcy
and stability, and provide links to other vital services.
From Guatemala’s perspective and as a follow-up to the 2020 session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, protection-of-civilians mandates
80/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

must be seen as the responsibility of all in-mission stakeholders, which is contingent
upon several critical factors, including well-defined, realistic and achievable
objectives; political will, leadership, performance and accountability at all levels,
from troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs) to civilians and the
Secretariat; adequate resources, mobility assets and well-trained, prepared and
appropriately equipped military, police and civilian personnel; the capacity to assess
threats to civilians; and policy, planning and operational guidelines and training.
Guatemala takes this opportunity to reiterate its position that caveats have a
negative impact on the implementation of mandates and operational effectiveness
and increase risks to the successful implementation of protect-of-civilians mandates
on the ground. We stress the importance of avoiding all caveats that might have a
negative impact on the protection-of-civilians mandate. In this regard, the Secretariat
and TCCs/PCCs must strive to redouble all efforts aimed at identifying and clearly
communicating any caveats that may have a negative impact on protection-ofcivilians mandates. At the same time, in Guatemala´s view, it is key that strategic
communications be developed, in coordination with national authorities and other
relevant stakeholders, on a mission’s protection-of-civilians mandate and related
operational capabilities and resources, with the aim of gathering relevant data from
the ground and disseminating accurate information so that the expectations and
concerns of local populations may be managed in a timely manner.
It has been 20 years since the Security Council adopted its first protectionof-civilians mandate, and experience has shown that United Nations peacekeeping
operations have a relevant role play on the issue. However, today, peacekeepers are
being asked to do more with less. While this is a reality we need to face, it is also
a reality that we need to change. Peacekeepers put their lives at risk in the most
dangerous circumstances for the noble goal of achieving peace. Guatemala has a longstanding tradition of contributing to peace and security through its participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Today, Guatemala renews its commitment
to providing our best-trained and most equipped special forces, with the objective of
fulfilling its mandate to protect civilians and their lives, without caveats.
Recalling the aforementioned annual report of the Secretary-General,
Guatemala wishes to underline the emerging risks with respect to the protection
of civilians. The threats caused by the malicious use of digital technologies and
the implications of developments in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems
must not be overlooked and should continue to be discussed in multilateral forums
Finally, Guatemala reiterates that the best way to protect civilians from
armed conflict is through prevention. Currently, we are tackling the global health
emergency presented by the coronavirus-disease pandemic, and the efforts aimed at
mitigating and controlling this disease should not be undermined by conflict. For
this reason, we encourage all relevant parties in conflict to respond to the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire in order to focus all efforts on the protection of
humankind as a whole from this deadly disease.

20-0733781/168

S/2020/465

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
We thank Estonia, President of the Security Council, for organizing today’s
open video-teleconference meeting on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
We thank the Secretary-General for his annual report on the topic (S/2020/366).
Every human endeavour has the potential of resulting in conflict. While it is
well understood that protecting civilians is a multidimensional and cross-cutting
issue, an attempt to view and interpret every conflict situation as requiring United
Nations protection is not just misleading but could have unintended consequences.
The presumption that every conflict situation requires a United Nations intervention
is not only too ambitious but could encroach upon the sovereignty of national
Governments, which have the primary responsibility for protecting civilians.
Last year was the twentieth anniversary of the protection of civilians
becoming a thematic item on the Security Council’s agenda. Despite the Council
being seized of the issue, we are conscious that the harrowing effects of conflicts
continue to worsen the lives of civilians. However, the remedy should not be worse
than the problem.
At the outset, it is important for us to have clarity on what the term “armed
conflicts” means. In the recent past, we have seen not just Member States, but even
United Nations entities themselves, take considerable liberty with what mandate
“armed conflicts” entails. Even conflicts that are not armed conflicts are now
being brought within the ambit of special representatives and other regimes, which
is not only an interference in the sovereign space of countries but should remain
the primary responsibility of national Governments. Bringing almost all conflicts
within this ambit will essentially ensure that we lose focus on the real problem of the
armed conflicts in which civilians must be protected.
It is in situations of armed conflict that the implementation of well-established
norms, such as respecting international humanitarian law and other relevant human
rights law by all parties to armed conflicts and ensuring safe and unhindered access
for medical and humanitarian agencies to assist people in need, inter alia, are not
matching expectations. The application of the concept of protecting civilians in
armed conflicts is directly mandated by the Security Council to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Protection of civilians in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping operations has been a complex one for a number of reasons: the varying
nature of armed conflicts, the concept’s contradiction with some long-standing
agreed principles of United Nations peacekeeping, limitations on the mandates and
the serious inadequacy of the resources made available for peacekeeping missions.
As far as India is concerned, even before the protection of civilians was a part
of the peacekeeping mandate, India was in the forefront of protecting civilians. We
would recall the example of Captain Gurbachan Singh Salaria, who led an Indian
infantry brigade group as part of the United Nations Operation in the Congo, in
November 1961. This mission’s objectives were to restore the peace and unity of
the Congo and to protect the lives of the civilian population in Elizabethville. As a
result, the greatest number of Indian casualties in a United Nations operation was
lost; indeed, 39 personnel laid down their lives. Again, after all these years, we
should not be putting our peacekeepers and those who protect civilians in armed
conflicts directly in harm’s way simply because the mandates that we give them are
fuzzy or insufficiently defined so that those men and women at the forefront are not
empowered to take protective operational action. The growing instances of serious
attacks on peacekeepers and the high level of casualties suffered by peacekeepers
82/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

in different missions point to the difficulties in implementing robust mandates in
situations involving rival warring groups mixed with civilian populations.
The expectation that United Nations peacekeepers can effectively ensure
the protection of civilians in the absence of clear and prioritized mandates is not
realistic. The protection of civilians is one of several other mandated components that
peacekeeping missions are individually expected to fulfil. However, peacekeepers
are often expected to do more than what they are mandated to do by the missions,
and with limited resources. Without proper equipment and resources and clear
accountability at all levels, the ability of peacekeeping operations to protect civilians
is unrealistic. The Security Council should undertake a serious examination of
mandates every time a peacekeeping operation is renewed.
The commitments under Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) provide a foundation
to tackle some of the challenges and further strengthen the protective role of
peacekeepers. We note that strengthening protection remains one of the key priorities
in the recently issued document “A4P in the time of COVID-19” for the period May
to October 2020. A collective endeavour is required, including by Member States
and the Secretariat, to adapt to changing environments.
We also believe that increasing women’s participation in peacekeeping
improves operational effectiveness and a mission’s potential to implement protection
of civilian mandates. In that context, we support efforts to reduce barriers to women’s
participation and promote greater participation through incentivization.
Going forward, it would be useful to consider evolving a normative architecture
for protection of civilians in armed conflict as part of a broad endeavour. A
framework that is politically attuned, but not politicized, and clearly defined and that
strengthens capacities of national Governments, enhances community engagement,
protects those who need it and abides by the do-no-harm principle with a strong
gender lens can be a workable solution.

20-0733783/168

S/2020/465

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
Ireland aligns itself with the statements of the European Union and the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians.
Twenty-one years ago, the Security Council adopted the protection of civilians
agenda. Since then, the Council has developed a culture of protection that recognizes
the interconnected nature of the protection risks to civilians in armed conflict. The
challenges that we grapple with now as a result of this global health crisis serve
to highlight our interdependence and demonstrate that it is only through collective
action, through collective commitment, that we can truly protect our citizens.
Secretary-General Guterres’ appeal for an immediate and global ceasefire in
response to the pandemic provides us with an opportunity that we must seize. It is
encouraging that many parties to armed conflict have endorsed that call. We must
continue to encourage others to do so, as we support those who have responded to the
Secretary-General’s appeal to move beyond the rhetoric. As we utilize any pause in
conflict to support a response to coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we need to look
at how that pause can be made permanent. We must use this as an opportunity to
strengthen our approach to the protection of civilians, which can be done through a
number of ways.
First, protection of civilians strategies will stand the greatest chance of
success if they include the voices of those who are most affected by conflict. As the
Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2020/366) highlights, various groups, such as
women, children, people with disabilities, refugees and internally displaced persons,
are uniquely affected by armed conflict. Response strategies that are designed in
concert with local stakeholders and civil society groups will ultimately reflect better
the unique protection needs of those groups.
Secondly, as the world health crisis continues, we must ensure compliance and
respect for international humanitarian law and continue to strengthen accountability
for all violations. The Security Council can play an important role to ensure the
effective investigation of credible allegations of serious violations of international
humanitarian law. In addition, increased cooperation and coordination between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court would significantly contribute
to the international community’s response where violations of international
humanitarian law may amount to crimes within that Court’s jurisdiction. Ensuring
compliance with international humanitarian law and preventing such crimes is more
important than ever as Governments and health-care systems commit their attention
and resources to deal with COVID-19.
Thirdly, Ireland welcomes the priority attached to the issue of explosive
weapons in populated areas by the Secretary-General in his Agenda for Disarmament.
The use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas constitutes
a serious threat for civilian populations, both in the short and long term. As the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reported in advance of last year’s
International Conference, “[w]arfare in populated areas using explosive weapons
that have a wide impact area exacts a terrible toll on civilians”.
The United Nations, ICRC and civil society have provided compelling
evidence of the humanitarian consequences of explosive weapons on civilians in
different conflicts around the world. Beyond the immediate deaths and injuries, the
destruction of housing, schools, hospitals, water and sanitation systems and other
critical infrastructure means that the civilian population is severely affected over the
longer term. That devastation, in turn, can act as a catalyst for the displacement of
84/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

people within and across borders, rendering displaced persons and refugees further
vulnerable to exploitation and abuse.
Ireland believes more can be done to reverse that pattern of humanitarian
harm and to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law. To that
end, we are proud to be chairing international efforts in Geneva to agree a political
declaration to address the humanitarian consequences that can arise from the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas. Through an open and
transparent consultation process initiated in November 2019, Ireland is seeking to
agree a political declaration in the coming months designed to foster behavioural
change, enhance compliance with international humanitarian law and strengthen the
protection of civilians during armed conflict. The widespread and cross-regional
level of engagement in that process is a reflection of the desire of the international
community to address that challenge.
The Secretary-General’s report on protection of civilians also illustrates how
the dynamics of armed conflict continue to evolve, with new and emerging threats to
civilians. Through our peacekeeping experience, Ireland is very much aware of that
and welcomes the ongoing efforts to adapt peacekeeping at all levels to meet those
challenges. As the Action for Peacekeeping priorities evolve during the current crisis,
there must be a continued focus on ensuring that peacekeeping mandates, especially
the protection of civilians mandate, meet the realities of conflict on the ground.
As an aspiring Security Council member, this is a responsibility that Ireland
fully understands. As COVID-19 creates new challenges for peacekeepers in accessing
and vulnerable populations and protecting them from conflict, it is imperative that
peacekeepers are fully supported and fully resourced in the implementation of that
mandate. We must be watchful for public health measures that impede them in their
work or that increase the vulnerability of already vulnerable populations.
Ireland encourages the United Nations and other Member States to continue
to support efforts to increase the full, effective and meaningful participation of
women in peacekeeping at all levels. Women are at the forefront of the fight against
COVID-19, taking on a disproportionate role as health-care staff, essential workers
and carers in the home. We know too, however, that COVID-19 is diverting resources
away from women’s services while driving an increase in violence against women.
The presence and skillsets of women peacekeepers, as well as women protection
officers within missions, have an important impact on a mission’s ability to carry
out the protection of civilians and conflict-related sexual violence mandates. We
need to ensure that women are there, participating equally and meaningfully in the
delivery of peace.
Ensuring that peacekeepers fully understand the protection of civilians
mandate is crucial. Ireland welcomes the updated protection of civilians policy and
the commitment to roll out the handbook to missions, which it is hoped, will enhance
implementation. Just as crucial is the provision of contextualized pre-deployment
training. Training is integral to our United Nations commitments, and Ireland has
been pleased to be able to deliver protection of civilians training to other troopcontributing countries.
Ireland will continue to seek innovative ways to share its expertise and
experience of peacekeeping in this new, challenging environment. To that end,
Ireland is collaborating with the Auschwitz Institute to provide online training on
prevention of atrocities and is also supporting the Gaming for Peace project (www.
gap-project.eu) to provide a free online training tool that will train peacekeepers in
essential skills that will allow them to deliver their mandate of protecting civilians,
such as cultural awareness, gender awareness and communications.
20-0733785/168

S/2020/465

The complexity and protracted nature of conflict drives the complexity of the
challenges of protecting civilians. The current COVID-19 crisis exacerbates those
challenges, but, just as we are bound together by those challenges, so should we unite
in presenting and delivering solutions.

86/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, Danny Danon
In his comprehensive report (S/2020/366), the Secretary-General highlights
the great challenges in protecting civilians in urban warfare. He also reminds us
of the grim reality that urban warfare will continue to be a defining feature of
armed conflict in the years to come. However, while the Secretary-General’s report
discusses the threats that stem from urban warfare, it does not discuss the reason for
the shift to that new battlefield. It could be understood from the report that urban
warfare is the unfortunate and unwanted consequence of modern armed conflict, but
that is not always the case.
For terrorist organizations and regimes, urban warfare is not a blip but, rather,
a feature of a carefully designed strategy to advance their deadly ideologies. They
choose to operate in urban areas, they choose to put civilians at risk because it serves
their interests in a number of ways. Hiding in homes, building bunkers in hospitals
and establishing command centres in schools provides them an additional layer of
protection — innocent civilians. In using human shields, terrorist organizations
know that countries that abide by a moral code will think twice, even three times,
before engaging their forces and putting civilians at risk.
Those terrorist organizations know that even when all precautions are taken
and measures of proportionality are expended, sometimes civilians are still harmed.
Yet, they do not see that as tragedy but, rather, as an opportunity. They cynically
use the death of civilians, for which they are responsible, as propaganda against
the forces that exercised every measure of restraint possible to minimize harm to
civilians. They work to delegitimize the efforts of countries by painting them as the
evil enemy in order to gain support at home and around the world. All of that is in
addition to their purposeful targeting of innocent civilians.
Unfortunately, Israel has witnessed such tactics in action many times, both
against itself and against many of the members of the Council and the international
community. Terrorist organizations and regimes disregard international law. They do
not value human life, they do not care about their own civilians and they definitely
do not care about our civilians.
As the report describes, the methods of the terrorist regimes and organizations
recklessly put the most vulnerable in harm’s way. The Houthis in Yemen use tens of
thousands of children as child soldiers. Hamas has built ammunition bunkers in the
basement of schools in Gaza run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees. The same children that are put in risk in those schools are then
sent to risk their lives with Hamas operatives rioting on the fence with Israel. Hamas
also uses hospitals in Gaza for their military operations, putting health-care workers,
as well as the sick and vulnerable, at risk. Hizbullah in Lebanon digs terror tunnels
from private homes across the border and into civilian populated areas in Israel.
Unsurprisingly, Hamas, Hizbullah and the Houthis are all supported by the
tentacles of terror of the same regime. In fact, the Iranian regime is involved in
nearly half of the 10 conflicts that the report blames for injuring and taking the lives
of over 20,000 civilians in the past year. Since the outbreak of conflict in Syria,
the Iranian regime has spent at least 30 billion dollars to support Syrian President
Bashar Al-Assad, who has not only targeted civilians but has done so with illegal
chemical weapons. The Iranian regime transfers $700 million to Hizbullah and $100
million to Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad annually. All are recognized
terrorist organizations that put civilians at risk as they turn their neighbourhoods
into urban battlefields. The Iranian regime uses its citizens’ money to train and arm
20-0733787/168

S/2020/465

terrorist organizations around the world. It teaches them how to use urban, highly
populated areas to maximize the risk to civilians and then how to cynically profit
from their death. The regime trains them to use civilians as dispensable pawns.
Israel has been dealing with terrorist organizations for decades. Our
unfortunate familiarity with urban warfare has forced us to develop new combat
doctrines and methods that take into account the complexity of an urban battlefield
and allow us to achieve results while minimizing harm to civilians. Israel is a leader
on that front and has shared its expertise with many countries now facing the same
struggle. Israel looks forward to cooperating with many more countries and sharing
its knowledge and capabilities in order to protect civilians in every conflict around
the world.
Adjusting the way that we fight to fit the new urban battlefield is not enough.
As I said earlier, urban warfare is not the result of modern armed conflict but a key
feature designed by terrorist organizations and those who fund them. Therefore, if
we wish to rid ourselves of the dangers that urban warfare presents, we must destroy
it at the source. We must fight the ideology that preaches that to harm civilians,
both your own and those of your adversary, is desirable. We must stop the funding
that allows such an ideology to spread around the world and pays for the training
enabling it to come to fruition. We must not allow the Iranian regime to continue
down the dangerous road on which it is set.
The Iranian regime is the world’s largest sponsor of terror. Any money that
the regime gets its hands on is not used to better the lives of its citizens but, rather, is
used to the detriment of civilians in the region and around the world. That has been
made even clearer during the coronavirus disease crisis, where the regime continues
to neglect its citizens as it pursues its military and terrorist objectives. Not only do
sanctions on Iran hamper the regime’s dangerous nuclear ambitions, it prevents them
from spreading the terror and instability that put millions of civilians at risk.
The Secretary-General’s report also touches upon the important issue of
missing persons. An alarming number of persons continued to go missing in armed
conflicts last year, and the families of the missing were left in despair, not knowing
the fate and whereabouts of loved ones. In 2014, Hamas killed and kidnapped
Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin. Hamas is also holding Avera Mangistu and Hisham
Al-Sayed, two young Israeli civilians who suffer from mental illness. Hamas has
refused to provide any sign of life to the families of the men and does not permit
visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross. More needs to be done by
the Council to ensure the return of Oron, Hadar, Avera and Hisham and all other
missing persons.
As the Secretary-General’s report rightly states, urban warfare threatens to
take the lives of many more civilians. It is not enough to learn new doctrines of urban
warfare; we must stop it from spreading in the first place. The Iranian regime poses a
threat to civilians all around the world. It aspires to turn every civilian into a civilian
in conflict. We cannot let that happen. The Iranian regime must be stopped.

88/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this annual
open debate. Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered by the observer of the
European Union and the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
This debate comes at a really challenging time for the protection of civilians.
Several conflicts are currently raging throughout the world, and violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law have been widespread in the
past year. As pointed out by the Secretary-General in this year’s report (S/2020/366),
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts,
including as a consequence of targeted attacks, and are disproportionately affected
by gross violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. Furthermore,
the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated the
suffering of people living in conflict settings. The most vulnerable, who account for
many of the civilians adversely affected by armed conflict, are also more exposed to
the effects of the pandemic.
It is therefore crucial to ensure unimpeded, fast and safe access to people
in need in order to provide them with adequate medical assistance and ensure the
effective delivery of humanitarian aid. In this perspective, Italy supports the call
of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire, which invited the conflict parties
to lay down their weapons and comply with their obligations deriving from the
international humanitarian law. We commend the launch of the Global Humanitarian
Response Plan by the Secretary-General, which will contribute to addressing the
risks of the COVID-19 pandemic for, and its impact on, the most vulnerable people
in countries affected by humanitarian crises.
Italy is very concerned by the ever-growing number of deliberate breaches
of international humanitarian law, resulting in attacks against humanitarian and
medical personnel and facilities, which are especially heinous in the context of the
pandemic, the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access, attacks against schools, the
use of starvation as a method of war, genocide and sexual and gender-based violence.
We strongly condemn the fact that sexual and gender-based violence continues to be
widely employed as a tactic of war. It is imperative to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, in all circumstances, in international and non-international armed
conflicts, as contemporary warfare poses new significant challenges.
Parties to armed conflicts continue to bear the primary obligation to respect the
right of civilians and to meet their needs, guaranteeing that the principles established
by the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional are fully respected. In
this regard, the national implementation of international humanitarian law remains
key. Italy commends the first resolution adopted by the thirty-third International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, “Bringing IHL home”, and will
continue to work with determination, also in collaboration with the International
Red Cross Committee, to disseminate knowledge of international humanitarian law
and to promote respect for such law, which today remains as relevant as ever.
The most effective way to ensure the full implementation of the protection of
civilians agenda is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of armed conflicts, thereby avoiding the occurrence of human rights violations and
atrocity crimes. We believe that conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes must be a political priority of each Member State and of the United
Nations, and we have always underlined the need to focus more on mediation
and peacebuilding.
20-0733789/168

S/2020/465

At the same time, when political dialogue does not pay off and conflict
occurs, it is crucial to ensure the protection of civilians on the ground. Peacekeeping
operations can play a key role in this regard, in particular when it comes to protecting
the most vulnerable segments of the population, through their engagement with
national authorities, security and military forces and capacity-building activities.
We should enhance our efforts to strengthen the impact of peacekeeping operations
on the protection of civilians, fulfilling the commitments we took in the framework
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which provides a comprehensive and
whole-of-mission approach to the protection of civilians. In this perspective, we
consider that peacekeepers should be adequately trained and equipped in order to
fully implement their protection of civilians mandate, and we commend the launch
of the updated Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping Handbook.
Promoting stronger accountability for serious international humanitarian law
and international human rights law violations is another fundamental element of
the protection of civilians. In the past, the Security Council has taken significant
steps to enhance accountability for serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law. However, Member States have the primary responsibility
for promoting and ensuring accountability and should take concrete, credible and
practical actions to this end.
We must fight against impunity for the most serious international crimes,
and to continue supporting international justice and accountability mechanisms.
It is paramount to conduct credible investigations and prosecutions wherever and
whenever international crimes occur in order to prevent the recurrence of these
violations and to provide justice to victims, who must be at the centre of our efforts.
Italy has traditionally been at the forefront of the efforts to ensure the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. During our term on the Security Council, in 2017 we
promoted the systematic inclusion of provisions on the protection of civilians in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, where necessary, and we submitted resolution
2382 (2017), on an enhanced role for police components in peacekeeping operations,
in order to step up the protection of civilians. We are committed to protecting and
promoting international humanitarian law and to implementing the principle of
accountability for violations of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in situations of armed conflict. In this perspective, Italy ensures
its firm support for international justice and accountability mechanisms, including
the work and independence of the International Criminal Court as an important actor
in the global fight against impunity, and urges all Member States to do the same.
Moreover, Italy shares the deep concern of the international community on
the extremely serious humanitarian impact of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in populated areas. Such impacts are extensive and include both direct
damage, in the form of death and injury, and indirect and long-term effects relating
to the destruction of essential infrastructure, cultural heritage, loss of services,
obstacles to humanitarian intervention, high costs of reconstruction and recovery,
displacement and denial of return.
Italy considers that the legal framework applicable to the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas is clear and that the crux of the matter is to implement
it in the changing dynamics of current conflicts. In particular, in the context of the
increasing relevance of population-centric warfare, it becomes necessary for States
and their armed forces to adapt their policies, doctrines and military tactics to the
challenges posed by military operations in populated areas so as to properly take
into account civilian vulnerabilities.

90/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

We therefore support the ongoing process to develop a political declaration
aimed at strengthening the protection of civilians from risks arising from the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas. It is extremely important to reinforce the
collective commitment to addressing civilian harm in urban warfare, reaffirming
that the cardinal rules and principles of international humanitarian law must be
complied with in all circumstances and by all parties to a conflict and promoting
best practices and the highest standards of conduct.
In the context of the protection of civilians, we have to pay special attention
to the most vulnerable.
First and foremost, it is a moral imperative to put an end to the worst forms of
violations of the rights of children in armed conflict, which not only endanger their
lives but also undermine the stability and welfare of societies as a whole, depriving
the new generations of their fundamental right to hope for a future after the war.
Italy presented an open pledge on the occasion of the thirty-third International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent to ensure that children can live safely
and enjoy their rights, even in conflict situations. It is fundamental to guarantee that
education is provided also in times of war, on the basis of the principles established
by the Safe Schools Declaration.
Our commitment to the issue encompasses not only political initiatives and
programmes but also specific cooperation projects. On the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, which we celebrate this year, Italy will continue to work with determination,
in collaboration with Save the Children and other relevant civil society organizations,
to allow children to enjoy their childhood and to hope for a better future, even in
times of war. We planned a high-level side event at the last session of the Commission
on the Status of Women on violence against girl children in armed conflicts and the
role of international criminal justice, in particular the International Criminal Court,
which could not take place due to the COVID-19 emergency. It will be rescheduled
as soon as possible.
Italy has long supported a policy of zero tolerance against sexual exploitation
and abuse committed by United Nations peacekeepers and civilian personnel. We
are a committed member of the circle of leadership on the prevention of and response
to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations, and we have signed
the related voluntary pact. We are also very proud to be the main contributor to the
United Nations trust fund in support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Finally, to protect the rights of persons with disabilities, we call for the
full implementation of the Charter on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in
Humanitarian Action, and we co-sponsored resolution 2475 (2019), on disabled
persons and armed conflicts.
To conclude, in order to strengthen the protection of civilians on the ground,
which is a cornerstone of the activity of the Security Council and a fundamental
duty and responsibility of the international community as a whole, we must keep the
protection of civilians high on the Council’s agenda, as the spread of the pandemic
has further highlighted.

20-0733791/168

S/2020/465

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to begin by thanking Estonia for convening this important
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366).
Since the adoption of the landmark resolution 1265 (1999), the Security Council
has reiterated its firm commitment to this important issue by adopting a series of
resolutions, including resolution 2286 (2016), on health care in armed conflict, to
which Japan contributed as a co-penholder in 2016. It is regrettable that, according
to the Secretary-General’s report, we see increased attacks against medical and
humanitarian personnel and their facilities. Last December, Dr. Tetsu Nakamura,
a representative of a Japanese humanitarian non-governmental organization
who devoted himself for decades to health care and agricultural development in
Afghanistan, was killed in a terrorist attack in Jalalabad. Japan strongly condemns
such heinous attacks against aid workers.
Currently, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is causing a serious human
security crisis, spreading across borders and striking the weakest segments of
society the hardest. Again, it is the people affected by armed conflict and other
situations of violence, women, children, people with disabilities, refugees and
internally displaced persons who are the most vulnerable. Japan strongly urges all
parties to armed conflict to respond to the Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire.
Key provisions of international humanitarian law must be respected to limit the
effects of armed conflict on the people and communities fighting against the virus
in already fragile situations. In March, Japan provided emergency assistance of
$140 million through United Nations agencies and the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies for the COVID-19 response. In April, Japan
decided additional assistance of more than $1.4 billion to support health systems and
medical capacity in developing countries.
Last year marked the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.
Japan is deeply concerned about the frequent occurrence of alleged violations of
international humanitarian law, notwithstanding the repeated resolve of the Council
with regard to the protection of civilians. At the thirty-third International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent last December, the Japanese Government, together
with the Japanese Red Cross Society, made a pledge to promote public awareness
through dissemination of the importance of international humanitarian law in order
to prevent sexual violence and attacks against humanitarian workers and their
facilities in armed conflicts. Japan urges all parties to armed conflict to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law in all circumstances.
Respect for international humanitarian law must be no exception in the
context of the emergence of cyberwarfare and new weapons equipped with emerging
technologies, including artificial intelligence, which may be drastically changing
aspects of conflict. At the thirty-third International Conference, Japan also pledged
to promote study and dialogue at multiple levels on issues concerning cyberwarfare
and the use of new weapons. Japan intends to contribute to the discussion towards
establishing new rules in this area. In this regard, Japan plans to host an international
conference on lethal autonomous weapons systems later this year.
Furthermore, Japan recognizes the critical role of the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission in upholding international humanitarian
law and continues to contribute both financially and by nominating the most qualified
members to the Commission.
92/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Japan is actively engaged in operational activities to help civilians affected
by armed conflict. With a view to ensuring human security, one of the pillars of
Japan’s development cooperation policy, Japan has always prioritized the protection
and empowerment of those affected by armed conflict, in particular refugees and
internally displaced persons. At the seventh Tokyo International Conference on
African Development, held in Yokohama last August, Japan, together with African
countries and international donors, committed to supporting efforts for strengthening
the self-reliance and resilience of displaced populations and host communities.
Japan’s contribution in connection with COVID-19, which I mentioned earlier, will
also be allocated to support those suffering from armed conflict and other situations
of violence in the Middle East and Africa.
The protection of victims of sexual violence in armed conflict is another
priority area for Japan from the viewpoint of human security. This year, which marks
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, Japan reaffirms its unwavering commitment by contributing
€2 million to the Global Fund for Survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. Japan
continues to support the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, under the Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Somalia and Iraq. Japan also contributes, through UN-Women, to the protection and
empowerment of victims of violent extremism in the Sahel and the Lake Chad region.
Japan will continue to commit itself to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. On the normative side, Japan will continue to work to further disseminate
awareness of international humanitarian law, while, on the operational side, we
will support the efforts on the ground to ensure and strengthen human security,
by protecting and empowering the victims of armed conflicts and by building
institutions that will protect the most vulnerable people, including through
humanitarian assistance and peacebuilding support. Japan looks forward to working
closely with the United Nations in this endeavour.

20-0733793/168

S/2020/465

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the
United Nations, Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi
[Original: Arabic]
First, I would like to thank Estonia for convening the open video-teleconference
on this important subject and to express appreciation to Her Excellency Mrs. Kersti
Kaljulaid, President of Estonia, for taking part.
Kuwait aligns itself with the joint statement circulated by Switzerland on
behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
This annual open debate provides the Security Council and, more broadly,
States Members of the United Nations with a unique opportunity to have a frank
discussion about the cur-rent situation with regard to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, enhance compliance with international law and related accountability
measures, and propose tangible steps to ensure that the protection of civilians agenda
is implemented by Member States, the United Nations and other stakeholders, based
on the Secretary-General’s annual report on the subject, in particular given the new
challenges we face with the spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
Today’s meeting is taking place in unprecedented circumstances, as the
United Nations and the international community continue to combat the spread of
COVID-19 worldwide. The virus not only poses a grave threat to the health of us all.
It is also exacerbating the security and safety challenges facing civilians because of
ongoing armed conflicts. For that reason, the protection of civilians agenda has taken
on even greater importance. Kuwait welcomes and continues to support the appeal
by the Secretary-General, António Guterres, for an immediate global ceasefire in
the light of the pandemic. It urges the Security Council, as the United Nations body
entrusted with maintaining international peace and security, to support that call.
This meeting marks the first time that Kuwait has participated in an open
debate of the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict since
its term as a non-permanent member of the Council for the period 2018–2019 came
to a close. During that time, it has contributed actively to the protection of civilians
agenda by sponsoring, alongside the Netherlands, Sweden and Côte d’Ivoire,
resolution 2417 (2018) on conflict and hunger.
It also sponsored resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed
conflict, which was adopted unanimously on 11 June 2019. That resolution, which
was inspired by a desire to strengthen the institutional and normative framework
for the protection of civilians and by our country’s own bitter experience, which
continues to be a source of suffering for many Kuwaitis, was the first to be issued by
the Council specifically addressing the issue of missing persons in armed conflict.
In it, the Council calls on all parties to armed conflict to take appropriate measures
to prevent persons from going missing, to actively search for persons reported
missing, to enable the return of their remains, and to ensure impartial and effective
investigations and the prosecution of offences linked to missing persons as a result
of armed conflict. Another aim of the resolution is to reaffirm the relevant rules of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
We welcome the level of detail in the section on missing persons in this year’s
report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/366), but note that there has been no letup in the alarming number of cases of persons who have gone missing in armed
conflicts over the past year. Member States should therefore ensure that they have
appropriate national laws and policies to prevent persons from going missing. We
94/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

encourage all parties concerned to take the measures necessary to address this issue
in line with resolution 2474 (2019).
Aside from the issue of missing persons, the Secretary-General paints a bleak
picture in his annual report of the current situation with regard to the protection
of civilians. The global civilian death toll and numbers of wounded and displaced
persons remain unacceptably high. In that regard, Kuwait would like to underscore
the following points.
First, we reiterate the importance of ensuring compliance with the relevant
provisions of international law and accountability for violations in situations
of armed conflict. It is clear from the report of the Secretary-General that the
suffering of civilians could be greatly reduced if all parties to conflicts respected
international humanitarian and human rights law. There must be accountability for
crimes committed in violation of that law so as to ensure that justice is served and
victims have recourse to legal redress. As underlined in the report, those factors
remain the most pressing challenges to strengthening the protection of civilians. We
therefore urge the Security Council to continue to take effective measures to ensure
compliance with international law and to develop the accountability measures
necessary to strengthen effective protection of conflict-affected populations, in
particular in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Secondly, we recall that violence and armed conflict, along with other
factors such as bureaucracy and certain obstacles caused by sanctions and counterterrorism measures, continue to hinder access to humanitarian aid. We therefore
call on the Security Council to urge the parties to armed conflicts to ensure that
humanitarian aid and goods are delivered to civilians in need wherever they are, and
to condemn ongoing violence against humanitarian workers and assets, including
killings, attacks, arbitrary detention, theft and the commandeering by the military
of humanitarian sites. We call again for use of the veto to be refrained from when
it comes to questions of access to humanitarian aid for civilians in need and under
siege in times of conflict.
Thirdly and last, we welcome the Secretary-General’s increased focus in
his report on new technologies and their impact on armed conflict. Some digital
technologies have contributed to the protection of civilians and provided a range
of opportunities for clear reporting on the number of victims and cases of missing
persons. They have, however, also been misused by certain parties to conflicts,
aggravating violence in some areas. We therefore call on the Security Council to
stress the need to address the harmful misuse of digital technology and ensure that
those new tools are used in compliance with existing obligations under international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we urge all members of the Security Council to intensify their
efforts to ensure that innocent civilians do not pay the price for conflicts in which
they have unwittingly been caught up and that the protection of civilians agenda
is implemented fully. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations, it is vital that we unite our efforts and mobilize the political
will needed to strengthen the protection of civilians trapped amid endless conflicts
around the world. Kuwait stands ready to continue to support those efforts.

20-0733795/168

S/2020/465

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Kyrgyz Republic
to the United Nations, Mirgul Moldoisaeva
First of all, let me express my gratitude to the Republic of Estonia for the
invitation to the today’s open debate of the Security Council. We commend you, Sir,
for the choice of this very timely and critical issue for consideration on this month’s
agenda during your presidency.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Peace Laureate and member of the Elders, for their very
informative addresses.
Let me thank the organizers of today’s event for the opportunity to speak on
the important topic of “Protection of civilians in armed conflict”.
The advent and rapid spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on a
global scale have had a severe impact on the protection of civilians in conflictaffected States. We note with deep concern the continued spread of the coronavirus
pandemic in all regions of the world, which poses a great threat to human health and
safety. It is obvious that people in conflict-affected States are paying the highest
price in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, and this is happening against the
backdrop of ongoing armed conflicts.
The current situation requires the immediate unification of our efforts and the
adoption of decisive actions by the whole international community. In this matter, the
central role of the United Nations and the Security Council cannot be underestimated.
The Kyrgyz Republic therefore supports Secretary-General Guterres’s call for a
global ceasefire and enhanced international cooperation to successfully counter the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Today, armed conflicts in different regions are causing increasing pain and
concern in the international community. In the unstable situations in Syria, Yemen,
Iraq, Libya, Gaza, Africa and Afghanistan, armed conflicts and terrorist attacks
claim the lives of innocent citizens every day and increase the number of refugees.
Continuing armed conflicts around the world highlight the need for timely and
effective measures for the protection of civilians.
We strongly condemn all acts of violence against civilians and call on the
international community to join efforts for the swiftest possible resolution of armed
conflicts through dialogue and negotiation between the conflicting sides. In this
regard, Kyrgyzstan fully supports all initiatives of the international community to
resolve the conflicts and protect civilians.
We believe that the protection of civilians must continue to underpin the
work of the Council and the international community. All States Members of the
United Nations need to ensure the protection of women, children and persons with
disabilities during armed conflict and take serious response measures to protect
medical personnel and medical infrastructure. In our view, respect for human
rights, including equality and non-discrimination, access to basic life services,
disarmament, mediation and other tools can play a vital role in conflict prevention.
We believe that, given the existing and emerging centres of instability around
the world, the role of the United Nations should be strengthened as much as possible.
In that regard, we support the peaceful resolution of the ongoing conflicts and crises
around the world by promoting, under the auspices of the United Nations, dialogue
among all political and military forces.
96/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

The Kyrgyz Republic pays great attention to preventive diplomacy,
peacebuilding and peacemaking, and the protection of civilians. In 2003, the
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic established the Interdepartmental Commission
for the Implementation of International Humanitarian Law. One of the functions of
the Commission is to consider issues related to the implementation of the international
obligations of the Kyrgyz Republic in the field of international humanitarian
law. The Commission’s activities are based on such principles as humanity, nondiscrimination and the protection of victims of armed conflicts, of civilians, of
medical personnel and of civilian objects.
We have ratified eight of the nine international human rights treaties. On 7 May
2019, Kyrgyzstan ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In
2018, we successfully completed our term on the Human Rights Council. According
to data from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
this year Kyrgyzstan became the first country in the world to resolve its stateless
problem, having reduced the number of stateless persons from 13,000 to zero over
the past five years. We have positive experience of participating in the settlement
of international and local conflicts, in United Nations peacekeeping operations and
within the framework of the Peacebuilding Fund, and we are also contributing to the
process of restoring Afghanistan.
We highly appreciate the work of the ICRC in Kyrgyzstan. The ICRC
supports the national authorities in disseminating knowledge and information about
international humanitarian law. In particular, the ICRC provides technical support
to the armed forces with the aim of integrating international humanitarian law into
their operational documents. With the support of the ICRC, seminars are held on the
law of armed conflict and on the protection of civilians, as are information sessions
on international humanitarian law, which helps to increase the level of training of
military personnel of units and military command-and-control bodies. Ongoing
ICRC projects and programmes in the country are relevant and important, including
in the field of humanitarian law, emergency situations and the penitentiary system.
We believe it is essential that the international community focus greater
attention on preventing conflicts and protecting civilians in armed conflicts.
We are keen to harness the potential and experience of the United Nations and
other international partners with regard to the specifics of our national development
and the historical and cultural traits peculiar to the Kyrgyz Republic. Our active and
productive cooperation with the United Nations system is evident in the growing
presence of its institutions in our country. We intend to continue our joint work,
and we are very interested in the possibility of attracting additional structures and
expanding the United Nations presence in our country.
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic intends to continue to support and
continue active work in cooperation with all Member States, the United Nations
system and all international partners to achieve our goals.

20-0733797/168

S/2020/465

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Latvia to the United Nations
We wish to congratulate Estonia on its successful and impressive presidency
of the Security Council. Estonia’s example demonstrates that smaller countries
contribute substantively to international peace and security. I thank you, Sir, for
your excellent leadership this month and for convening this important debate.
It has been more than 20 years since the Security Council included the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on its agenda, recognizing it as a matter
of peace and security. We thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this annual
debate and for doing it at the beginning of the protection of civilians week despite
the global hardships we all face at the moment.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement of the European Union.
Latvia supports the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate ceasefire across
the globe in the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The recent report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2020/366) outlines the realities on the ground and the ongoing
challenges and increasing risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We strongly
concur with the Secretary-General that we have the tools to strengthen the protection
of civilians, but all we need is strong political will.
And yet political will is what many struggle to exhibit. States are the ones
that bear the primary responsibility to protect their populations. According to
the latest report, 2019 was yet another year of suffering; civilians continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflicts and suffer devastating consequences.
More than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured in 10 conflict-affected areas,
including Syria, Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Libya, Yemen and
Ukraine. We need to be determined to address those situations, act promptly and
demand accountability.
We are extremely concerned about direct and indirect attacks against civilians,
civilian infrastructure, journalists and humanitarian and medical personnel during
armed conflicts, including in the light of COVID-19. Deeply disturbing methods
of warfare such as sexual and gender-based violence, harassment and rape, terror,
starvation and torture are still being used and often go unpunished. Women and girls
face heightened risks of sexual and gender-based violence during conflict.
A robust implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is
crucial and must be a priority. To further strengthen our efforts in this area, Latvia
recently became a member of the Group of Friends for Women, Peace and Security,
chaired by Canada. The reduction of gender-based violence was also Latvia’s priority
during its presidency last year of the Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade
Treaty, which resulted in a consensual action plan to tackle gender-based violence,
including the gendered impact of armed violence and conflict, as well as specific
aspects of risk assessment related to gender-based violence in considering the
issuance of export licences.
We must work tirelessly to reverse the aforementioned appalling trends and
ensure respect for international law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We reaffirm our strong support for the international justice and
accountability mechanisms, including the work of the International Criminal Court.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an integral part of the Security
Council’s agenda. The prevention of conflicts; the existing challenges to the protection
98/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

of civilians in various conflict-affected areas; and accountability for violations against
civilians are matters that should be addressed with a sense of urgency.
In that context, we remain deeply concerned by the continual suffering of
civilians in Syria. We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons in Syria, as
concluded in the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team to the
Executive Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and to the Secretary-General (S/2020/310, enclosure). The use of chemical weapons
by anyone is a brutal violation of international law, and those responsible for such
terrible crimes must be held accountable.
We remain deeply concerned about the deterioration of the human rights
situation in the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea as well as in
certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions currently not under the control of
the Ukrainian Government. Thousands of civilians have been killed and wounded in
the conflict. We call on the authorities of the Russian Federation, as the occupying
Power in Crimea, to end all human rights violations and abide by international
law. It is essential that the international community maintain pressure on Russia
until Ukraine’s sovereignty is fully restored and secured within its internationally
recognized borders.
Libya remains a matter of great concern owing to the growing number of
indiscriminate attacks against civilians, the increased violence and the escalation
of hostilities in the past couple of weeks. We strongly condemn the shelling of
residential areas by General Haftar and the forces aligned with him and any other
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure. Such activities undermine
further efforts towards sustainable peace. We call on all actors to de-escalate
hostilities and fully implement the United Nations-sanctioned arms embargo and
their commitments in line with the Berlin process.
The protection of civilians is also an important component of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and can be strengthened by the implementation of the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians and the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative Declaration. Latvia will continue its support by contributing experts to the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
The recent outbreak of COVID-19 has given rise to a new set of challenges that
negatively affect the protection of civilians. We must focus our efforts on tackling
the worst impacts on the most vulnerable and ensure that adherence to international
law prevails, especially now.
In addition to other unprecedented challenges, States face growing liabilities
in the digital sphere. According to statistics, today 4.57 billion people are active
Internet users. Digital technologies can and should provide us with the means for
everyday communication and sources of reliable information. However, the report
recognizes the countless hidden vulnerabilities that cyberspace presents and the risk
that it could become a tool for manipulation, recruitment and the spread of violence.
It is essential to counter intolerance, hate speech and the dangerous spread of
misinformation. Latvia supports the recent initiative by the Secretary-General on
COVID-19 communications in this regard. It is the responsibility of States to provide
an orderly cyberspace based on international law and on building digital literacy and
resilience to protect its population.
While digital technologies have provided unprecedented opportunities
for citizens and Governments, challenges lie in the possibility of their multiple
applications. For instance, we can see that the same technology may be used in selfdriving cars and in autonomous military systems with inbuilt lethal functionality.
20-0733799/168

S/2020/465

These very complex issues are currently being discussed within the framework
of the Group of Governmental Experts on Emerging Technologies in the Area of
Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems (GGE on LAWS). Latvia is contributing to
that international discussion by chairing the GGE on LAWS process in 2020. In his
report, the Secretary-General outlines the importance of retaining human control
over the use of lethal force. That is one of the main topics of the international experts’
debate in the GGE on LAWS this year and dovetails with the attempts being made to
protect civilians in armed conflict.
We cannot become detached from human suffering and calls for help. The
international community must step up its commitment to provide stronger protection
to civilians and implement the comprehensive recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report.
It is a fundamental legal obligation and in our common interest to promote and
ensure the effective protection of civilians.

100/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Lebanon commends Estonia for having organized this open debate. The highlevel participation therein testifies to the centrality of this item on the agenda of the
Security Council and of the United Nations in general.
The topic is timely because even a pandemic could not stop conflicts around
the world or stop civilian suffering. The Security Council should prioritize this
agenda and make it central to all peace and security issues under its consideration,
since the number of civilian deaths, injuries and trauma as a result of armed conflict
continues to be staggering, as illustrated in the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366).
Compliance with existing international legal instruments, particularly
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and Security
Council resolutions, remains a crucial way to ensure the protection of civilians. The
Security Council should therefore ensure that those instruments are implemented
and respected. It can do so through greater coordination with the relevant regional
organizations and concerned Member States.
But this is not a matter of legality and international law only; it is a moral
issue and goes to the heart of what makes us human and decent. Ethics and morality
have to be integral to human behaviour, especially during conflict. We need to insert
morality into the language of protection and of the prevention and resolution of
conflicts.
When we in Lebanon speak about the protection of civilians, we do so from
our long experience with wars and invasions. Lebanese civilians have paid the heavy
price of years of blatant violations of international law, with countless indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks by the Israeli forces. The shelling of a United Nations
compound in the village of Qana in 1996 resulted in the deaths of more than 100
Lebanese civilians — including children — and injuries to hundreds more, including
United Nations peacekeepers. Ten years later, in 2006, Qana was once again bombed
by the Israeli forces, which resulted, again, in the deaths of children and civilians.
Millions of cluster bombs were dropped on Lebanese territory. Even the
environment was not spared, with the destruction of the Jiyeh power plant, which
resulted in a massive oil spill on Lebanese shores and beyond.
And yet all those crimes against the civilian population, against the
environment and against the territorial integrity of a country were committed without
any accountability or remedy in sight. Accountability is fundamental to putting an
end to impunity and to giving victims the justice that they deserve. Accountability
mechanisms must be put in place and supported by the Security Council, without
double standards.
The same could be said of the situation in the occupied Palestinian State,
where Palestinian generations have grown up living under the constant violations
of their rights by the occupying Power, in total breach of its obligations under
international law, hence the importance of ensuring respect of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the application of the Fourth Geneva Convention to protect
Palestinian civilians and guarantee their rights.
In the absence of specific legislation and standards regarding the use of
new technologies and weapons in a context of armed conflict, we believe that the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution should apply. Prevention
20-07337101/168

S/2020/465

must continue to be at the core of our efforts, and we must continue to address the
root causes of conflicts. National policy frameworks that are consistent with regional
and international strategies can help in that regard and could be developed through
an inclusive approach, with the participation of the Government, the United Nations,
civil society, youth and women representatives. Security Council and regional
organizations could support States in the implementation of such frameworks.
As stressed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 67 of his report,
“The most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of armed conflict.”
It also brought into better focus the Secretary-General’s call for a humanitarian
ceasefire. He rightly pointed out that the pandemic has shown the folly of war.
However, it also showed how vulnerable humans are and that protecting them should
be the highest responsibility today and tomorrow.

102/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
Liechtenstein associates itself with the statement read out by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
The situation with regard to the protection of civilians must be seen in
the context of the severe impact of the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The virus is exacerbating pre-existing inequalities and vulnerabilities
while also exemplifying global interdependence and demonstrating the need for
solidarity. Measures to support vulnerable populations are urgently needed, including
through the provision of water and sanitation, and by ensuring access to health care
and health services and enhancing protections from gender-based violence. Refugees
and displaced people as well as those who are detained face a particularly difficult
task in finding safe ways to self-isolate and avoid infection.
Liechtenstein places on record our support for the Secretary-General’s appeal
for a global ceasefire in order to help create conditions conducive to the delivery of
aid and prise open a space for diplomacy in intractable armed conflicts. We hope
to see its implementation by all relevant parties without distinction on the basis of
actors or situations. A virus that spreads without discrimination must be met by a
global ceasefire that does not discriminate.
The consideration of the impact of COVID-19 on the protection of civilians
should make us reflect on our understanding of the notion of security. Never have
more people felt more insecure than in the last three months, and never have we
been less prepared to offer an effective response. Our definition of security must be
human-centred and go far beyond measures to address the immediate threat of armed
violence. Food security, climate action, economic security and universal access to
health care should be key ingredients of our understanding of human security.
Conflict-related sexual violence continues to be a blight on many of the
world’s most severe conflicts. We appreciate that the Secretary-General has brought
awareness to its prevalence for men and boys, given the distinct stigmas that they
may suffer as a result; we will continue work with the Liechtenstein-based nongovernmental organization All Survivors Project to highlight this understudied
issue. Liechtenstein is also proud to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration as it marks
its fifth anniversary. We underline the need for all parties to conflict to fully comply
with international humanitarian law and for the Council to ensure accountability in
cases of non-compliance.
The ongoing imperatives of prevention and accountability must not be obscured
by the need for immediate protection measures. The Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct regarding Security Council action against mass
atrocity crimes, which is supported by 121 States, including two thirds of the current
Security Council members, remains highly relevant in this respect. Liechtenstein
continues to call on non-signatories to sign the code.
Liechtenstein is pleased that the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/366)
emphasizes once again the need to enhance accountability and that it references
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. It is worth
remembering that the Mechanism was created by the General Assembly in the light
of a deadlocked Security Council unable to pull the levers of accountability available
to it, in particular a referral to the International Criminal Court (ICC). The fact
that this section of the Secretary-General’s report does not highlight any Council
actions in many years should serve as a wakeup call to a body that increasingly
20-07337103/168

S/2020/465

seems asleep at the wheel on questions of accountability. Liechtenstein emphasizes
the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General with respect
to Council referrals to the ICC — a meaningful tool when supported by followup action in the Council. The principle of complementarity — that is, the primary
responsibility of national judiciaries to investigate and prosecute — offers the
Council many more opportunities in its engagement with States, both during and
after armed conflict.

104/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the
United Nations, Audra Plepytė
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
The protection of civilians has been systematically addressed in the Security
Council for more than 20 years, yet thousands of civilians are still dying as a result of
armed conflicts that too often are in flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law. The international community has indeed taken a number of important steps for
the protection of women, children, internally displaced persons, refugees, journalists
and media professionals. Nevertheless, we need to keep strengthening the normative
framework and its implementation, and continue to examine what more can be done.
In that context, I would like to mention the three most pertinent aspects related to
the protection of civilians for Lithuania: the protection of journalists, peacekeeping
and the fight against impunity.
Protecting civilians is not possible without protecting journalists during
conflict. Today we mark five years since the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2222 (2015), drafted by Lithuania, putting out a call for all Member States to create
a safe environment — both in law and in practice — for journalists to carry out their
important functions. Attacks against journalists and media workers, like attacks
against civilians, constitute crimes against humanity and undermine the ability of
the international community to understand and respond effectively to conflicts that
threaten international peace and security.
The spread of radical extremism and terrorism undeniably adds a highly
dangerous dimension to the threats facing journalists and media workers. However,
many of the journalists killed in the past decade were local journalists targeted for
covering conflict, corruption or gang violence in their own communities. Impunity
remains widespread. With more than 1,000 journalists and media workers killed
worldwide over the past decade and only one case out of 10 legally prosecuted,
the level of impunity for crimes against journalists remains appallingly high. That
creates a climate of fear among journalists and has a negative impact on the whole
society, as impunity for crimes against journalists is detrimental to the freedom
of opinion and expression online and offline, in general. It demonstrates that,
despite significant progress in international legal frameworks, the lack of safety
for journalists on the ground remains worrisome and requires the attention of the
international community.
Lithuania co-founded the cross-regional Group of Friends for the Protection
of Journalists in 2016, inspired primarily by the goals of resolution 2222 (2015) and
in response to the lack of safety for journalists worldwide. The Group is working
closely with United Nations entities, representatives of media organizations and
non-governmental organizations to promote respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including through the appropriate implementation of the resolutions on
the protection of journalists and the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, adopted under the auspices of UNESCO. It
also seeks to increase international awareness of the severe violations of the human
rights of journalists and media workers worldwide. In April, four Groups of Friends
for the Protection of Journalists — at the United Nations in Geneva and New York,
UNESCO in Paris and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
Vienna — released their first joint statement denouncing attempts by certain States
to use the fight against COVID-19 as a pretext for limiting the freedom of expression
and persecuting journalists.
20-07337105/168

S/2020/465

Let me also underline that Lithuania remains grateful to the Secretary-General
for his continuous leadership in the area of the protection of journalists and for his
activation of the relevant Focal Points Network within the United Nations system.
Allow me to turn now to peacekeeping. Given the increasing complexity
of today’s conflicts, the effective implementation of the protection of civilians is
as challenging as ever. In many ways, it has become the most visible standard by
which the performance of United Nations peacekeeping is often judged. Lithuania
is a strong supporter of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
which includes strengthening the protection provided by peacekeeping operations as
one of its priority areas.
Predeployment and in-mission training of peacekeepers remains essential.
Training in behavioural, social, and attitudinal skills, as well as in other relevant
skills and tools such as intelligence and communication, is critical. Those tools,
offered by the United Nations or troop- and police-contributing countries, help to
ensure that peacekeeping personnel are equipped to interact with vulnerable people
and at-risk populations, and that through that interaction they can provide appropriate
protection. Lithuania takes the training of peacekeepers extremely seriously. Nearly
300 Lithuanian peacekeepers have received comprehensive predeployment training
on their practical and legal commitments with respect to the civilian population on
the ground, per United Nations guidelines.
The Security Council’s efforts to give practical meaning to the protection
agenda would be useless without increased accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. We cannot
succeed in protecting civilians when those who commit abuses, crimes and atrocities
know they can get away with such crimes. The Council has a critical role to play
in bringing the perpetrators to account by taking a strong and systematic position
on ending impunity for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and gross
violations of human rights. My delegation reiterates its call to restrain the use of the
veto in situations where such crimes are committed.
Perpetrators of crimes against civilian populations and those who attack
and kill journalists and humanitarian and medical workers must know that there is
no escaping justice. National and international justice mechanisms, including the
International Criminal Court, have an important role to play in that sphere. In that
regard, we welcome the international cooperation that led to the arrest and trial of
Félicien Kabuga for genocide and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in
Rwanda in 1994. Ending impunity is also essential for protecting civilians. Lithuania
is determined to persecute perpetrators of mass atrocities. Our national courts are
imposing real sanctions on the perpetrators of war crimes.
In conclusion, we must admit that current international efforts to ensure
accountability remain insufficient and do not meet the bar set by legally binding
international treaties. In that regard, we call on all State and non-State actors to
intensify efforts to ensure accountability for violations of international law. We
urge the members of the Security Council, the Secretary-General and all the States
Members of the United Nations to take determined action to strengthen the protection
of civilians and stand up for the norms and laws that are essential for safeguarding
civilians in conflict.

106/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
On behalf of the Government of Malta, I thank Estonia for organizing this
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Malta recognizes the
importance of holding regular constructive discussions on this matter, as civilians
are the ones who bear the brunt of conflict. In that connection, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2020/366) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the observer
of the European Union and would like to add a few additional remarks in our
national capacity.
Malta remains deeply concerned about the devastating impact on, and the
ongoing suffering of, civilians due to the conflicts in Libya and Syria. The fact
that attacks on civilians, hospitals, medical facilities, schools and refugee camps
continue, in complete violation of international law and international humanitarian
law, is completely unacceptable.
Malta stresses the need for all parties to conflicts to ensure the protection of
civilians and respect the principles of distinction between civilians and combatants,
proportionality and precaution. In 2019, tens of thousands of civilians were affected
by conflict around the world. In addition, the coronavirus disease pandemic has
further exacerbated the vulnerability of people in conflict zones.
Women and girls in particular have always been subject to sexual and genderbased violence, which has been adopted repeatedly over the years as a war tactic.
Malta remains deeply concerned about reports of increased violence against women
and girls, especially in conflict-affected areas, where there is little social cohesion
and services are limited. We call on all partners to ensure widespread compliance
with commitments undertaken within the highest organs of the United Nations
system in order to address gender-based violence in conflict.
Furthermore, Malta remains committed to the Secretary-General’s view that
the effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda needs
to remain a priority throughout this period. As previously stated, Malta intends to
launch its first women and peace and security action plan this year.
Malta also underlines the importance of protecting children in armed
conflict. It remains unacceptable that, for thousands of children born in the last
decade, living in a war-torn country is normal. Daily bombings are normal. Fleeing
homes is normal. Forced disappearances are normal. Sexual violence is normal. Not
knowing where the next meal will come from is normal. No access to clean water
and sanitation is normal. Political settlements may end wars, but the psychological
and social consequences of conflicts will be felt for decades. During the past year,
children were once again exposed to a multitude of violations, including killings,
maimings and sexual violence, as well as forced displacement.
Mental health and psychosocial support will need to play a more central role in
peacebuilding efforts, especially when it comes to women, children and vulnerable
groups.
In our view, the principle of accountability remains fundamental. It must
be implemented and further strengthened, as serious crimes and violations of
humanitarian law cannot go unpunished. Credible investigations are needed in order
to ensure that victims get the justice they deserve. Peace without justice is fragile
and short-lived. We must therefore take concrete steps in that regard.
20-07337107/168

S/2020/465

Malta fully supports the global call for peace made by the Secretary-General
in March, in which he emphasized the need “to put armed conflict on lockdown and
focus together on the true fight of our lives.” We also join Special Representative
Gamba in urging the inclusion of child protection provisions, such as securing
the release of all children associated with parties to conflict, prioritizing their
reintegration and immediately ending their recruitment and abuse.
The best way to protect civilians is prevention. We urge all States and parties
to armed conflict to comply with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law at all times. We recall their obligation to respect and ensure respect
for international humanitarian law in all circumstances. Finally, we urge them to
allow the unhindered provision of life-saving assistance such as medicines, food and
fuel for civilian purposes throughout the country and across conflict lines.
We have the tools to protect civilians, even in situations of armed conflict.
The international community must act today to mitigate the impact of conflict on
civilians when possible, prevent their involvement in future conflicts and assist
affected civilians in recovering from violent conflict.

108/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
This debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict is taking place at
a critical moment for humankind, which is facing an invisible threat that is already
having a devastating impact worldwide.
The pandemic poses an enormous additional challenge for millions of human
beings living in situations of armed conflict. If we are to effectively combat the
pandemic, we must support the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. It is
for the sake of humankind. We welcome the fact that some have not ignored the call
and are focusing efforts on saving lives. Unfortunately, others have not only ignored it
but have even taken advantage of the distraction provided by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) crisis to escalate conflicts and ensure the restocking of weapons. That is
absolutely unacceptable, and the international community should strongly condemn
that practice.
Civilians in armed conflict are particularly vulnerable to the pandemic.
COVID-19 could have apocalyptic implications in some States whose medical
infrastructure has been devastated after years of fighting. We therefore reiterate our
strong condemnation of all attacks on medical infrastructure and medical personnel.
Such attacks are grave violations of international humanitarian law and constitute
war crimes. Civilians risk being held hostage both to war and to a medical crisis.
Strict observance of international humanitarian law and international human rights
is therefore critical. Accountability mechanisms, including legal remedies, must
also be bolstered. The Security Council must assume its responsibility to address
impunity by exercising its power to refer cases to the International Criminal Court.
Mexico also strongly calls for the non-use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas because of their direct impact and humanitarian consequences
for civilians, as well as the damage they cause to the critical civilian and medical
infrastructure needed to combat the pandemic.
We recognize the heroic work and sacrifice of humanitarian and health
workers in these particularly adverse circumstances. We will not tire of repeating
that humanitarian assistance can never be held hostage to the political interests of
the Council.
We are concerned about the impact that additional restrictions on movement
may have on the capacity of humanitarian and protection actors to fulfil their
mandates, and about the potential implications for vulnerable groups, particularly
women and children. We must not allow the fight against COVID-19 to also result
in an increase in gender-based violence, sexual abuse and human rights violations.
Mexico expresses its concern about the pandemic’s potential impact on the
work of peacekeeping operations. While it is necessary to take all precautionary
measures to prevent the spread of the virus, it is essential that peacekeeping
operations continue to carry out their essential tasks in the area of peace and
security, especially those dedicated to the protection of civilians. That requires a
certain margin of flexibility in the adaptability of mandates and the pending rotation
of troops.
Finally, we stress the importance of the effective implementation of resolution
74/274, recently adopted by the General Assembly for the benefit of civilians in
armed conflict. It is critical that all the necessary measures be taken to avoid denial

20-07337109/168

S/2020/465

of access to essential drugs, vaccines, personal protective equipment and medical
equipment to combat COVID-19.
The Security Council cannot remain paralysed amid the suffering of millions
of human beings in conflict situations, especially when it acts on behalf of the entire
international community. As such, there is only one alternative — to act now.

110/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the
United Nations, Omar Hilale
[Original: French]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Estonia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the first time in its history and to thank
its delegation for organizing today’s important debate, the theme of which fits
perfectly with the priorities of its mandate, namely, as presented to us, respect for
international standards, the fight against impunity, the defence of human rights,
addressing environmental issues and the improvement of the working methods of
the Security Council. The statement by the President of the Republic of Estonia also
demonstrates the country’s unwavering commitment to the protection of civilians.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing, which took stock of the current status of the protection of
civilians and highlighted the challenges that the international community continues
to face in that regard, as also outlined in his report (S/2020/366). My thanks also go
to the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and
to President Johnson Sirleaf, member of The Elders and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate,
for their particularly relevant briefings.
One year after the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999), which placed the protection of civilians on the Council’s
agenda, we note that significant normative progress continues to be made, thanks in
particular to the commitment of the Council, with the support of all States Members
of the United Nations and also of civil society. Indeed, the numerous resolutions
and presidential statements, together with the crafting of specific protection-ofcivilians mandates in certain missions, have made it possible to establish a robust
legal regulatory framework.
However, it must be noted that, despite these advances, civilian populations
continue to be victims of serious violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, with a continuous increase in the numbers of victims,
displaced persons and refugees. This situation is likely to worsen further with the
coronavirus disease and its short- and medium-term consequences, particularly when
it comes to the dynamics of conflicts. It has been noted that some actors are trying
to take advantage of this unprecedented situation to advance their agendas, despite
the Secretary-General’s call for a comprehensive ceasefire, to which Morocco fully
subscribes. The efforts of the international community must also continue to take
into account sexual violence in times of conflict and pay particular attention to the
most vulnerable, especially children and women.
Given that the protection of civilians is primarily the responsibility of the States
concerned, it is important to strengthen their capacities, if necessary, and always at
their request. It would therefore be worthwhile to further explore the potential of
the Peacebuilding Commission in this respect. Furthermore, Member States should
develop national policies based on good practices and set up institutional bodies to
work on the protection of civilians, while continuing and strengthening mechanisms
at the regional and international levels.
The States concerned can also rely on peacekeeping operations if necessary.
Peacekeeping operations remain an essential tool, although they are not always
deployed to locations where populations are at risk. The priorities in the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping operations that are mandated to provide such protection
are now well established, and a significant body of policy and guidance has been
20-07337111/168

S/2020/465

developed. It is worth noting the publication last week of the new version of the
handbook entitled The Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping. As
a long-established troop-contributing country in United Nations peace operations,
allow me to share the following points with the Council.
First, just over 20 years ago, the Security Council gave the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone the first specific mandate on the protection of civilians.
Since then, the protection of civilians by peacekeeping operations has developed
significantly. Today more than 90 per cent of peacekeepers are deployed in missions
with a mandate to protect civilians, and these mandates are often cited as priority
tasks for missions in the various theatres where this is necessary.
Secondly, the protection of civilians requires adequate human and financial
resources, whether in terms of the number of Blue Helmets deployed or of their
equipment and their training. It is also necessary to be able to manage the expectations
of all parties involved, be they local populations, host country authorities or Security
Council members.
Thirdly, the changing nature of conflicts requires us to constantly review our
methods and processes. The United Nations has embarked upon a reform of its peace
and security architecture that gives the protection of civilians an important place.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative takes this into account,
as does the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
The role of humanitarians is also essential. Morocco firmly denounces the
attacks on humanitarian personnel, which have experienced a worrisome upsurge.
Humanitarian workers’ detention, abduction or even murder continue to seriously
hamper humanitarian operations. In this regard, immediate measures must be taken
to ensure humanitarian workers’ safety. Another important aspect is humanitarian
access, which is too often denied. In addition, States are obliged to fulfil their
obligation to combat impunity and fully investigate and prosecute anyone responsible
for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, or systematic and serious
violations of human rights.
Fighting impunity means, in part, putting in place strong justice and
accountability mechanisms. In some cases, such international mechanisms as
the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda,
sanctions regimes and hybrid mechanisms such as the Special Criminal Court in the
Central African Republic can be tools at our disposal.
Refugee and displaced populations need special attention, especially in this
period of pandemic, because even in normal times they are extremely vulnerable to
violations of their rights. The international community has an obligation to ensure
that all their rights are respected and that the aid provided to them actually reaches
them and is not misappropriated or subject to spoliation. The registration of refugee
populations is a sine qua non for ensuring these rights, as recognized in international
law and in Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Lastly, as has been pointed out, in order to assess threats and coordinate the
actions of the various actors, the best protection remains prevention. The preventive
dimension can be carried out through capacity-building in the countries concerned,
respect for the rule of law, good governance, the entrenching of a culture of
human rights and the establishment of early-warning mechanisms that can detect
pre-conflict situations and prevent them from turning into violent conflict. We take
this opportunity to reiterate our full backing for the Secretary-General’s policy of
increasing support for mediation and the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
In conclusion, Morocco salutes all those who are working to protect populations
in conflict zones and pays them sustained tribute.
112/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
I would like to begin by thanking the Estonian presidency for organizing
today’s high-level video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and Nobel
Peace Laureate and member of The Elders, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for
their briefings. I also welcome the annual report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366).
We are at one of the most difficult junctures in human history. Due to the
coronavirus-disease pandemic, the protection of civilians has become the foremost
priority of every country, whether it be at peace or in conflict. The impacts of this
invisible enemy threaten to reverse the achievements of years of rigorous diplomatic
efforts aimed at sustaining peace. Poor and vulnerable countries had already been
struggling when they had to take up the fight against this pandemic and strive to
provide proper health services and economic relief to their citizens. In addition
to this, there is a danger that the pandemic will support destabilizing factors that
fuel frustration and create instability. The cases of gender-based violence and
discrimination against the vulnerable segments of populations are already on the rise.
In this context, we must ensure that the pandemic not be used as a pretext
to inflict pain and suffering on civilians. The most vulnerable people, particularly
children, women, the sick and the wounded, should be given special attention.
Moreover, civilians’ right to food and unhindered access to health and medical
facilities should not be compromised under any circumstances. Above all, the
principles of international humanitarian law and human rights law should be upheld
in all circumstances.
Nepal expresses its support for the international normative framework for
the protection of civilians and underscores the need to reinforce existing standards
and their effective implementation. The State has the primary responsibility for
protecting its civilians and preventing violence against them. Perpetrators should be
held accountable and brought to justice.
The capacity of national Governments to develop and implement national
policy frameworks on the protection of civilians should be strengthened. In this
regard, States Members of the United Nations and regional institutions should share
their experience and good practices with each other.
Nepal’s experience from its nationally led peace process has proved the
significance of the promotion of social harmony, tolerance and understanding for
ensuring the protection of civilians in conflicts and peace processes alike. The
local community should be informed and involved, as they are directly or indirectly
affected by conflicts and their aftermaths. Local community leaders, youth and
women’s organizations have a crucial role to play in strengthening the social fabric.
Furthermore, the investments in education, awareness programmes and
employment generation are the most prudent that can be made to protect civilians
in the long run. Moreover, inclusive policies relating to all issues of social life,
including in public governance, must be adopted and promoted.
As one of the major contributors to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Nepal takes every measure to prevent the exploitation of civilians by keeping its
peacekeepers highly professional, including through vetting, predeployment and intheatre awareness training on applicable provisions of international humanitarian
20-07337113/168

S/2020/465

law and human rights law as well as through robust punitive measures for those
convicted in sexual exploitation and abuse cases.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance of providing peacekeeping
missions with proper and adequate resources for implementing their mandates,
including their protection-of-civilians mandates, at this difficult hour. This will
also help the peacekeeping missions support host Governments in their fight against
the pandemic.

114/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 51
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Nigeria to the
United Nations, Samson Sunday Itegboje
We thank the delegation of Estonia for organizing today’s important debate.
Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and Nobel Peace
Laureate, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for sharing their perspectives on this very
important subject.
I commend health-care workers, Member States, United Nations agencies,
civil society, the private sector and, in particular, the World Health Organization for
providing vital support and services to defeat the coronavirus-disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. As we contend with COVID-19 and its far-reaching effects, Nigeria calls
on all Member States and parties to conflict to join and support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire.
It is a matter of grave concern that conflict situations expose civilians to
killings, kidnappings, torture, sexual exploitation, trafficking and other dangers.
This is particularly the case where non-State armed groups are involved. Their
complete disregard for international law, in particular international humanitarian law,
highlights the challenge they pose to the protection of civilians in conflict situations.
It is also an unfortunate reality that women and girls are the most affected
groups in conflict situations. Accordingly, we acknowledge the Security Council’s
commitment to the protection of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations, as exemplified by the adoption, inter alia, of resolutions 1325 (2000),
1960 (2010) and 2122 (2013).
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an obligation that requires
the collective efforts of various stakeholders. Indeed, close collaboration among the
Security Council, the United Nations Department of Peace Operations, troop- and
police-contributing countries and their respective missions, as well as such regional
organizations as the African Union, is vital to the success of protection-of-civilians
mandates. It should be underscored that a clear and common understanding of
protection mandates is fundamental to the effectiveness of missions.
In this regard, we strongly support community engagement in promoting the
protection of civilians. Community-alert networks and community-liaison assistance
are vital to understanding perceptions of threat at the community level, including
how communities seek to reduce risks and how peace operations can address them.
We urge the international community to continue to recognize these imperatives.
Nigeria endorses the Secretary-General’s emphasis on preventive measures
to stop armed conflicts. We wish to state in this regard that the efforts aimed at
protecting civilians in armed conflicts require that the conditions that allow these
conflicts to thrive be brought to an end. In other words, beyond the law enforcement
approach, dealing with the political economy of conflicts in a more holistic manner
is crucial to finding potential remedies to situations of conflict and the related crimes
around the world.
In the same vein, the world must find solutions to the thriving market in small
arms and light weapons. Terrorist, militant and rebel groups continue to have access
to weapons that are used to wreak havoc on communities in attempts to gain political
power or push forward their selfish and unpatriotic agendas.
Nigeria is firmly committed to the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and recognizes the primary responsibility of States in protecting civilians within
20-07337115/168

S/2020/465

their national jurisdictions. That conviction underlies our resolve to continue to
take all the necessary measures, in full compliance with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, to protect civilians in the battle against the
terrorist group Boko Haram and its ilk.
Nigeria has had its fair share of extreme terrorist activities by Boko Haram in
the north-east region of the country, which have led to huge displacement of people
and conflict-related violence against civilians, including women and children, that
has been widely condemned. Since the establishment of the Multinational Joint
Task Force, made up of Nigeria, Chad, Benin, the Niger and Cameroon, resounding
successes have been recorded in the degradation and decimation of the group. Nigeria
is collaborating with the United Nations and other international partners to improve
service delivery and enhance protection measures, both in communities and in areas
where civilians seek refuge.
In furtherance of that, Nigeria has appointed a national focal point on the
responsibility to protect under the presidential committee on small arms and light
weapons to tackle the issue of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. A
human rights desk has also been established by the Nigerian military to ensure that
the military operates in accordance with its rules of engagement. The Government
has taken measures to enhance the security of civilians, including women and
children in the camps for internally displaced persons, to reduce their vulnerability
and promote their safe return to their homes and their reintegration into society.
Nigeria is a signatory to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
It has put in motion legal remedies for victims of Boko Haram terrorism, which
have resulted in diligent prosecution of many detained Boko Haram terrorists in
competent courts of law, as well as in reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes designed to meet the specificities of each victim of violence.
We have also intensified efforts to demine and remove improvised explosive
devices, facilitate military escort of humanitarian workers and aid, grant access to
detention facilities, release detainees after screening and profiling and conducting
medical outreach to remote communities. Furthermore, the military’s code of
conduct and rules of engagement have been revised to address the new trend of
violent extremism and the protection of human rights.
The federal Government set up an independent judicial commission in 2017 to
look into human rights abuses by military personnel in the country. Its mandate is,
among other things, to scrutinize compliance by the armed forces with human rights
obligations and rules of engagement, especially in local conflict and insurgency
situations; to investigate alleged violations by the Nigerian security agencies of
international humanitarian law and human rights law, the Constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria of 1999, as amended, the Geneva Convention Act, the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and other relevant laws; and to look into
factors that might be hindering the quick resolution of local conflict and proffer
solutions on how to prevent human rights violation in times of conflict in future.
In addition, Nigeria has endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, thereby
committing to implementing the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Following the endorsement, the Nigerian
Government launched the Safe Schools Initiative, aimed at providing education and
piloting safe education facilities in the conflict-affected areas of the north-east.
As part of efforts to counter violent extremism, Nigeria is taking steps to
deradicalize convicted terrorists through the deployment of emergency teams of
psychosocial counsellors and health professionals to the north-east to assist with
the profiling of victims for appropriate therapies. Furthermore, we are utilizing
116/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Islamic scholars to counter extremist narratives by training them on various aspects
of dialogue and religious counselling. We are also working assiduously with the
affected communities to design economic revitalization programmes targeted at
those most affected by terrorism and violent extremism.
Recognizing that our efforts will be more productive with international
support, we call for the full implementation of the provisions of resolution 2349
(2017) and for our international partners — technical and financial alike — to remain
unwavering in their support. Protecting civilians in conflict situations remains a
critical challenge, not only for the United Nations but also for the entire international
community. We pay tribute to our security forces, peacekeepers, humanitarian
workers, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders for their hard
work, often in difficult circumstances, to ensure the safety and security of civilians.

20-07337117/168

S/2020/465

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations
This statement is issued on behalf of the Nordic countries — Finland, Iceland,
Denmark, Sweden and Norway.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/366), and Estonia
for convening this open debate. Strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law and ensuring accountability for violations must, regrettably,
continue to be of great concern to the Council.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic calls for solidarity. The Nordic
countries support the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire. Gender
equality and women’s rights are essential to getting through the pandemic together.
The Nordic countries remain deeply troubled by the inadequate respect for
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and humanitarian
principles shown by parties to conflicts around the world. Not only do violations
during armed conflict have immediate negative impacts on individuals and their
communities, they also undermine longer-term prospects for reconciliation,
reintegration, development and sustainable peace.
We welcome the practical measures and steps to increase the protection of
civilians in armed conflict presented in the Secretary-General’s report. We also find
the resolution adopted at the thirty-third International Conference of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in December a very useful tool for all States to
ensure the implementation of international humanitarian law.
We must continue to fight impunity for violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights. First, it is necessary to support national efforts to strengthen
States’ own capacity to ensure justice in the wake of armed conflict. Secondly, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and other global and regional mechanisms are
important tools in ensuring accountability. For instance, we have seen how the ICC
has issued important convictions for crimes related to rape and sexual violence in
armed conflict. We also welcome the recent decision to include in the ICC Statute
the war crime of intentional use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare,
including in non-international armed conflicts. We call upon all States parties to
ratify or accept the amendment as soon as possible.
The obligation for States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction and the Convention on Cluster Munitions to clear contaminated areas
and destroy stockpiles are concrete and efficient contributions to the protection
of civilians after conflict. We are deeply troubled about the effects that the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas have had on the civilian
population in many conflicts. We therefore support the development of a political
declaration aimed at enhancing the protection of civilians in urban warfare.
We need to increase the United Nations capacity to prevent and resolve
conflicts. We will continue to strengthen the United Nations mediation efforts and to
support its broader political and peacebuilding efforts. United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions must have the protection of civilians firmly embedded in their
mandates and operationalized on the ground as a mission-wide responsibility, ranging
from preventive measures to institutional reform and direct physical protection. This
year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we renew our commitment to the women and peace and security agenda.

118/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbates protection risks for people in conflict
zones. Both the Secretary-General’s report and the ICRC underline how respect for
international humanitarian law is key to ensuring essential services and the legal
protection necessary to tackle the crisis. The attacks on health care must end. We call
for the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). We support the efforts of the ICRC
and the World Health Organization, in particular to identify best practices to protect
health care and document attacks. It is paramount that humanitarian organizations
get safe, timely and unhindered access to populations in need everywhere. We need
to ensure that sanctions and other restrictive measures, including national COVIDrelated restrictions, do not hinder the delivery of life-saving assistance. We urge the
Security Council to renew resolution 2504 (2020) to ensure that people in need have
access to humanitarian assistance and protection throughout the whole of Syria.
Sexual and gender-based violence in conflict is widespread and devastating.
We support the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and call for the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019), with a focus on justice,
accountability and a survivor-centred approach in the prevention and response to
conflict-related sexual violence. At the conference on sexual and gender-based
violence held in Oslo last year, an increase in both funding and action was pledged.
We urge all States and organizations to follow through on their commitments.
Armed conflicts have a disproportionate impact on persons with disabilities.
We therefore emphasize the particular needs of persons with disabilities in
humanitarian responses. Member States should take all the appropriate measures
to eliminate discrimination and marginalization of persons based on disability in
situations of armed conflict.
Children are particularly vulnerable in conflicts, and we support the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. The Secretary-General’s report points to the Safe Schools Declaration as
a concrete protection tool and calls on all States to endorse and implement it. As we
mark the fifth anniversary of the Declaration, we are encouraged that 104 States
have endorsed it, the most recent being the current President of the Security Council,
Estonia, and Antigua and Barbuda. We are very pleased to see that endorsing States,
international organizations and civil society, led by the Global Coalition to Protect
Education from Attack, demonstrate commitment to its implementation. We thank
the Secretary-General for highlighting the fate of the missing and their families and
the need for increased efforts to restore family links. We welcome the resolution at
the International Conference of the International Committee of the Red Cross on
restoring family links and data protection.
Armed conflicts also have significant negative consequences for the
environment and the livelihoods of civilian populations in conflict-affected areas.
The Nordic countries welcome the increased attention to the environmental impacts
of armed conflict, as well as the initiatives to strengthen the legal protection of the
environment in relation to armed conflicts.
Dialogue with parties to conflict is key to enhancing the protection of civilians.
The work done by influential States is important — leading by example is crucial.
We would also like to highlight the work done during conflicts by the ICRC, Geneva
Call and others to engage armed forces and non-State armed groups in changing
their practices, understanding their obligations and acting accordingly.
To conclude, we would like to give recognition to the practitioners,
humanitarian organizations and civil society members that have taken the lead in
some of the most successful practical initiatives and measures taken to increase
compliance and protection of civilians in armed conflict.
20-07337119/168

S/2020/465

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the
United Nations
We thank the Permanent Mission of Estonia for holding this very important
high-level open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict via videoteleconference. The theme underscores the pivotal importance of the issue, especially
as civilians around the globe have become a disproportionate target of violence in
the ongoing situations of armed conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Committee of Red Cross and the other briefers for their
insightful statements.
The modern edifice of international humanitarian law is built on the Geneva
Conventions of 1949. Today the four Geneva Conventions are among the very
few international treaties to have been universally ratified, reflecting not just the
universal legal consensus but also our shared values of ethical behaviour during
armed conflict and the conduct of hostilities.
Despite the comprehensive legal framework, it is quite evident that the
implementation of international humanitarian law, particularly the protection of
civilians during armed conflict, has not matched our expectations. That is also
reflected in the Secretary General’s latest report (S/2020/366), which notes that tens
of thousands of civilians were killed, maimed or injured in 2019 in various armed
conflicts around the globe. Unfortunately, the cardinal principles of distinguishing
between civilians and combatants, military necessity and proportionality continue to
be violated, with warring parties operating with impunity. It is the persistent failure
to comply with those obligations and respect the rules of international humanitarian
law during armed conflict that remain the abiding challenges for the international
community.
The empirical evidence of recent and older history shows that systematic
and consistent violations of the rights of civilians are most frequent and pervasive
in situations of foreign occupation and suppression of the right of peoples to selfdetermination. An important question that should be posed is how to protect civilian
populations when their very suppression is the object of the conflict. The rationale of
suppressing terrorism should not open the door to the repression of civilians seeking
respect for their fundamental rights, including the right to self-determination.
The challenge of addressing gross violations of international human rights law
and humanitarian law are exacerbated by the problem of inequity in the international
response. In some situations, there is a quick and even robust response. In others,
the perpetrators enjoy virtual impunity, both at the national and international levels.
Most often, there is sufficient public concern but insufficient political will to act.
The record of the Security Council itself in that context is not without blemish. In
the circumstances, it is vital to reinforce the concept of the protection of civilians in
all such situations of complex crisis.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment that the ongoing coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated difficulties in the protection
of civilians. Since the attention of Governments and the international community is
absorbed by the unprecedented health crisis, the pandemic has allowed some States
to take advantage of the situation by intensifying targeted violence against civilians,
particularly those living under foreign occupation.
In that regard, we wish to draw the Security Council’s attention to the
deteriorating human rights and humanitarian situation in Indian-occupied Jammu
and Kashmir, where India has callously exploited the COVID-19 crisis to enhance its
120/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

control of the occupied territory. Already reeling from a nine-month-long draconian
digital and physical lockdown, the occupied valley has now been placed under a
double lockdown in the guise of COVID-19 restrictions, severely impeding the
access of Kashmiris to medicine, medical help and information on ways to deal with
the pandemic.
While the world’s attention has been riveted to combating the COVID-19
virus, India has taken further steps, almost by stealth, to change the demography
of occupied Jammu and Kashmir by promulgating new domicile regulations that
would enable settlers from all over India to colonize the occupied state in violation
of Security Council resolutions and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
In order to suppress the legitimate resistance of the people of Jammu and
Kashmir advocating for self-determination, the Indian security forces have once
again resorted to the indiscriminate use of pellet guns and live ammunition, arbitrary
arrests and extrajudicial killings against civilians in the occupied valley. In April
2020 alone, 33 Kashmiris were killed, 152 injured and 945 arbitrarily arrested. In
another inhumane practice, the Indian security forces have refused to return the
bodies of killed Kashmiris to their families for proper burial.
Defying the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, India has intensified
its violations of the ceasefire along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir and
the working boundary. Since 1 January, it has committed 989 unprovoked ceasefire
violations and deliberately targeted innocent civilians on the Pakistan side of the
Line of Control, killing six civilians and injuring 82. In flagrant violation of article
28 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, India has frequently placed its artillery guns
within crowded Kashmiri villages, using them as human shields, to avoid Pakistani
retaliation for its ceasefire violations.
The worsening situation and increased attacks against civilians call for the
Security Council’s intervention by holding India accountable for its clear, grave
breaches of international humanitarian law and war crimes in Indian-occupied
Jammu and Kashmir.
The protection of civilians in the context of United Nations peacekeeping
operations has been complex because of the vastly different nature of armed
conflicts, possible contradiction of the long-standing agreed principles of United
Nations peacekeeping, the limitations of the mandates and the serious inadequacy of
the resources made available for peacekeeping missions.
Pakistan, as one of the world’s top troop-contributing countries, has proudly
and conscientiously undertaken the task of proactively protecting civilians,
in collaboration with the host Governments, as and when mandated by the
Security Council.
While the fundamental principles of peacekeeping are not an impediment to
the protection-of-civilian mandates, the primary responsibility for the protection of
all civilians nevertheless rests with the host countries. The clear distinction between
the established norm of the protection of civilians and the evolving concept of the
responsibility to protect must therefore be maintained.
The goal of protecting civilians is best served by preventing the outbreak
of armed conflicts in the first place. The Security Council, as the primary organ
of the United Nations tasked with maintaining international peace and security,
should focus on the root causes of emerging and long-standing conflicts, including
Palestine and Jammu and Kashmir, and find inclusive political solutions. Inaction
by the Council in cases of foreign aggression and occupation comes at a high human

20-07337121/168

S/2020/465

cost. However, unfortunately, we continue to see legal and moral values sacrificed at
the altar of political expediency.
In conclusion, collective action and multilateral solutions to today’s conflicts
offer the best hope for millions of civilians who are trapped between death and
despair. We must not fail in responding to this challenge. We must act boldly in all
situations where the survival of millions of civilians caught in the vice of violence
and war is threatened.

122/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to thank the Estonian presidency for convening this open debate
on the issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which is also a priority
for Peru. We particularly welcome the participation of the President of Estonia, Her
Excellency Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid. We would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his important presentation, as well as Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, Nobel Peace Laureate.
Peru is a country that is committed to multilateralism and the rule of law
as fundamental tenets of the international community. Within the rule of law, two
bodies of law are key: international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We are party to the core international instruments in both areas, and their
provisions are duly reflected, developed and implemented in our national legislation.
During our recent membership of the Security Council, we attached high
priority to the Council’s responsibility to protect civilians, in line with the obligations
established under international humanitarian law. We believe that the Council has
a moral and legal obligation to act as one to put an end to the suffering of millions
of people in the many situations on its agenda, including those who are particularly
vulnerable — children, young people, the elderly and persons with disabilities,
among others.
The international community must respect and comply with the principles
of international humanitarian law, including the principle of distinction between
civilians and combatants and between civilian objects and military objectives, and
the principle of proportionality, among others. This is a collective legal obligation,
as the International Court of Justice specified in its 1996 advisory opinion on the
Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons, in which it set out that
“these fundamental rules are to be observed by all States whether or not
they have ratified the conventions that contain them, because they constitute
intransgressible principles of international customary law” (A/51/218, annex,
para. 79).
States have the primary responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights
of all persons within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction. Similarly, it is
the obligation of all parties to armed conflict to take measures to protect civilians.
This is in accordance with international law, as affirmed on several occasions by the
Security Council.
In that regard, Peru adheres to the concept of the responsibility to protect.
This year marks 15 years since the concept was unanimously agreed and adopted by
the General Assembly in resolution 60/1, thereby establishing the responsibility of
each State to protect its population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.
In that connection, we wish to emphasize that 119 States, including Peru, have
endorsed the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct,
which commits us to acting in a timely and decisive manner to prevent and put an
end to crimes of atrocity.
We stress that the various peacekeeping operations deployed as a result of a
Council resolution are mandated to protect civilians, including from the actions of
their own Government’s regular army.
20-07337123/168

S/2020/465

We note with great concern that the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) points out that, for
the ninth consecutive year, the harm caused by the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas is devastating for civilians, who have long been
the most affected by these devices, which violate the principles of distinction and
proportionality prescribed by international humanitarian law. In that regard, and
in the light of the recommendation of the Secretary-General and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Peru fully supports the process leading to the negotiation
and adoption of an international political declaration on the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas.
We should bear in mind that we must achieve the goal of a world free of poverty
and hunger in order to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the vision of a world without poverty and hunger, with equitable and widespread
access to quality education, health care and social protection, thereby fulfilling
the rights to an adequate standard of living, education and health, as set out in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We must therefore act decisively so as to comply with the obligations of
international humanitarian law and develop effective measures to prevent violations
in order to ensure the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure during armed
conflict, since that, in turn, leads to forced displacement and the economic exclusion
of victims.
The protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure is particularly important
in situations such as the current one, where the coronavirus disease pandemic
is affecting all humankind through its rapid spread and where vulnerable and
marginalized groups are more exposed to the disease and its repercussions in other
areas. This reality is affecting millions of people, the vast majority of whom are
civilians, for whom, in addition to suffering armed conflict, there is the impact of a
disease that is making the highest demands on all our health systems. It is a disease
that now more than ever needs civilian infrastructure — particularly for health care
and the production and distribution of medicines and food — which must therefore
be protected. For that reason, Peru firmly supports the Secretary-General’s call for a
global ceasefire to help contain the coronavirus disease.
We note with great concern the persistence of sexual violence related to armed
conflict, of which, as the Secretary-General’s report mentions, women and girls
continue to represent the vast majority of victims. We reiterate our condemnation, in
the strongest terms, of all forms of sexual violence in armed conflict, as well as the
urgent need to protect victims and ensure that those responsible are held accountable.
Meanwhile, we believe that the care and rehabilitation of victims is fundamental
to any sustainable peacebuilding process, which must take into account the fact that
the psychological impacts of conflicts, particularly on civilians, have the potential to
destroy the social fabric of communities, thereby making them more likely to suffer
new conflicts.
We believe that it is important to take into account the needs and concerns
of affected communities in order to enhance their protection. Their involvement
in conflict prevention gives greater credibility to negotiation and peacebuilding
processes. In that context, we highlight the role that young people and women are
called upon to play in conflict prevention and resolution, justice and reconciliation.
Both are crucial to building the inclusive vision of the future required to achieve
sustainable peace.

124/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

It is equally critical to ensure accountability for the commission of atrocity
crimes. The universalization of international criminal jurisdiction will make it
possible to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflicts more effectively.
In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to the humanitarian agencies and
workers, as well as the Blue Helmets, involved in protecting civilians in conflict
areas under the most difficult conditions, risking their lives to save others.

20-07337125/168

S/2020/465

Annex 55
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Philippines to the
United Nations, Kira Christianne D. Azucena
We commend Estonia, under its presidency of the Security Council, for today’s
open high-level video-teleconference in the face of the extraordinary circumstances
brought about by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The protection of civilians continues to be front and centre in the dialogue
on peacekeeping operations. It is more than 20 years since an explicit mandate
on the protection of civilians was established for the peacekeeping mission in
Sierra Leone. Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for a culture of protection to
permeate the United Nations system and the mindsets of those in the field. In 2015,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support,
which we now know as the Department of Peace Operations and the Department of
Operational Support, respectively, defined the protection of civilians around three
tiers of protection: protection through dialogue and engagement, the provision of
physical protection and establishment of a protective environment.
In theory and practice, the protection of civilians has become a priority in
nine United Nations peacekeeping missions where 95 per cent of peacekeepers are
deployed. Nonetheless, the implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate
is beset by three key challenges. First, missions tend to implement the protection
of civilians in a process-oriented way or based on activities; secondly, there is a
disconnect between the protection of civilians and political strategy; and, thirdly,
how to apply a whole-of-mission strategy — political, military/police and civilian —
in order to pursue a protection of civilians mandate.
As it should be, the mandate on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping,
with an emphasis on the protection of children and combating sexual exploitation and
abuse, is the standard by which the performance of United Nations peacekeeping is
measured, giving it legitimacy and credibility. The Philippines earnestly subscribes
to this view, and therefore strongly supports Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions that underscore the principal concern of conflict prevention and the
protection of civilians in areas of conflict.
The Philippines submits the following views on the elements that make up the
mandate of protecting civilians in armed conflict.
First, comprehensive predeployment training forms the bedrock of effective
peacekeeping operations. It should draw on existing policy, guidance and training
resources to explain what the protection of civilians means in a given operational
context, or mission theatre, defining the responsibilities, opportunities and constraints
faced by peacekeepers deployed in that context. Drawing on its experience as a
member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Philippines
supports the hosting of centres of excellence per region to deliver training packages
to troop- and police-contributing countries consistent with United Nations standards.
Secondly, the Philippines encourages the deployment of more women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, including in leadership positions. The Philippines
has an all-female civilian-relations company from the Armed Forces of the Philippines
and the Philippine National Police, which assists with the rehabilitation and
recovery of internally displaced persons (IDPs) of the Marawi crisis. The company
complements peacekeeping operations by helping IDPs, conducting peace education
and providing psychosocial debriefing among the traumatized, particularly women,
children and young people.

126/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Thirdly, the Philippines supports the Vancouver Principles, especially the
prevention of child recruitment in conflict areas. We commend the Security Council
for establishing a framework to address the protection of children in armed conflict
and the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence. Last year, His Excellency President Rodrigo Roa Duterte signed into law
the Special Protection of Children in Armed Conflict Act, which declares children
as zones of peace and criminalizes grave violations against children and attacks on
schools, child development or day-care centres, playgrounds and recreation parks.
Finally, the Philippines calls on the Secretary-General and Member States to
promote unarmed strategies or unarmed civilian protection as a key complement to
the protection of civilians toolkit. We are pleased to note that the 2020 report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations recommends “leveraging unarmed
practices and capabilities of local communities to support the creation of a protective
environment” (A/74/19, para. 132).
The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process of the Philippines
acknowledges civil society’s role as a partner in bringing peace to Mindanao.
I mention, as examples, Ceasefire Watch, Spaces for Peace, Mothers for Peace,
Tiyakap Kalilintad, or Care for Peace, and the International Monitoring Team (IMT).
The IMT is a civilian-based ceasefire monitoring and response mechanism and is
a model for other countries in conflict. Grassroots leaders from ASEAN members
and some from Eastern European countries have travelled to Mindanao to learn
more about how it works on the ground. In 2009, the Philippine Government and the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front agreed to expand the mandate of the IMT to include
civilian protection.
The Philippines believes that an effective protection-of-civilians mandate must
be anchored in human rights and international humanitarian law, particularly with
regard to vulnerable groups, and should adhere to the principles of accountability,
conflict sensitivity and peacebuilding.

20-07337127/168

S/2020/465

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
As the protection of civilians worldwide remains the highest priority for
Poland, we would like to begin by thanking Estonia for providing, despite current
restrictions, this opportunity to exchange views on the situation of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to extend Poland’s appreciation to Secretary-General
António Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for their briefings
during this open high-level video-teleconference of the Security Council.
While we align ourselves with the statements delivered on behalf of the
European Union and of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflicts, Poland would like, in its national capacity, to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) and
share our most recent experience of membership in the Security Council.
The report acknowledges that more than 20,000 civilians were killed or
injured as a result of attacks in only 10 ongoing conflicts, which raises the highest
alarm for Poland. Equally disconcerting is the urbanization of conflict, the inhumane
impact of improvised explosive devices, the unlawful denial of humanitarian access,
attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel, hospitals and other facilities, the
destruction of civilian infrastructure, counter-terrorism measures that impede
humanitarian action, and sexual and gender-based violence. Attacks on journalists
and human rights defenders are yet another example of flagrant violations of the
existing normative framework.
Those few examples alone should be enough to incentivize the international
community to step up its efforts to protect civilians, given how disturbing this
comprehensive overview is. The already dire situation for civilians in conflictaffected areas is being further impacted by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. It is taking a toll among refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants,
the young and the elderly, men and women and persons with disabilities, among
so many others. For the purpose of this statement, however, we will focus on the
situation of persons in the most vulnerable situations — persons with disabilities,
women and children, refugees — as well as such crucial issues for the agenda as
emerging threats, accountability and peacekeeping.
To protect persons in the most vulnerable situations, including persons with
disabilities, Poland joined the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire so that
fighting parties stop hostilities, which only aggravate the suffering of civilians.
Simultaneously, Poland would like to recall that States have a primary obligation
to protect civilians, including during major health crises, and that COVID-19related precautionary measures introduced by States should not be used as a pretext
to disregard their obligations under international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
Yet armed conflict and current crises continue to have significant impact
on persons with disabilities. The wide range of challenges includes, among many
other things, violence and a lack of access to health-care services, education and
employment opportunities. Almost a year after the adoption of the resolution 2475
(2019), presented by Poland and the United Kingdom, the detrimental impact of
conflict on persons with disabilities persists. Organizations working on disability
inclusion in Yemen face constraints while providing crucial services, due to
bureaucratic delays and cuts in funding. Persons with disabilities facing lifethreatening situations have limited access to escape and often live in deplorable
conditions. Resolution 2475 (2019) was meant to be an important step in changing
128/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

that. But, in order to see tangible effects on the ground, it must be fully implemented,
also by including persons with disabilities in decision-making processes.
Women and children continue to face obstacles regarding health care,
livelihood, education and other critical support. Bearing in mind imminent risks
caused by armed conflicts for women and girls, in particular under the special
circumstances caused by COVID-19, Poland would like to underline the importance
of initiatives aimed at the effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda as well as prevention and response efforts on the fight against
sexual, gender-based and domestic violence.
Moreover, Poland is especially concerned about the increased attacks on
educational facilities, students and teachers. We welcome and support initiatives
aimed at putting an end to the use of schools and universities for military purposes.
The 2014 Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict are a good example in this regard. To confirm our
commitment to the effective implementation of those Guidelines, Poland signed the
Safe School Declaration. We believe that such initiatives constitute an important step
towards the protection and promotion of the rights of the child, especially in conflict
situations. It is especially important as children in Syria, Afghanistan, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and many other countries are being forced to
fight on the front lines and exposed to killing, maiming and sexual violence. Given
the gravity of this situation, the Warsaw Process Humanitarian Issues and Refugees
Working Group, which convened in February in Brasilia, focused on ways to foster
political solutions and improve coordination and structural interventions to reduce
the impact of humanitarian crises in the Middle East on children and young people.
In addition, the refugee and forced displacement crises are among most
pressing issues to be addressed by the international community. The number
of displaced people worldwide reached almost 71 million in 2019, with 2 million
displaced in Syria and Libya alone. Those figures continue to grow, and the situation
is deteriorating further due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The protection persons in the most vulnerable situations remains the priority
for Polish development cooperation. Although Poland is a relatively new donor of
development assistance, including humanitarian aid, we have already managed to
develop areas in which we can share our knowledge and experience — for example,
the protection in conflict of persons with disabilities and of other groups at risk
of exclusion.
Polish Aid is also involved in development activities aimed at providing
psychological support for children affected by the conflict in Ukraine. Together with
Polish Humanitarian Action, we work to improve the functioning of social-service
systems by developing the capacities of social and psychological services personnel
in the settlements along the contact line. Ukrainian civilians on the contact line
continue to face direct physical threats to their security as a result of daily shelling,
small arms fire and mine and unexploded ordnance contamination. For many, this
remains the primary threat to their safety, particularly in the light of increased
ceasefire violations. Parties to the conflict should continue to exercise restraint in
the use of force and abide by international humanitarian and human rights norms
and principles.
Let me turn to emerging threats and accountability. The international
community should diligently address humanitarian challenges in the protection of
civilians, such as the inhumane impact of improvised explosive devices, and curb
illicit flows of small arms and weapons. Last year, according to the report of the
Secretary-General, in Afghanistan alone more than 10,000 civilians were killed or
20-07337129/168

S/2020/465

injured as a result of the use of improvised explosive devices. The situation is no
better in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan or Somalia. Conflict also continues to have
a negative impact in other domains, including the environment, which results in
further negative consequences for human health, inflicting serious health problems
and reducing access to resources vital for survival.
In all those cases, international humanitarian law, international human rights
law and international refugee law continue to apply, and must be respected by
all parties and actors, in order to ensure effective protection for conflict-affected
countries. Poland believes that respect for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law must be enhanced. We strongly call on all States
and non-State parties to conflict to comply with their legal obligations. And, since
international legal norms are just as applicable online as they are offline, we call on
States also to adhere to the existing legal framework in cyberspace.
Impunity for any violation of international humanitarian law should be put
to an end. We need to ensure accountability regardless of the perpetrator. The
International Criminal Court (ICC) should play the leading role on the international
stage in terms of accountability and restoring a sense of justice. We believe that the
Security Council should promote accountability by more frequently referring to the
ICC cases involving the most serious international crimes.
At the same time, we would like to emphasize the crucial role played by
peacekeeping when it comes to the protection of civilians. Deployed in evolving
security contexts, peacekeeping operations are at times the basic security guarantee
for civilians. The protection of civilians remains a high priority issue for Poland,
which is why we have acceded to the Kigali Principles and why we call on Member
States, including all troop- and police-contributing countries, to endorse them.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that the protection of civilians is not
an exclusively humanitarian task, but requires a comprehensive approach with
adequate political support and actions to be taken in peacekeeping, human rights,
the rule of law, political, security, development and disarmament domains. As the
challenge is global, we should promote cooperation and partnership among States,
international and non-governmental organizations, but also other stakeholders. These
actions should be supported by the heightened diplomacy, awareness-raising and
necessary training. For these reasons, Poland has been advocating and facilitating
communication with State and non-State actors, and encourages others to do the
same.

130/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 57
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
At the outset, I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for convening
this open debate. We thank the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for their briefings.
The grave and systematic targeting of civilians in armed conflict that the
world has witnessed proves the need for adherence to international humanitarian law
enshrined in the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Protocols Additional, and
other relevant international instruments. The breaches of international humanitarian
law are an infringement on human values and a violation of the international covenants
that have been agreed upon by the world, notably the Charter of the United Nations.
At a time when the world is facing an unprecedented global health crisis due
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we need to be reminded that more
than 70 million people have been forcibly displaced by armed conflict and are now
more vulnerable to the threat of the pandemic. Immediate action by the international
community is therefore needed to protect civilians exposed to the risks of COVID-19.
In the same vein, it is critical that all parties to armed conflicts seriously respond
to the appeal launched on 25 March by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire.
The Security Council has underlined the importance of conflict prevention in
the context of a commitment to collective action in order to spare peoples around the
world the suffering and devastation caused by conflicts, and towards the promotion
of international peace and security. It is regrettable, however, that such an approach
has not been pursued in many situations, including when it comes to the unjust
and unlawful blockade against the State of Qatar, which will enter its fourth year
on 5 June. This blockade is imposed under false and untenable pretexts, with total
disregard for the disastrous consequences on the security and stability of our region,
at a time when the Arab region is going through numerous crises and conflicts causing
a tremendous amount of suffering. Instead of seeking to contribute to solving and
settling those crises and their root causes, the blockading countries have chosen a
path that violates the provisions of international law and runs counter to the desired
intentions of the international community.
The State of Qatar is proud of its strong partnership with the United Nations
system to improve its capacity to quickly respond to the millions of civilians in
need in armed conflict. Besides our multi-year unearmarked contributions to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the State of Qatar
is also an active member of the OCHA Donors Support Group and will assume
the presidency of the Group in July. We have also supported OCHA country-based
pooled funds since 2016 by providing unearmarked and rapid financing to close
the funding gaps, including by providing support to humanitarian efforts in Syria,
Yemen, Afghanistan, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Nigeria.
In line with the State of Qatar’s intention to support the International
Committee of the Red Cross, a joint declaration of intent was signed — the first
of its kind in the region — to support civilians affected by armed conflict, thereby
contributing to promoting respect for international humanitarian law.
Within the framework of shared responsibility and international cooperation
to face the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, we would also like to note the
cooperation between the State of Qatar and NATO in support of the SecretaryGeneral’s call to address the humanitarian impact of the pandemic. The State of
Qatar has supported OCHA’s global appeal to provide support for the transport of
20-07337131/168

S/2020/465

humanitarian and medical supplies by air through NATO’s Euro-Atlantic Disaster
Response Coordination Centre.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar is proud to co-chair, alongside Denmark and
Costa Rica, the cross-regional Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect. On
the fifteenth anniversary of the enshrinement of this landmark principle in the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) we continue to seek to
ensure that the international community never again fails to halt the mass atrocity
crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

132/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 58
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation commends the President for convening today’s timely open
video-teleconference of the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The Republic of Korea expresses its deep appreciation to Mrs. Kersti
Kaljulaid, President of Estonia, for her participation today. My delegation also
thanks Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, member
of The Elders, for their enlightening briefings.
Over the past 20 years since the inclusion, in 1999, of the protection of civilians
as an item on the Security Council’s agenda, we have witnessed steady progress
on this very important issue. However, the reality on the ground is still far from
ideal. We continue to witness the horrific suffering of innocent people in many parts
of the world. Scores of civilians are being killed, maimed, starved and displaced
on a daily basis. Hospitals and schools are being targeted. Economic and social
infrastructure is being ravaged. Such tragic events have lingering impacts beyond
the current generation, thereby hampering the normal trajectory of societal progress.
Furthermore, as the report of the Secretary-General this month (S/2020/366) rightly
points out, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic could exacerbate untold
suffering for the most vulnerable populations already in difficult situations.
Against this troubling backdrop, my delegation would like to emphasize
the following five points with a view to enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
First, the Republic of Korea urges all parties to conflict to support the
Secretary-General’s timely appeal for an immediate global ceasefire to collectively
tackle the COVID-19 crisis. The entire global population is now facing a common
threat, and we must work together to minimize the pandemic’s impact on all. In this
regard, my delegation very much hopes that the Security Council can unite to come
up with substantive measures to support the Secretary-General’s urgent appeal for
an immediate global ceasefire.
Secondly, in protecting civilians in armed conflict we must pay greater
attention to the disproportionate impact conflict has on vulnerable groups. Sadly,
in so many conflicts around the world, time and again we witness rampant sexual
and gender-based violence, the systemic marginalization of ethnic and religious
minorities and other deplorably hateful targeting. The Council has been steadily
expanding protection for such groups, including women, children, people with
disabilities and others, through a series of resolutions. We should continue to work
harder to strengthen the requisite protection
Thirdly, in order to achieve sustainable peace and security, more must be
done to address the root causes of conflict through a comprehensive approach to
the peace-development-human rights nexus. While Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their own citizens, greater support from the international
community to ensure the safety and human rights of those affected by conflict should
go hand in hand. Prevention and sustaining peace were at the heart of the Republic
of Korea’s efforts as Chair and Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission in
2017 and 2018, and we are consistently increasing our financial contributions to the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the
United Nations Development Programme to realize this vision.

20-07337133/168

S/2020/465

Fourthly, my delegation urges all parties to respect and fully comply with
the guiding rules and principles of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In that connection, it is important that we all strive to reduce the
continued and troubling gap between the existing normative framework that we have
accomplished on the one hand and the stark reality of undercompliance and, in some
cases, impunity on the ground on the other. The international criminal tribunals
have been playing a critical role in reducing that gap by ensuring that there is no safe
haven for perpetrators of major crimes under international law. The precedents of
accountability must be accumulated in order to secure viable and critical pathways
to truth and justice for appalling crimes against civilians in armed conflict, thereby
stamping out impunity.
Fifthly, we would like to highlight the importance of incorporating the
latest technological developments into the work of the United Nations to improve
engagement with the vulnerable populations in the post-COVID-19 era, to enhance
the effectiveness of peace operations and to protect civilians in armed conflict as we
look forward to hosting the 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting. Peacekeeping
operations should be equipped with the best available resources and equipment to
facilitate the effective implementation of their respective mandates, including the
protection of civilians. For example, new technologies in data collection, digital
early warning, and information and communications can be leveraged to help protect
civilians, expedite humanitarian assistance and secure accountability. In that regard,
we welcome and support the United Nations initiative to establish the Expert Panel
on Technology and Innovation in United Nations Peacekeeping. Bearing in mind the
double-edged characteristics of technology, we must maximize the many positive
aspects of new technology while minimizing its negative impacts.
The Republic of Korea would like to reaffirm its driving commitment to
working with the United Nations as well as all Member States with a view to better
protecting civilians in armed conflict today, tomorrow and beyond.

134/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations, Ion Jinga
I would like to commend the Estonian presidency for having convened this
meeting on the protection of civilians, a topic that lies at the heart of the Security
Council’s mandate. Allow me also to express my deep appreciation for the
informative briefings given by Secretary-General António Guterres; the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer; and by Ms. Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union. I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity.
This year’s debate on the protection of civilians is taking place in a particularly
challenging context, namely, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which
is a stress test for the United Nations system as a whole and which poses a particular
challenge as regards the protection-of-civilians mandate. The current crisis has the
potential to place at higher risk the already vulnerable populations that are suffering
in conflict-affected areas: the elderly, people with disabilities, migrants and refugees,
as well as women and children.
In 2019, we celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which formally recognized the protection of civilians as a matter of international
peace and security. Since then, the Council has adopted multiple resolutions on this
topic, enacted a legal framework for strengthening it and mandated peacekeepers to
integrate the protection of civilians into their missions. Those developments offered
glimpses of hope for an improvement in the safety and security of the millions of
people affected by war and violence.
However, in spite of this robust normative framework, implementation gaps
remain. The latest report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2020/366) describes 2019 as a year of suffering. We continue to
witness, on a regular basis, attacks on civilian objects such as schools, religious
sites, immigration facilities, markets and towns, as well as widespread and persistent
humanitarian access constraints and the perpetration of conflict-related sexual
violence. According to the Secretary-General’s report, more than 20,000 civilians
were killed or injured in 2019 as a result of attacks in 10 countries only: Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic, Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Ukraine and Yemen. Those numbers are appalling.
We continue to believe that those gaps can be addressed, first and foremost
through prevention, which remains the most important tool that we have at our
disposal for the protection of civilians. It can comprise advancing political dialogue,
pursuing reconciliation processes and strengthening security sectors, as well as
economic recovery and social development.
Secondly, when prevention has failed, ensuring respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law is the guarantor that even in the face of war
human dignity is still upheld and parties may find ways to coexist once hostilities
have ended. That should be even more stringent in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic by guaranteeing protection to health-care workers, facilities and transport.
In implementing our commitments, Romania is among the States that have
adopted a strategy on the implementation of international humanitarian law, which
contains clear regulations on the protection of civilians. The strategy is designed to
be implemented both at the domestic level and during participation in international
20-07337135/168

S/2020/465

missions. At the international level, Romania has endorsed the Safe Schools
Declaration; the Paris Commitments to protect children from unlawful recruitment
or use by armed forces or armed groups, and the Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups; the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers;
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians; and resolution 2286 (2016),
concerning the protection of the wounded and sick and of medical and humanitarian
personnel engaged in medical duties.
Thirdly, concerning the fight to end impunity, we recognize the primary
responsibility of States to promote and ensure accountability and, at the same time,
we remain convinced of the promise embodied by the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to address the impunity gap for the most serious crimes. Romania continues
to encourage the widest possible participation in the Rome Statute and reiterates its
support for the Court and its calls for enhanced cooperation with the ICC. Closing an
important gap in the Court’s jurisdiction, in December 2019 the Assembly of States
Parties to the Rome Statute adopted an amendment to the Statute to include the war
crime of intentionally using the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare in noninternational armed conflicts. Romania was a co-sponsor of the amendment.
Romania has been a solid contributor to peacekeeping operations for more
than 29 years, deploying in that period approximately 13,000 military staff,
police officers and close-protection units. Romania upholds its responsibilities in
offering well-prepared and trained officers. In doing so, we organize — prior to the
deployment of contingents under the United Nations flag — a rigorous three-month
training programme in which the protection of civilians and respect for human rights
are central themes. We have also placed particular emphasis on incorporating a
gender perspective across operations.
In line with the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, the
Ministry of National Defence has made a substantial contribution in the past year
to fulfilling Romania’s commitments, deploying in Mali, between October 2019 and
October 2020, a detachment of helicopters for medical evacuation and transport
operations in support of the Malian armed forces. Currently, the Romanian military
and police officers are deployed in four United Nations missions with a mandate to
protect civilians — the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. The culture of protection has been instilled in the
mindset of our peacekeepers within the process of pre-deployment training and also
in the field. Our uniformed officers are involved in all three tiers of the protection of
civilians: first, protection through dialogue and engagement; secondly, the provision
of physical protection; and, thirdly, the establishment of a protective environment.
Romania supports the recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report and will continue to advocate and act for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, in close collaboration with all relevant actors.

136/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 60
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the
United Nations, Valentine Rugwabiza
I congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the Security Council for
this month, and I thank you for having convened this meaningful discussion on
peacekeeping with a particular focus on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As a top troop- and police-contributing country, Rwanda considers this
topic to be of critical importance in our collective effort to lend support in the
implementation of the Security Council mandates on the protection of civilians. I
join others in assuring the Council of my delegation’s full support in this endeavour.
This debate comes at a time when Member States are facing an unprecedented
global health crisis in the form of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Host nations of peacekeeping operations have not been spared either, which may
affect the implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to the needy. Even amid COVID-19, our troops and
police have maintained the tempo of operation while implementing protectionof-civilians mandates.
Saving the lives of innocent civilians needs to be a primary responsibility
of peacekeeping missions with protection-of-civilians mandates. The peace process
is for the people, mainly civilians, in particular women and children, who are the
most vulnerable to violence during armed conflicts. The failure to protect civilians
from armed violence and atrocities, including sexual exploitation and abuse, during
conflict defeats the purpose of peace undertakings.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/366) notes that following the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999) and subsequent protection-specific resolutions, the Security
Council enhanced the protection framework for civilians in armed conflict, which
has saved the lives of many innocent people. However, the report also points to the
fact that a lot remains to be done to strengthen the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian personnel.
We must acknowledge that the Geneva Convention and related Protocols
have not been observed, hence the lack of ability to provide the desired protection
to civilians in armed conflict, as armed groups have consistently violated their
protection-of-civilians obligations. In addition, protection of civilians mandates have
not done enough to prevent killings, sexual and gender-based abuse or restrictions in
the flow of humanitarian aid. In that vein, we wish to emphasize the following points.
States Members of the United Nations and the Secretariat, in partnership with
host nations, the African Union and other regional organizations, need to collectively
strengthen compliance with international law as an essential legal instrument for the
protection of civilians. Most civilian deaths, suffering and displacement could be
avoided if parties to conflict consistently respected and diligently upheld the Geneva
Convention and its Protocols.
Peacekeeping operations are being impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic,
including through restrictions on movement and peacekeeper rotations. Six of
13 current United Nations peace operations have the protection of civilians at the
core of their mandates. Emerging challenges to international peace and security,
as well as the COVID-19 pandemic, necessitate a more robust and comprehensive
approach to the protection of civilians.
The safety and health of peacekeepers and other United Nations personnel are
equally important. There are growing concerns over the rising trend of COVID-19
20-07337137/168

S/2020/465

cases in host countries that make United Nations personnel susceptible to this
pandemic. The situation calls for appropriate assistance. Our peacekeepers will be
safer from contracting COVID-19 so long as host countries’ communities are safe.
A recent report on COVID-19 cases in protection-of-civilians sites in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan is an urgent reminder that something needs to
be done as soon as possible. We urge the Secretariat to come up with a concrete plan
to contain the situation. The intercommunity spread of COVID-19 can be avoided
if action is taken fast and as per World Health Organization guidelines. There is
an urgent need for the Secretariat to mobilize resources and capabilities to contain
and prevent the spread of COVID-19 in camps for internally displaced persons and
refugees under the protection of United Nations peacekeepers in a context where
social distancing is challenging.
In that regard, Rwanda recently partnered with the Central African Republic,
a country that hosts a United Nations peacekeeping mission, to build COVID-19
testing capabilities through the training of laboratory technicians and the provision
of testing equipment. This practical example of South-South bilateral cooperation
shows that with modest, targeted and rapid interventions we can realize significant
benefits in the protection of host communities and United Nations peacekeepers
against COVID-19.
We welcome previous mandates that explicitly respond to recurring issues of
the protection of civilians and sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict.
We appreciate that there is increased attention to context-specific pre-deployment
training, which is key to improving the operational capacity and performance
of peacekeepers.
Conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence continues to inflict physical
and psychological suffering on women and girls in armed conflict. The COVID-19
pandemic poses extreme risks for women and girls in fragile and conflict-affected
situations, mainly because the pandemic makes it more difficult for protection and
humanitarian workers to reach vulnerable populations. Women should be at the
centre of the response to the pandemic, and socioeconomic plans should be designed
with the lives and future of women and girls in mind.
We cannot emphasize enough the importance of women at all levels of
peacekeeping. Reports show that deploying women in meaningful roles increases
the effectiveness of peacekeeping and enhances missions’ ability to protect civilians.
Rwanda is happy to be among the top contributors of female police in peacekeeping
missions. There is ample evidence that employing women in peacekeeping
significantly reduces the potential for conflict and confrontation between
communities. It provides a broader sense of security to local populations, including
women and children. In that regard, we are supporting in practice the United Nations
ambition to increase the percentage of female peacekeepers deployed.
The Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians are a non-binding set
of pledges to implement best practices in peacekeeping. It is the best instrument
that addresses the most relevant aspects of peacekeeping, including assessment
and planning, force generation, training and equipping personnel, performance and
accountability. The Principles address much broader challenges that undermine the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations conducted in conflict situations. So far
50 Member States, including top troop- and police-contributing countries as well as
financial- contributing countries, have endorsed them. We call upon other Member
States to come on board.
We also appreciate the role of United Nations police in assisting with the
protection of civilians, strengthening and extending law and order, building
138/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

confidence and working towards proper and coordinated peace transitions. As
peacekeeping missions turn into peacebuilding ones, enhancing policing and law
enforcement becomes necessary.
On the political front, Member States and non-State actors should support all
efforts by the United Nations and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, in attempts to respond to and mediate conflicts. Peace agreements reached
in the Sudan and South Sudan are clear evidence that the primacy of politics in
the framework of United Nations partnership with regional organizations makes a
collective approach to conflict resolution and conflict de-escalation work.
Finally, we fully appreciate the central role and value of peacekeeping missions
with protection-of-civilians mandates; we know what is at stake when we fall short
of our expectations and responsibilities and what it will take to make peacekeeping
effective now and in future.
Let me reiterate the importance of having a common understanding of the
scope and intensity of implementing protection-of-civilians mandates even amid the
COVID-19 pandemic. Partnership and cooperation among the United Nations and
regional organizations are essential. At the same time, training and properly equipping
troops and police should, as such, conform to the realities in the mission field.

20-07337139/168

S/2020/465

Annex 61
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Senegal to the United Nations
[Original: French]
I would like to congratulate the Republic of Estonia on the holding of this
important open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a topic that
has become a priority in the maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation has followed with great interest the statements made by
Secretary-General António Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Prize Laureate and
Member of the Elders, who have given a comprehensive overview of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, especially during this difficult period of pandemic.
By adopting resolution 1265 (1999) a little more than 20 years ago, the
Security Council took the full measure of the importance of the protection of
civilians for the credibility and success of peacekeeping operations. That awareness
has been translated into concrete action through, inter alia, the inclusion of explicit
provisions on the protection of civilians in the mandates of several peace operations,
the deployment of protection of civilians advisers in certain peace missions and the
development of a guide on the implementation of protection of civilians mandates
for use by United Nations police, and now through response and resilience measures
to combat the health crisis.
While there is no doubt that this mechanism has made significant progress,
it must be noted, as the Secretary-General’s most recent report on this issue
(S/2020/366) clearly demonstrates, that civilians continue to be subjected to abuses
by non-State armed groups and regular armies alike.
Indeed, in 2019, the United Nations registered more than 20,000 civilians
killed or wounded in attacks in 10 countries, while an alarming number of people
remain missing in connection with armed conflicts, including 139,000 cases of
missing persons submitted to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
alone. As a result, during the period under review, millions of civilians were forced
to leave their homes due to conflict, adding to the 70.8 million people worldwide
already displaced by conflict or violence at the beginning of the year in question.
In the same year, the World Health Organization (WHO) registered 1,000
security breaches in health facilities, not including the millions of victims of sexual
violence. These scourges amply demonstrate the degree of vulnerability of civilians
in armed conflict.
My delegation takes this opportunity to pay solemn homage to all those killed
and to express sympathy to the millions of other victims that are still suffering.
The already troubling fate of civilians in conflict zones has no doubt
deteriorated in the global context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) because of
its disruptive effect on the conduct of security and humanitarian operations.
It is against that bleak backdrop that Secretary-General António Guterres on
23 March launched an appeal for an
“immediate global ceasefire... to help create corridors for life-saving aid, to
open precious windows for diplomacy, to bring hope to places among the most
vulnerable to COVID-19”.
Strongly committed to the ideals of peace, justice and the rule of law, Senegal
unreservedly supports that appeal and therefore joins the Secretary-General in urging
140/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

all parties to conflicts worldwide — State and non-State alike — to unconditionally
enforce them.
In addition to that ambitious appeal, we must pursue efforts to commit State
and non-State actors to respecting humanitarian and human rights standards and to
include the obligation to protect civilians in peace and ceasefire agreements. Indeed,
in the absence of a ceasefire, strict respect for international humanitarian law by all
parties to conflicts remains the best — if not the only — alternative to ensure that
vulnerable populations receive basic protections and humanitarian services.
That is why I welcome the call to action to strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law and principled humanitarian action, launched by
France and Germany in September 2019 and endorsed by 43 Member States. Given
today’s challenges, that call is more than justified and it is our collective duty to
heed it. Its success must include the effective protection of civilians and all medical
and humanitarian personnel working in the field, as well as their equipment and
facilities.
That also requires, as recommended by the Secretary-General in this year’s
report, that all parties to conflict set out to train their combatants — armed forces
and non-State armed groups alike — to respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. In that regard, it is essential that the United Nations
and its partners, such as the ICRC, get involved by providing said parties with the
technical assistance and logistical support they need.
It is clear that these measures to ensure respect for international humanitarian
law are only preventive provisions that can be violated. It is therefore essential that
they be complemented by other measures to ensure full accountability for those who
violate them.
In addition to simply affirming the non-negotiable principle of respect for
the law, strengthening law enforcement requires creating the conditions to ensure
that perpetrators are held accountable. That, in turn, requires the establishment of
complementary legal instruments at the national, regional and international levels, as
well as mechanisms and procedures for the detection and prosecution of international
humanitarian law violations.
With the committed legal cooperation of all countries, such a deterrent arsenal
would help to put an end to impunity. It would allow us to become aware of violations
of humanitarian law and to systematically conduct the investigations necessary to
find and arrest the perpetrators in order to bring them before the competent courts.
These fundamental provisions must also be applied to those who perpetrate
attacks on peacekeepers, who also often pay a heavy price in the implementation
of the protection of civilians mandate. I pay my respects to all the Blue Helmets
who, like Captain Mbaye Diagne, have given their lives to protect civilians. I am
pleased to note that in two days, the Secretariat will honour them on the occasion
of the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, which is enshrined in its
annual agenda.
In general, States today are responding to COVID-19 with border closures and
containment. Although that effectively curbs the spread of the disease, this autarkic
approach can only have short-term success as it is economically unsustainable. A
more resilient stance should therefore be adopted for the medium and long terms
so as to enable both the resumption of economic activity and control of the disease.
We cannot do so through a response that lacks global solidarity and international
coordination. We must keep in mind that as long as the coronavirus persists anywhere,
the risk of a global resurgence remains very real. In that connection, Senegal, through
20-07337141/168

S/2020/465

its President, Mr. Macky Sall, has called for the cancellation of debt in order to
allow developing countries, particularly in Africa, to devote their limited resources
to national COVID-19 response plans and to strengthen their resilience.
We also note and commend the establishment of a COVID-19 fund by financial
institutions, launched at the very beginning of the pandemic, as an embodiment of
the same spirit of solidarity.
With regard to the coordination of response activities, it is important to
reaffirm the central role of the WHO in addressing health issues at the global level.
The WHO must continue to urge States to work in synergy through dedicated
structures and mechanisms at national, community and regional levels.
For its part, Senegal, with the valuable support of the WHO, developed a
national preparedness and response plan in mid-January and is participating actively
in efforts undertaken within the framework of the Economic Community of West
African States and the West African Health Organization, as well as the African
Union’s Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention.
This resilient stance also applies to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and all stakeholders must integrate it into the current and post-COVID-19 contexts
so as to enable peace missions to continue to fully carry out their mandates in an
environment of a global health crisis and its inevitable subsequent recession.
In that vein, the Secretariat and the missions, in conjunction with troop- and
police- contributing countries and host countries, must continue — now more than
ever — to develop temporary strategies and guidelines that take this health dimension
into account in the preparation and training of contingents, in the procedures for
their deployment or repatriation and in the conduct of operations in the field.
Troop- and police-contributing countries, for their part, must take ownership
of the relevant new provisions by training and equipping their personnel accordingly.
In the field, missions must plan and conduct their operations in such a way as to
continue to implement their mandates without exposing personnel. Moreover,
the cooperation of host countries is critical to protecting mission personnel and
maintaining their operational capacity.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that in the absence of a ceasefire,
strict and permanent respect for humanitarian law remains the best way to protect
civilians. To that end, I call for the strengthening of prevention mechanisms and
the systematic application of the principle of accountability for perpetrators of
humanitarian crimes. My delegation also remains convinced that the challenges
related to COVID-19 require resilience and international solidarity.

142/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 62
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union. I would like to share a few additional reflections in my
national capacity.
The current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis not only raises global
health and socioeconomic concerns, but also impacts the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Civilians in armed conflict are already vulnerable and the pandemic
puts them at even greater risk. COVID-19 exacerbates the suffering caused by
conflicts and can potentially lead to the emergence of new conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire is therefore timely and
urgent. Slovakia strongly supports it and urges all parties to conflicts to do the
same. We also appreciate other tools for Member States to ensure that human rights
are at the centre of the response to the pandemic, including the policy briefs on
COVID-19 and human rights, the impact of COVID-19 on women and children, and
the guidance note on addressing and countering COVID-19-related hate speech. The
Secretary-General’s call to action for human rights, issued in February, is also key.
We have witnessed the impact of COVID-19 on peace operations, including
limitations of troop rotations and restrictions of movement in order to protect the
health, safety and security of United Nations personnel. That unfortunately impedes
their fundamental task of maintaining peace and security wherever deployed. Often,
civilians pay the highest price. They remain at risk of conflict-related sexual and
gender-based violence, which continues at shocking levels. The COVID-19 pandemic
poses extreme risks for women and girls in fragile and conflict-affected situations,
particularly as the pandemic makes it more difficult for protection to be provided
and for humanitarian workers to reach vulnerable populations. Women and women’s
organizations should be at the centre of the pandemic response, and socioeconomic
plans should be designed with the lives and future of women and girls in mind.
As an active troop- and police-contributing country to United Nations missions,
Slovakia endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations in September 2018 and remains committed to working
further on their implementation, including through the effective performance and
responsible and disciplined conduct of our peacekeepers in United Nations missions
and operations. We subscribe to the initiatives such as the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention
of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and the Secretary-General’s voluntary
compact to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse. The President of the Slovak
Republic, Ms. Zuzana Čaputová, is one of the 87 members of the Secretary-General’s
circle of leadership on preventing sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
International law is essential for the protection of civilians, and strengthening
compliance with its norms, including international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, can significantly contribute to avoiding civilian deaths, suffering
and displacement. All State and non-State parties to conflicts must abide by their
obligations under international law. States should establish appropriate legislative
and institutional arrangements to comprehensively address violations of international
humanitarian law and hold accountable those who violate it.
We strongly support the International Criminal Court (ICC) and its role in the
fight against impunity and in bringing perpetrators to justice. Achieving the Court’s
20-07337143/168

S/2020/465

universal jurisdiction would be a major step towards ensuring accountability for
violations at the national, regional and international levels. We once again urge all
States Members of the United Nations that have not yet done so to sign and ratify
the Rome Statute.
It is also important to highlight the role of the security sector. When reformed
and well-governed, it can significantly contribute to political dialogue, arms control,
the protection of civilians and respect for human rights, which are the foundations
of all States. The security sector plays a key role in preventing the outbreak,
escalation, continuation or recurrence of armed conflict, which is the most effective
way to protect civilians. Slovakia is a long-standing supporter of the security sector
governance and reform agenda and is fully committed to continuing to co-chair the
Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, together with South Africa.
The protection of civilians is incumbent not only upon warring parties,
but also upon Governments, which must find the much-needed political will and
support to ensure better todays and tomorrows for those unwillingly affected by
armed conflict.

144/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 63
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the United Nations
We wish to thank the Estonian presidency of the Council for organizing
today’s open debate and the Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2020/366)
and briefing. We also thank the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the Nobel Peace Laureate, President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, for their comprehensive briefings.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union and wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity.
Stepping into the new decade we have been faced with the largest global
crisis seen in modern times. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
challenged our humanity and solidarity and tested our commitment to leaving no
one behind. It has highlighted the weakest links in our societies and social protection
systems and exposed the most vulnerable. However, it has also provided us with the
opportunity to build back better, stronger and more resilient. It is our responsibility
now to seize the opportunity presented.
It is deeply saddening and concerning that, despite some positive steps and
strengthened commitments, the evidence on the ground continues to provide a grim
picture of human suffering and an alarming number of casualties in armed conflicts.
That is why Slovenia strongly supports the call of the Secretary-General for an
immediate global ceasefire in order to ensure delivery of humanitarian assistance to
and protection of the most vulnerable to COVID-19 in situations of armed conflict.
It is the primary responsibility of Governments to protect civilians. We need
to do more and better when it comes to protecting civilians and the most affected
in armed conflict, including by ensuring access to health services and clean water.
The protection of civilians is not just an assault on our conscience; it is also our legal
obligation. Moreover, it is particularly alarming that not only are civilians continuing
to be disproportionally affected by armed conflict, they are also becoming the means
itself by which war is waged.
Assisting victims and alleviating the pain of those affected by armed
conflict, especially children, has always been among Slovenia’s highest priorities.
Well over 500 children coming from active or post-conflict areas have been
rehabilitated in Slovenia. Psychological and physical assistance and rehabilitation,
social rehabilitation training for pre-school and school counsellors, and a mine-risk
education programme implemented by the non-profit humanitarian organization ITF
Enhancing Human Security are just a few of the examples of my country’s efforts to
provide for the overall well-being and development of children affected by conflicts.
Women, children, refugees, persons with disabilities and older persons continue to
be the most affected by armed conflict.
Attacks against schools constitute a major violation of the rights of the child
and international law. Strengthening the protection of education from attack and
restricting the use of schools and universities for military purposes are important
aspects of protecting children in armed conflict. They are essential for ensuring
children’s right to education and for providing them with a safe and enabling
environment during this period. Without such an environment, children will have
no chance as youth to participate in and contribute to post-conflict reconstruction.
They are the ones that will have to live with the consequences of the war in future.
Slovenia has therefore joined others in endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration and
continues to promote its implementation.

20-07337145/168

S/2020/465

As the greatest global health crisis in the world since the end of the Second
World War, COVID-19 has exacerbated the vulnerabilities of the least protected in
societies across the globe, and the threat to lives, security and well-being of those in
situations of armed conflict is even greater. Even though women and girls account
for the vast majority of the recorded victims of sexual and gender-based violence in
armed conflicts, men and boys are not immune to it. It is abhorrent that sexual and
gender-based violence continues to be part of armed conflict, including as a tactic
of warfare. This is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. We need to do more to
prevent its occurrence, prosecute and punish perpetrators and provide help, support
and justice to all victims.
Women and youth are important actors in ensuring the protection of civilians.
They are often the first responders on the ground, the caregivers, health workers and
peacebuilders. They are also the missing piece of the puzzle in finding lasting and
sustainable solutions and in lessening the burden of civilians in conflict situations. It
is therefore essential that they have an equal role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery.
Preventive action should be our key investment. Only through preventive
efforts and the use of preventive-diplomacy tools can the protection of people
be achieved and their suffering truly diminished. Respect and compliance with
international humanitarian law and international human rights law must be ensured,
and those who commit crimes against civilians must be prosecuted. There must be
no space for immunity. As has been seen in many cases, there can be no sustainable
peace without justice. Marking the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions, Slovenia published the official Slovene translation of the
Conventions together with the three Additional Protocols.
Ensuring accountability and fighting impunity for the most serious crimes,
such as genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, are essential components
of prevention and protection. They are key to preventing armed conflicts, protecting
civilians during those conflicts and building sustainable peace. Such international
mechanisms as the International Criminal Court, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar have important roles to play in these efforts.
Before concluding, let us briefly touch upon the issue of access to humanitarian
assistance. Slovenia calls once again on every party in every conflict to fully
cooperate with the United Nations, its agencies and its partners in conflict areas to
deliver, without any impediments or preconditions, the life-saving assistance to the
millions of people who need it.
The protection of civilians is the most important duty of international
peace operations and missions. Effective and comprehensive peacebuilding and
peacekeeping operations with robust mandates that are flexible enough to provide
protection of and assistance to civilian populations are critical. This also requires
the Security Council’s strong and continuous engagement in protecting civilians on
the ground, which includes systematic and timely responses to the grave violations
of international humanitarian law and international human rights law.

146/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 64
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations, Agustín Santos Maraver
[Original: Spanish]
Spain aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres, the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the Nobel
Peace Prize Laureate, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for their briefings.
Today’s open debate on the protection of civilians comes at an unusual time.
We are dealing with a global pandemic that has had effects on multiple levels,
and this crisis overlaps with other political challenges, including the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The spread of the virus has affected millions of people,
increasing the risk that tensions, conflicts and divisions in the world will worsen.
This is a sensitive time that requires restraint, commitment and determination.
The current crisis calls to mind three important lessons. The first is that we
are deeply interconnected. The second is that prevention works. The third is that
international cooperation is key to overcoming common challenges. These lessons
are applicable in all areas, including in achieving the objectives we pursue in the
protection of civilians. I will try to explain this idea with a concrete example in
the second part of my statement, but first let me refer to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2020/366).
The picture that the report paints is frankly bleak; it sets out figures that show
the darker side of our species. The problem is very serious, and if we are to address
it with well-targeted concrete actions, as the Secretary-General puts it, we must be
aware of it. We therefore believe that our best strategy is as follows.
We must remain vigilant so that international humanitarian law and Security
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians have a real impact on the protection
and lives of people. Since urban conflicts have accentuated the impact of these
attacks on the civilian population, it is essential that all parties to the conflict comply
with their international obligations and that they are otherwise held accountable
for violations. If that is not possible, the Security Council must play a key role in
ensuring accountability for serious violations of international law.
Because children are twice victims of armed conflict and deserve special
protection, we consider maintaining the presence of protection officers, especially for
children and gender, to be essential and, if possible, their presence in peacekeeping
missions should be strengthened.
As we have an obligation to prevent attacks on schools, medical facilities and
humanitarian workers who carry out exclusively medical work, these attacks must
be systematically and forcefully condemned, keeping in mind the duty to protect
victims and the obligation to bring those responsible to justice.
Sanctions regimes and counter-terrorism measures must allow for principled
humanitarian action and compliance with international humanitarian law.
The foregoing actions are just a few of the actions consistent with the
Secretary-General’s report, but we know that there are many others. In choosing
among them, we must take advantage of those that light the path for us to follow. In
this context, I would call to mind the lessons that the current crisis has brought in
one area related to the protection of civilians: education in conflict situations.
20-07337147/168

S/2020/465

The first lesson resides in our mutual interconnectedness. We can say today
that the Safe Schools Declaration and the related actions taken are saving lives by
preserving the right to education for all, even in the most difficult circumstances.
This is because those who push for the actions are now linked with those whose lives
have been saved. Even a match extinguished in the sea warms the ocean.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has also shown us once again that
prevention works, especially in terms of the protection of civilians. The report on
attacks on education by the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack,
which is being presented tomorrow at the margins of today’s open debate, shows this.
Politically driven and resourced awareness and control actions create the conditions
for preventing these attacks. The reduction of attacks on schools in recent years has
opened future opportunities for entire generations.
The third lesson points to the power of change that international cooperation
provides. The third International Conference on Safe Schools, which Spain organized
in Palma de Mallorca just a year ago, showed how important it is to stimulate
international cooperation and boost political support for meeting this challenge.
A growing majority of Member States and regional organizations have endorsed
the Declaration which, for us, marks a clear step towards its universalization. We
encourage those who have not yet done so to endorse the Declaration, and we
welcome the draft resolution on the International Day to Protect Education from
Attack, which Qatar has introduced and Spain has co-sponsored.
Allow me to share three final considerations that seem to us to be central to
the protection-of-civilians agenda.
First, we are convinced that a gender perspective is vital to seeking concrete
solutions and successfully addressing this challenge. We must therefore continue to
promote this agenda in an ongoing and cross-cutting manner, prioritizing actions
towards protection and respect for human rights and its close link with international
peace and security in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).
Secondly, we need to strengthen our actions in the area of humanitarian
diplomacy. The Spanish Government is determined to maintain the protection of
civilians as one of the priorities of its foreign action and humanitarian action, working
with national and international actors while strengthening actions in humanitarian
diplomacy. We will continue to take concrete steps to strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law and to work on the commitments made at the thirtythird International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, in Geneva.
Thirdly, we need to persevere in the fight against impunity. We must guarantee
the mechanisms that bring perpetrators of atrocious crimes to justice, including the
International Criminal Court (ICC). That is the best way to honour the victims, do
justice and deter future attacks. We encourage those States that have not done so to
sign the Rome Statute and accept the jurisdiction of the ICC. I would also like to
highlight in this regard the work that can be done by the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, in collaboration with the United Nations, to prevent
violations of international humanitarian law.
Allow me to conclude by thanking the Secretary-General and, through him,
all the people who comprise the United Nations family for their work and dedication
and for their commendable efforts in favour of the protection of civilians in the most
difficult of circumstances. Far from their loved ones, they are risking their own lives
to make this world a better, more humane place.
We must also acknowledge the excellent work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and that
148/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, including
its recent conclusions on Yemen, the Central African Republic and Afghanistan.
The United Nations can count on Spain to make progress in achieving
the objectives set forth in the Secretary-General’s report by implementing
its recommendations.

20-07337149/168

S/2020/465

Annex 65
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the
United Nations
My delegation warmly congratulates Estonia on its assumption of the
presidency for the month of May and believes that it will be a successful tenure. We
appreciate Estonia for organizing this discussion on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, as it is civilians who face the brunt of the ruthless actions of terrorist
groups that have little respect for human life and human rights in the pursuit of their
destructive agendas.
As this organ is aware, the people of Sri Lanka experienced nearly three decades
of brutal separatist terrorism. During that time, the ruthless terrorist organization
in Sri Lanka, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), used civilians over and
over again as pawns to pursue their bloody and destructive agenda of creating a
separate State in the country. Civilians were used as human shields, were forcibly
recruited as cadres and suicide bombers and as workers to construct defences for the
LTTE and to perform a variety of other tasks during that treacherous period, and
children were recruited as child soldiers. Food and medicine provided to civilians
living in the terrorist-held areas were forcibly taken by the terrorists for their own
survival. Civilians were forced to pay taxes from their hard-earned income into the
coffers of that terrorist organization; even Sri Lankan Tamils living outside of Sri
Lanka were subject to extortion. If they did not comply, their lives and those of their
family members were at risk.
No one was safe from their clutches, and religious clergy, innocent men,
women and children and political leaders from all the ethnic communities in Sri
Lanka — Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim and Burghers — were brutally massacred. That
was the reality in Sri Lanka before 2009. Normal civilian life did not exist in the
north or east of Sri Lanka, and people were not free to exercise their democratic
franchise or have access to their basic rights. Civilian life was affected to a great
extent in the other provinces of the country as well.
With the noble aim of liberating those civilians from the grasps of the most
ruthless terrorist outfit in the world — as designated by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation — the Sri Lankan armed forces launched the country’s largest hostage
rescue operation. The massive humanitarian operations that were conducted during
the final stages of eradicating terrorism from the country focused on ensuring
the safety and security of all civilians and on their rescue from the bondage of
terrorism. Sri Lanka, with the assistance of bilateral partners, multilateral agencies
and international and local non-governmental organizations, began delivering on
its responsibility of freeing its civilian population from that terrorist organization.
During the humanitarian operation, the Sri Lankan armed forces adopted a number of
measures to ensure the safety of civilians and to distinguish between military targets
and civilian occupied areas. It is pertinent to reiterate that action by the Sri Lankan
security forces during the conflict was against the LTTE, a group designated as a
terrorist organization by 32 countries and whose designation has been continuously
and consistently retained, and not aimed at any community in the country.
With the end of the conflict, Sri Lanka faced new challenges that included
the rehabilitation of former combatants, among which were child soldiers. Reuniting
those children with their families after rehabilitation and addressing their educational
needs were the utmost priority in the immediate post-conflict phase. The programme
launched under the Commissioner of Probation and Child Care Services resulted in
the rehabilitation and reintegration of all 594 former child soldiers, providing Sri
Lanka with a success story in that respect to share with the world. All former child
150/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

soldiers who did not possess a national identity card were issued with one and were
supported in their education through the facilitation of school enrolment and the
provision of school supplies and financial assistance, including scholarships.
It is noteworthy that special attention was paid to those whose education
had been disrupted owing to conscription by the terrorist organization and who
wished to complete their formal education. As a result, the rehabilitation programme
enabled a number of former child soldiers to participate in the national examinations.
Eleven former child soldiers took up the university entrance examination, with four
being successful, either during or after their rehabilitation programme. Three were
able to receive a university education. Many others have taken part in vocational
training programmes. Thus, many of the former child soldiers are now employed as
account clerks, computer instructors, mechanics, carpenters, farmers, fishermen and
employees in the garment manufacturing industry.
In the above context, when every effort was being made by the Sri Lankan
Government to protect its civilians from the terrorist organization and the
consequences of its brutal activities, it is indeed tragic that certain segments of the
international community, including former United Nations officials, sympathized
with the ideologies and actions of that organization. It is evident that even today,
some of them continue to regret the downfall of the ruthless terrorist organization
and fail to acknowledge the torment and suffering of the helpless civilians both in
Sri Lanka and abroad.
That was reflected recently when a former high-level United Nations official
was seen speaking at an event organized by the rump of the LTTE — an internationally
banned outfit. Such circumstances should compel the United Nations to thoroughly
screen the credentials of those working for it. It is now clear that the former highlevel official was propagating the views of a ruthless terrorist organization, while
carrying out her functions at the United Nations main human rights body. She has
let down all the civilians who were held hostage by the terrorist group and has only
sought to use this organ to pursue personal agendas, thereby calling into question
the work carried out during her term of office. Such actions should not be allowed to
continue within this organ, where the personal agendas of a few allow for sovereign
States and their sovereign decisions to be vilified and discredited.
Sri Lanka remains committed to finding innovative and pragmatic solutions
driven by the domestic context to protect the country’s national interest, guided by
the provisions of the Constitution and the will of the citizens expressed through
democratic means.

20-07337151/168

S/2020/465

Annex 66
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
This statement is issued on behalf of the members of the Group of Friends
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict: Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Brazil, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, France, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kuwait,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay.
The Group of Friends thanks the Estonian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate. We also thank today’s briefers for their statements.
This debate takes place in unprecedented times. A year ago, we were celebrating
the twentieth anniversary of the protection of civilians resolution 1265 (1999) at
the Security Council and committing to strengthening the protection agenda for the
years to come. Today, protection challenges are as acute as ever, and the protection of
civilians becomes even more crucial in the time of coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
The pandemic poses a threat to human security and exacerbates the vulnerability of
people living in conflict situations. It magnifies existing protection challenges. The
primary responsibility to protect civilians lies with the parties to armed conflict
and includes facilitating safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. In that
regard, measures to combat COVID-19 must not negatively impact the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and protection. We must also be watchful for measures that
increase the vulnerability of certain groups or that unnecessarily limit the ability of
United Nations mission personnel to fulfil their mandates.
The Group of Friends welcomes and continues to support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an immediate global ceasefire in armed conflict in the light of the
global COVID-19 pandemic. We call on the Security Council to endorse that call
without delay.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/366) paints a bleak picture of
the state of the protection of civilians. The number of civilian deaths and injuries
remains appallingly high, as does the number of displaced persons, who are often
forced to flee multiple times. In that regard, we take note of the Secretary-General’s
establishment of the High-level Panel on Internal Displacement. Indiscriminate
attacks occur with horrifying frequency and have devastating consequences for
the civilian population, in particular children. In that regard, on the occasion of
the twentieth anniversary of two of the optional protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, we reiterate the importance of protecting children during armed
conflicts, including by guaranteeing unimpeded access for humanitarian actors.
Conflict-related sexual violence persists, often as part of a broader strategy. All
too often, the wounded and sick, as well as the medical and humanitarian personnel
and their facilities, are intentionally attacked. Given the importance of independent
reporting, the decrease in journalists reporting from conflict zones owing to the
high level of insecurity is of grave concern.
The Secretary-General has emphasized that civilian suffering could be
significantly reduced if international humanitarian law and international human
rights law are respected. We recognize the Security Council’s consistent calls for
all parties to observe their obligations under international humanitarian law and
urge immediate compliance. Member States, as well as parties to armed conflicts,
are obliged to respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law in all
circumstances. National implementation of international humanitarian law is the
cornerstone of that important source of law. Accordingly, we commend the resolution
adopted by the thirty-third International Conference of the International Committee
152/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

of the Red Cross (ICRC), on national implementation of international humanitarian
law, and support the Secretary-General’s enhanced focus on national implementation
of the protection of civilians agenda.
Moreover, we echo the Secretary-General’s recommendations to ensure
accountability for violations of international humanitarian law. Our international
legal framework on protection of civilians is sound; the challenge lies in its
implementation. The Group of Friends welcomes the adoption by the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court of an
amendment to the Rome Statute to include the war crime of intentionally using
starvation of civilians as a method of warfare in non-international armed conflicts.
We call on States parties to the Statute to ratify or accept the amendment. Fighting
impunity is of paramount importance to ensure that violations do not go unpunished
and to deliver justice to victims.
The Group of Friends wishes to highlight the active role played by the Council
since the last open debate (see S/PV.8534) by welcoming the adoption of resolution
2474 (2019), on missing persons, and 2475 (2019), on persons with disabilities. We
urge Member States to implement all the appropriate measures necessary to clarify
the fate of the missing and to fully cooperate with all relevant actors, especially
the ICRC. As resolution 2475 (2019) is crucial to the better protection of persons
with disabilities, we also call on the Secretary-General and the Member States to
strengthen their implementation efforts.
Despite progress, the Group of Friends would like to comment on the risks
and opportunities in relation to the protection of civilians identified in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
First, we remain gravely concerned at the humanitarian harm being caused
during active hostilities in populated areas. The nature of armed conflict in urban
areas poses acute challenges for the protection of civilians, and more can be done to
strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law during armed conflict
and to advance the protection agenda. Strict application of the rules and principles
of international humanitarian law, including on precaution, humanity, distinction,
necessity and proportionality, is required by all parties to conflict. In that regard,
the Group of Friends takes note of the consultation process towards developing a
political declaration to enhance the protection of civilians in urban warfare, including
protection from the possible humanitarian impacts of the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas.
Secondly, new technologies are changing human interaction profoundly,
including in times of armed conflict. Digital technologies have helped protect
civilians in situations of armed conflicts and have offered a range of opportunities
for more efficient clarification in cases of missing persons, as well as in the recording
of casualties. At the same time, those technologies have also been misused, thus
exacerbating violence. The Group of Friends stresses the necessity of responding to
the malicious use of digital technology and calls on all Member States to use those
new assets in compliance with their existing obligations under international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations, international humanitarian law and
human rights law. In that regard, the Group of Friends would also like to emphasize
that malicious cyber operations on medical facilities, as currently experienced
throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, cannot be considered acceptable in either
times of peace or of armed conflict.
Thirdly, we note the increased attention given in the Secretary-General’s
report to civilian suffering linked to the environmental impact of armed conflict
and climate change. Armed conflicts can contribute to significant environmental
20-07337153/168

S/2020/465

degradation that, in turn, affects the population. Environmental damage in conflicts
should, therefore, be more visible in humanitarian reporting. We therefore call for a
better understanding of the matter.
Fourthly, the Group of Friends notes that 29 May is International Day of
United Nations Peacekeepers. We welcome and celebrate the focus on women and
peacekeeping. The Group recalls that women peacekeepers deployed in civilian,
military and police roles, including in leadership positions, have a significant impact
on the pursuit of peace and protection of civilians, and we encourage the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We pay tribute to the service and sacrifice of all peacekeepers, particularly while
implementing mandates to protect civilians.
The Group of Friends reiterates the importance that we attach to the full and
effective implementation of protection of civilians mandates by relevant United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and we encourage safe, meaningful and effective
engagement with local and affected communities in that regard. The Group takes
note of the 2019 Department of Peace Operations policy on the protection of
civilians and of the recent launch of the handbook entitled “Protection of Civilians
in United Nations Peacekeeping”. We stress that the Security Council must ensure
that United Nations peacekeeping operations have clear and realistic mandates and
that the General Assembly must allocate resources to them that are consistent with
those mandates.
We also encourage peacekeeping operations to take into account gender
mainstreaming as a cross-cutting issue in the implementation of their mandates and
to deploy gender advisers. We further underline the importance of peacekeeping
personnel receiving extensive and adequate pre-deployment and supplementary
in-mission training in order to implement protection of civilians mandates
appropriately. The Security Council should support the inclusion of protection
of civilians mandates in relevant peacekeeping operations as an integral part of
comprehensive political strategies, in coordination with the Secretariat, troopand police-contributing countries and host States. Finally, we call for results and
accountability in the implementation of protection of civilians mandates, in line with
resolution 2436 (2018).
As the United Nations marks its seventy-fifth anniversary, the protection of
civilians — or the lack thereof — continues to have a huge impact on the priorities of
the Organization in its three pillars. More consistency and political will are needed
in the overall efforts to enhance protection of civilians and implementation of the
law and political commitments, both by Member States and parties to conflict and at
the level of the Security Council. The Group of Friends is committed to doing its part
and to contributing to global-level advocacy to enhance the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts.

154/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 67
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
At the outset, Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General’s recently released
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366), which is
submitted against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Furthermore, Thailand views the Secretary-General’s appeal for an immediate
global ceasefire to reinforce diplomatic action as significant. The initiative could
help create conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and bring hope to
those most vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The pandemic continues to have a severe impact on the protection of civilians,
both in conflict contexts and from domestic and gender-based violence. By looking
ahead to the post-COVID-19 era, we can see that the vulnerability of the least
protected in society, especially those in conflict-affected areas, will be exacerbated
in terms of health and security. In conflict-affected States, where health-care systems
are already weakened, the pandemic will worsen the situation for the vulnerable,
particularly the elderly, who are more prone to the virus. Women and children, as
well as persons with disabilities, will face greater difficulties in gaining access to
health care and other essential services.
Therefore, while we are assessing measures to move forward in the new
normal, it is imperative for all stakeholders to devote their efforts to protecting these
vulnerable groups by upholding their rights within the obligation to protect civilians
under international law. We must create strong partnerships among all stakeholders,
share best practices and provide socioeconomic opportunities to the vulnerable
through sustainable development approaches.
Thailand wishes to highlight the elements that we believe deserve special
emphasis in today’s discussion.
First, priority must be given to raising awareness of, and respect for, obligations
related to the protection of civilians under international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations. The State has the primary responsibility to protect its citizens, and
all parties to armed conflict must honour and strictly comply with their obligations
under international law, international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. While all personnel in peacekeeping missions need to clearly understand
their protection mandates, priorities and responsibilities, efforts must be made to
promote awareness and understanding among all parties and stakeholders, including
civilians themselves. In that regard, the protection of women and children and the
elimination of sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping missions have been one
of Thailand’s priorities.
Secondly, we need stronger partnerships to strengthen the protection of
civilians. This requires an integrated approach among military, police and civilian
components at all levels. In turn, they must coordinate with national authorities,
local communities and relevant humanitarian organizations in the field. Multistakeholder engagement is also key, while all players must be given space for
meaningful participation. All stakeholders must exchange information on frank and
clear situation assessments, supported by adequate capabilities and resources and
further underpinned by practical and achievable expectations.
Thirdly, it is essential to reduce threats to sustainable peace and development
and to build and sustain a safe and enabling environment for civilians. We support the
Secretary-General’s view that the most effective way to protect civilians is through
a long-term process and a comprehensive approach applied before, during and after
20-07337155/168

S/2020/465

conflict. Sustaining peace requires us to view peacebuilding more holistically, as
part of the peace continuum from conflict prevention and conflict resolution to laying
the foundations for sustainable peace and development. By achieving sustainable
peace and development, civilians, including those in vulnerable groups, would gain
a better opportunity to thrive and attain better living conditions.
Thailand encourages peacekeepers to take on the role of early peacebuilders.
By promoting development initiatives in the field, peacekeepers could play a crucial
role in promoting sustainable peace in post-conflict societies, thereby complementing
Sustainable Development Goal 16 on peace, justice and strong institutions. Our
peacekeepers have been incorporating development aspects into their assigned task
in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
It is also important to build a sustainable environment for civilians where
their safety is ensured and their human rights promoted and protected. We must
also recall the tremendous role of women as agents of change in conflict situations,
especially when it comes to building trust and ensuring protective environments for
vulnerable groups. The reach and impact that women have in the local community
have long been underestimated.
Last but not least, an area that Thailand has always viewed with a discerning
eye is the issue of capacity-building and training. All peacekeepers have to be
properly prepared, trained and equipped to meet the challenges they will face in
the field. It must be underlined time and again that intensive predeployment and
periodic in-mission training, including training of trainers, both on operational
tasks and other protection-related elements, are vital. As an active troop- and policecontributing country, Thai peacekeepers are trained as a standard procedure to assist
the local population in their efforts to prevent the relapse of armed conflict and
ensure sustainable development.
As we aspire to becoming a regional centre of excellence on the issue of
children and armed conflict and for the United Nations Staff Officers Course, we
have been working closely with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the Department of Peace
Operations. We are also willing to share our experiences and lessons learned in these
areas with all interested partners. Thailand also wishes to exchange views and best
practices through the Peacebuilding Commission, which provides a constructive
forum to discuss integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery.
Furthermore, Thailand continues to support the delivery of consistent and coherent
training, in collaboration with relevant agencies, to our peacekeeping personnel for
all mandated tasks. Those elements include international law, gender-based issues,
the protection of civilians, child protection, conflict-related sexual violence and
cultural sensitivity. There is more we can and want to do.
Thailand wishes to conclude with the parting thought that, in its view, durable
peace is not tenable if civilians lack security and are not safe. We need to continue
to evolve our discussions on enhancing and reinvigorating the protection of civilians
agenda in order to meet the new challenges of that protection.

156/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 68
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
I would like to thank Estonia for organizing this timely meeting, as well as the
Secretary-General for his insightful presentation. I also thank the briefers.
It is 70 years since the adoption of the Geneva Conventions, and 2019 marked
the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the protection of civilians on the agenda
of the Security Council. We are equipped with comprehensive rules, reliable tools
and a strong framework. However, while the number of human-made disasters is
increasing, we cannot provide adequate and timely responses to such crises. We
witness the erosion of humanity, day by day.
As the Secretary-General reports, conflicts forced millions of civilians to flee
their homes last year, adding to the 70.8 million people already displaced by conflict
and violence by the beginning of 2019 (see S/2020/366). We now live in a world
where one person is forcibly displaced every two seconds as a result of conflict
or persecution.
In 2019, more than 41 million people were displaced in their own country. In
Libya, the number of internally displaced persons has almost doubled, to around
350,000, due to the military campaign to overthrow the legitimate Government in
Tripoli. In Syria, only last year 1.8 million people were displaced, 1 million of whom
escaped from the indiscriminate attacks of the Al-Assad regime in the north-west
towards the Turkish border. In Myanmar, fighting displaced more civilians in the
first three months of this year than in all of 2019.
The number of refugees continues to grow, reaching 25.9 million, more than
half of whom are under the age of 18. Millions of these people have been denied
access to basic rights such as education, health care, employment and freedom of
movement. In humanitarian crises women and children continue to suffer the most
from sexual violence and other violations of international humanitarian law.
The spread of the coronavirus disease has further worsened the already dire
conditions in many parts of the world by exacerbating the vulnerability of the least
protected people. The current situation of health-care systems in certain parts of the
world gives a grim outlook for the upcoming months.
In Libya, conflict and the pandemic present a significant threat to life.
According to a recent survey of the World Health Organization, only 20 per cent
of primary health centres are delivering services in the country. The recent attacks
on health infrastructure by General Haftar’s forces and their backers diminish the
capacity of Libyans to mitigate the effects of the pandemic. In Syria, a health facility
was attacked every four days last year. The majority of the attacks occurred in the
north-west. In Yemen, where civilians face the largest humanitarian crisis of our
time, 8.9 million people remain in acute need of medical care; yet only 50 per cent of
medical facilities function due, in part, to conflict-related damage.
It is therefore more urgent than ever that the global ceasefire appeal by the
Secretary-General is implemented in order to help create conditions for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. This is also important for the adaptation of peacekeeping
operations to evolving situations so as to ensure the protection of civilians.
The suffering that engulfs people in the different complex emergencies is also
experienced by humanitarian personnel, who are doing their best to provide relief
for those in need. We would like to commend the tireless efforts of the Office for the

20-07337157/168

S/2020/465

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as well as other United Nations humanitarian
agencies, in their life-saving work.
As Member States, we need to increase our financial resources in order to help
the United Nations in its humanitarian activities. Turkey is committed to continuing
its leading role in various humanitarian efforts across a wide geographical area,
from Syria, Yemen and Palestine to Somalia and Myanmar. The medical assistance
we have provided to 93 countries since the start of the pandemic is in addition to our
regular humanitarian aid deliveries throughout the world.
Meanwhile, Turkey now hosts 20 per cent of all refugees around the globe. We
will continue to assist Syrians in need in our homeland, and also across our borders
with Syria. We will continue to mobilize our resources for these people, including
by facilitating United Nations cross-border operations — a lifeline mechanism for
Syrian civilians.
Delivering humanitarian aid is our common responsibility, and we see it as
a crucial element to achieve international peace and stability. In fact, humanitarian
access is a requirement of international humanitarian law, and it cannot be a matter
for negotiation.
I therefore reiterate the request that I made to the Council last week. In the face
of the pandemic, we need the United Nations cross-border mechanism for Syria more
than ever, and the Council has the responsibility to authorize it without delay and
for at least 12 months. This will be a litmus test for the Council and its members as
to how able they are to address the request of millions of people who are completely
dependent on these deliveries.
Targeting civilians can have no justification. All parties to conflict have an
international legal obligation to respect international humanitarian law. We must act
and establish genuine accountability mechanisms in order to end impunity.
In that regard, we welcome the work of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the establishment of the Independent
Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar. We also commend the efforts of the Gambia
in bringing a case before the International Court of Justice in 2019, which led to a
landmark provisional ruling for Rohingya Muslims.
At the same time, much work still needs to be done to hold perpetrators
accountable. This also requires avoiding any engagement with terrorist organizations
that would risk conferring legitimacy. Since the start of the pandemic, the Kurdish
Workers Party/People’s Protection Units have perpetrated more than 30 terrorist
attacks in northern Syria, including mortar and rocket shelling, targeting civilians.
It is noteworthy that all these attacks have occurred at a time when the so-called
Syrian Democratic Forces pretend to comply with the Secretary-General’s appeal
for a global ceasefire.
Whether we are donors or recipients, or both, we share a responsibility towards
humankind. The protection of civilians is a long-term investment for our collective
security, peace and prosperity. This week marks the fourth anniversary of the firstever World Humanitarian Summit, which has been key in advancing the agenda for
humankind. It is time to revisit existing commitments to strengthen the centrality
of protection.

158/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 69
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations, Lana Nusseibeh
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open videoteleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank the
briefers for their statements. These are difficult times for civilians in conflictaffected areas around the world. In addition to the existing threats they face —
violence, food insecurity and displacement, among others — the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic presents a dramatic new threat to civilians and has created
new challenges to their safety.
In order to mitigate the impact of armed conflict on civilians around the
world, the United Arab Emirates takes this opportunity to renew its support for
and commitment to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire. As the
Secretary-General has underscored, that is the most effective way to protect civilians.
The appeal is also an opportunity to remind us of our shared humanity, and we hope
that other Member States will fully support this initiative.
Protecting vulnerable populations, including by providing medical care in
conflict situations around the world, is at the centre of the humanitarian programmes
of the United Arab Emirates and its efforts to support the global fight against
COVID-19. We have provided aid to more than 50 countries, including many
affected by conflict, such as Somalia, Afghanistan and Yemen. We have partnered
with the World Health Organization to support the worldwide delivery of critical
medical equipment through Dubai’s International Humanitarian City, and we have
launched an international air bridge operation, in partnership with the World Food
Programme, which will enable the movement of life-saving cargo and personnel to
where they are needed most.
Allow me to turn now to the content of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/366). As has been the case in recent years, violations of international
humanitarian law by non-State actors continue unabated. In Yemen, for instance,
the Houthis use human shields, deliberately attack critical civilian infrastructure
and intentionally obstruct the delivery of humanitarian assistance. These constitute
grave violations of international humanitarian law. Left unanswered, such violations
of international humanitarian law contribute to the erosion of the essential set of
rules that seek to mitigate the effects of armed conflict.
The United Arab Emirates expresses its continued commitment to supporting
all efforts towards ending sexual and gender-based violence in conflict. We note with
concern the analysis in the Secretary-General’s report of the patterns of conflictrelated sexual violence during displacement and in the midst of hostilities. The
United Arab Emirates is a donor to the United Nations trust fund to address sexual
violence in conflict and will continue to implement the outcomes of the Ending
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence in Humanitarian Crises conference it co-hosted
last year in Oslo, including through funding initiatives targeting sexual violence.
Training and capacity-development are a core element of promoting
accountability and State compliance with international obligations. In addition to
strictly national accountability mechanisms, it is important to highlight the role that
international instruments can play when working closely with the sovereign State
concerned and at its request, such as the Security Council-established United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We take this opportunity today to reiterate our
support for the Team’s mandate and, in particular, its critical work documenting
sexual and gender-based crimes against religious minorities.
20-07337159/168

S/2020/465

The United Arab Emirates remains committed to bridging the gap between
rhetoric and implementation. In order to do so effectively, we would like to propose
four recommendations.
First, we urge the Security Council to tailor and apply the range of tools at
its disposal to address effectively the growing threat to civilians posed by non-State
actors, and to ensure their compliance. Too often, Security Council resolutions,
including those imposing measures under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations, are ignored by non-State actors.
Secondly, the United Arab Emirates would like to express its support for
Security Council efforts to negotiate a resolution, welcoming the Secretary-General’s
appeal for a global ceasefire. We urge Council members to overcome their divisions.
At this moment of crisis, unity of action is essential.
Thirdly, the United Arab Emirates would like to commend the SecretaryGeneral for the report’s comprehensive approach, which highlights the growing
challenge of protecting civilians from such threats as the malicious use of digital
technologies and as climate change. These are no longer the threats of tomorrow,
but the threats of today. We encourage the Council to incorporate more regularly in
its analysis the impact of these challenges on the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Finally, it is important that measures taken by Member States to address
the COVID-19 pandemic be consistent with international humanitarian law and its
fundamental principles.
The United Arab Emirates will spare no effort in promoting the protection of
civilians and upholding international law. We call on the Security Council and fellow
Member States to join us in this endeavour.

160/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 70
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya
I would like to express my appreciation to the Estonian presidency for holding
this important debate to discuss the current state of and challenges to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, including implications connected to the global
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for presenting
his report on the issue (S/2020/366) as well as his timely initiatives aimed at protecting
the most vulnerable from the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. The call for
an immediate global ceasefire, which Ukraine, whose population suffers from an
ongoing foreign armed aggression, immediately supported, is directly linked to our
today’s discussion. This initiative is an important part of our common fight against
the pandemic, which has already adversely impacted the international community’s
efforts in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Secretary-General’s report this year provides a detailed description of
both current risks as well as opportunities in the area of protection of civilians,
including the role of digital technologies and social media in conflict situations. We
know from our own experience how damaging the impact can be of cyberattacks on
critical infrastructure, of blockades against alternative sources of information, of the
deliberate spreading of disinformation and of incitement to violence.
We note the emphasis in the report on the environmental impact of conflicts
on civilian suffering. In this regard, we value the reference to the International Law
Commission draft principles on the protection of the environment in relation to
armed conflicts, in the deliberations on which Ukraine took an active part.
Unfortunately, since the first Security Council open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.4312), the situation has not improved, and
hundreds of recommendations presented over the past 20 years remain unimplemented
despite their enduring relevance.
As a result, this year’s report records unprecedented figures for losses among
civilians. In 2019 alone, more than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured in 10
conflicts, including that caused by the Russian aggression against my country.
Accountability for each loss of life should be established. This is one of the main
preconditions for achieving sustainable peace.
We agree with the Secretary-General that these figures clearly signal to the
international community the need to change the approach to accountability and to
strengthen collective responsibility to prevent, stop and ensure non-repetition of
attacks against civilians in conflict situations.
At the same time, we regret that the report did not pay due attention to the
protection of civilians in occupied territories or to the insufficient implementation
of relevant thematic United Nations resolutions. In the second part of my statement,
I will address some of these gaps.
Unfortunately, Ukraine has become an example of the consequences of the
violation by a permanent member of the Security Council of norms and principles of
international law, including international humanitarian law. For more than six years,
Russian aggression has continued to claim the lives of civilians in my country. That
international armed conflict and the temporarily occupied territories of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions as well as the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city

20-07337161/168

S/2020/465

of Sevastopol turned the protection of civilians for my country from an academic
subject to a very practical daily issue.
In the resolutions of the General Assembly on this question, special emphasis
is placed on the necessity to ensure respect for international humanitarian law.
Referring to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Additional Protocol I
thereto, of 1977, the General Assembly qualified Russia as an occupying Power and
urged it to uphold all of its obligations under applicable international law.
Meanwhile, according to the twenty-ninth report by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on the human rights
situation in Ukraine, during the entire conflict period OHCHR recorded a total of
3,052 conflict-related civilian deaths: 1,812 men, 1,056 women, 98 boys, 49 girls and
37 adults whose sex is unknown. Taking into account the 298 persons who perished
on board Malaysia Airlines flight MH-17 on 17 July 2014, the total death toll of the
conflict on civilians has reached at least 3,350. The number of injured civilians so
far is estimated to exceed 7,000.
The armed conflict continues to affect the civilian population’s enjoyment of
economic and social rights, especially by the more-than 5 million residents of the
conflict-affected areas and internally displaced persons. Children, older persons and
persons in vulnerable situations are at increased risk of being left behind in achieving
sustainable development because of the conflict, the OHCHR report stated. The dire
humanitarian situation in the conflict-affected areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions continues to deteriorate. Furthermore, the harassment by the Russian
Federation of commercial vessels passing through the illegally constructed Kerch
Strait bridge between Russia and temporarily occupied Crimea and its restriction of
international shipping there further aggravate the economic and social situation and
the suffering of the civilian population in the broader region already affected by the
attempted annexation of Crimea and the ongoing armed conflict in Donbas.
More than 3.4 million people are expected to require humanitarian assistance
in 2020. Over half a million people live in the areas directly affected by the armed
conflict, while another 2 million people are exposed to landmines and explosive
remnants of war. This area, according to the United Nations, has already become one
of the most mine-contaminated stretches of land in the world. We are particularly
concerned at the latest reports of shelling of civilian infrastructure by the Russian
occupation forces, as well as the use of civilian facilities to hide military equipment.
It reminds us of a well-known practice of the Russian armed forces of hiding behind
the civilians, widely used in the orchestrated occupation of the Crimean peninsula
back in 2014.
In the context of the spread of the acute respiratory coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), the state of the protection of the life and health of civilians in the
temporarily occupied territories has become even more alarming and requires
special attention from the international community.
As party to the conflict, Russia persists in disregarding its duty as occupying
Power under international humanitarian law to ensure and maintain the public health
of the population, and is using the recent aggravation of the humanitarian situation
as a smokescreen for further attacks on the rights and freedoms of the residents of
Crimea.
The spread of the pandemic did not stop the Russian authorities from
announcing another conscription into the occupying army of the Russian Federation,
which is a war crime. In March 2020, a decree by the Russian President to deprive
Ukrainian citizens of the right to own land in Crimea became yet another uncouth

162/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

demonstration of Moscow’s disregard for its responsibilities under international
humanitarian law.
Moreover, for more than three years, the occupying Power has shown the
utmost disrespect for the International Court of Justice by ignoring its order, which
demands the restoration of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People and the protection
of the identity of the Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar communities under temporary
occupation. In addition, Russia continues to block proper and unhindered access for
international monitoring missions, primarily by OHCHR, to the occupied territories.
Given this situation and in order to enable the provision of the necessary
medical assistance to the civilian population in the occupied areas, we demand that
the Russian Federation ensure unhindered access there to Ukrainian competent
authorities and medical staff, and provide, on a constant basis, exhaustive information
on the spread of COVID-19 in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine and
on measures it is undertaking to assist the population of these territories to cope
with the pandemic. Russia should make all efforts to prevent the spreading of the
COVID-19 from the occupied territory to other areas and neighbouring States.
Last year, we celebrated the seventieth anniversary the Geneva Conventions,
the cornerstone documents that brought greater protection of each individual from the
scourges of war. Ukraine pays special attention to issues related to compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights in armed conflicts, as well as to
preventing and responding to forced displacement and protecting women and children
affected by armed conflict, including combat conflict-related sexual violence.
As a party to core international instruments related to the protection of
civilians, we constantly promote and support all efforts aimed at strengthening
their implementation and advocate respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law be ensured at both bilateral and multilateral forums.
In contrast, the other party to the conflict, the Russian Federation, ignores
General Assembly resolutions and OHCHR recommendations, taking a cherrypicking approach to its obligations under international humanitarian law. Last year,
Russia recalled the statement made at the ratification of Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and relating to the Protection of Victims of
International Armed Conflicts. That statement recognized the competence of the
International Fact-Finding Commission, which is a key mechanism for achieving
the objectives undertaken by States parties to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
to Protocol I to respect and ensure respect for the provisions of those treaties. That
move was quite revealing in that it exposed Russia’s disregard for international
humanitarian law and its aversion to the Commission’s mandate to investigate
alleged facts of grave breaches, as defined in the Conventions and the Protocol,
or other serious violations thereof. Russia takes a similar approach to evading
responsibility vis-à-vis the implementation of European Court of Human Rights
decisions. In the light of all the above, the dangerous trend of Russia’s abdication
of its legal obligations has to be duly reflected and assessed in the next SecretaryGeneral’s report.
Time and again, we urge Russia to uphold all its obligations under applicable
international law as an occupying Power, in particular to ensure proper and
unimpeded access for international human rights monitoring missions and human
rights non-governmental organizations to Crimea, pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 71/205, 72/190, 73/263 and 74/168; immediately release without
preconditions Ukrainian citizens who have been unlawfully detained; end the
practice of transfers of its own population to the occupied territories and forcible
transfers and deportations of protected persons, including detainees, to areas outside
20-07337163/168

S/2020/465

the occupied territory; and refrain from compelling residents of Crimea to swear
allegiance to and serve in the armed forces of the Russian Federation, to name but
a few.
To conclude, I would like to quote Judge and former President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals Theodor Meron, who, in
his essay “Closing the Accountability Gap: Concrete Steps Toward Ending Impunity
for Atrocity Crimes”, wrote that,
“ensuring accountability for atrocity crimes should not be seen as a mere
political option: one choice among many facing national authorities and
diplomats. It should be understood as a political, legal, and fundamentally
human and humanitarian imperative”.

164/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

Annex 71
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Uruguay thanks Estonia for having convened this timely high-level open
video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which allows
us to assess the current situation facing peoples in contexts of armed conflict and to
express various points of view on the concrete steps that should be taken to implement
this agenda. My delegation also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the valuable information contained in his report on the issue (S/2020/366).
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the Group of Friends
on the Protection of Civilians and will offer some clarifications at the national level.
In 2019, tens of thousands of human beings were killed or injured; women and
girls were subjected to terrible acts of sexual or gender-based violence; thousands
of indiscriminate attacks against essential civilian infrastructure, in particular
hospitals and schools, were recorded; famine caused by conflict and often used
as a tactic of war devastated entire regions; alarming numbers continued to be
added to the millions of refugees and internally displaced persons; an increasing
number of people were victims of enforced disappearances; and the obstruction
of humanitarian access and attacks perpetrated against human rights activists and
defenders continued to increase.
In his report, the Secretary-General defines 2019, in terms of the situation of
civilians, as a year of suffering. Today entire societies face an invisible, ruthless and
deadly new enemy: the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which is exacerbating the
extreme vulnerability of the millions of people already suffering the ravages of war.
Uruguay strongly supports the Secretary-General’s call to implement an
immediate and global ceasefire aimed at facilitating efforts to tackle the pandemic
and alleviate the situation of civilians.
Our delegation wishes to emphasize the following aspects, which are
considered priorities in efforts to advance the implementation of the agenda on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
First, it is necessary to respond to the challenge of ensuring strict compliance
by States and all parties to conflict with international humanitarian law, especially
the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional, and with international
human rights law. The alarming failure to abide by those norms is translating into
tremendous suffering for the civilian population.
Initiatives should also be encouraged that promote respect for these core
standards. In that respect, Uruguay has reaffirmed its commitment to international
humanitarian law and its implementation, joining the call for action to bolster
respect for international humanitarian law and principles-based humanitarian action,
launched by France and Germany.
Secondly, greater protection must be ensured for hospitals, medical
infrastructure, the wounded and sick, and personnel carrying out medical tasks.
Four years after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), parties to conflict continue
to carry out indiscriminate attacks and bombings against hospitals and medical
personnel, blocking humanitarian access and illegally seizing medical material and
instruments necessary to serve the civilian population in conflict areas.

20-07337165/168

S/2020/465

The World Health Organization registered 1,006 security-related incidents
affecting health care in 2019, resulting in 825 victims in 11 countries and territories.
The recent attack on a maternity hospital in Kabul, which claimed the lives of
mothers, newborn babies and medical staff, shocked the international community by
its fiendish cruelty. All this indicates that there is still a long way to go before we see
the effective implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). Efforts must be redoubled to
safeguard the provision of health care in conflict at a time when hospitals and health
workers are also engaged in the fight against COVID-19.
Thirdly, particular attention should be paid to the most vulnerable segments
of the population, including children, women, the elderly, the sick, people with
disabilities and marginalized and displaced persons living in conflict areas where
essential services such as water, sanitation, health care and education have broken
down or completely collapsed. Those groups are the ones that suffer from the
most devastating effects of war and are now also exposed to the worst impacts of
COVID-19. Of particular concern is the increase in the number of serious violations
against children and incidents of sexual and gender-based violence, perpetrated
mainly against women and girls. Home confinement, social distancing, difficulties
in accessing justice and social services, and the economic impact of the crisis could
increase the incidence of such acts of violence.
In order to improve the situation of civilians on the ground, Uruguay endorsed
the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or
Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention
of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Given the increase in the number
of attacks against education, the military occupation of schools and educational
centres, and the violence and threats against teaching personnel, Uruguay adhered
to the Safe Schools Declaration.
Fourthly, parties should refrain from using explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. My delegation notes with particular concern the Secretary-General’s
statement in his report that in 2019 the use of explosive weapons in urban areas
continued to have serious consequences for innocent civilians, who, for the ninth
consecutive year, represented more than 90 per cent of those killed or injured by
such weapons. These are not just numbers or cold statistics; they are human beings
who will not have the opportunity of a future, and they are men, women and children
whose lives, owing to the physical consequences they have suffered, can never be
the same. In addition, they suffer from the repercussions of the attacks, such as
collateral damage to critical infrastructure, which affects the delivery of services
vital to the civilian population.
Uruguay reiterates its commitment to the Santiago Declaration, which it
signed together with other Latin American and Caribbean countries and which
recognizes the need to refrain from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
It also supports the adoption of an international political declaration on the subject,
with a humanitarian focus that ensures the maximum possible protection for the
civilian population.
My country further reaffirms its support for the Secretary-General’s
disarmament agenda, which is focused on disarmament and arms control, including
the priority given to “disarmament that saves lives”. That element, which relates to
the reduction of conventional weapons such as missiles, shells, landmines, cluster
munitions, improvised explosives and small arms and light weapons, relates directly
to the protection of civilian populations.
Effective control of the arms trade is essential to ensuring the full application
of international humanitarian law and mitigating the consequences of the use of
166/168

20-07337

S/2020/465

conventional weapons. For that reason, today we call once again on States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Arms Trade Treaty.
Fifthly, in order to enhance the protection of civilians, effective use must be
made of one of the most successful instruments for promoting international peace and
security available to the United Nations: peacekeeping operations. The Council must
prioritize the protection of civilians in the mandates of such operations, particularly
during this pandemic.
Peacekeeping operations that have such protection-of-civilians mandates must
continue to adapt to difficult environments by taking a comprehensive, integrated
approach aimed at ensuring adequate protection for civilians. The Organization and
its Member States have made, and continue to make, considerable efforts to improve
the capacity of those operations. The recent report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, adopted by consensus (A/74/19); the revised policy of the
Department of Peace Operations for the protection of civilians; and the new guidance
in the form of The Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping Handbook
are clear examples of the collective commitment to achieving greater effectiveness
in terms of the protection of civilians.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we would stress that peacekeeping operations
must have the human, financial and equipment resources necessary to fully
discharge the protection-of-civilians tasks entrusted to them. Furthermore, greater
participation of women at all levels of peacekeeping missions is essential to improving
the protection of civilians on the ground. Uruguay has taken substantive steps in
that direction, guided by its own experience, which has demonstrated that female
staff can establish closer relationships of trust with local communities, particularly
women, children and other vulnerable groups.
Based on its strong commitment to peacekeeping operations, Uruguay has
taken on, with pride and dedication, the task of protecting civilians in various parts
of the world and assures the Organization and its Member States of its intention to
continue and even to increase the contribution made by the Blue Helmets, especially
in these extremely complex operational circumstances in which civilians may be
even more unprotected.
Sixthly, and lastly, accountability for those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law is essential. My delegation
agrees that this is one of the major outstanding challenges. Accountability is
important not only because of its deterrent effect but also because it allows an end
to the culture of impunity, which denies the right of victims to justice. In order to
identify and punish the perpetrators, it is imperative first to collect and analyse
comprehensive and reliable information and to conduct independent and impartial
investigations.
States are primarily responsible for promoting the prosecution of perpetrators
in national and international criminal justice systems. Uruguay calls on all States to
ratify the Rome Statute and to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court,
and it believes that the Council should refer cases to the Court where appropriate.
To conclude, as Secretary-General António Guterres has pointed out, the
situation generated by COVID-19 is the worst crisis the world has faced since the
Second World War. This very serious pandemic at the dawn of a new decade increases
the challenges that civilians must face. However, fresh opportunities emerge from
even the worst crises. Seventy-five years ago the Second World War gave rise to the
creation of the Organization and a new international system of multilateral norms
designed to guarantee the peace, security and prosperity of all nations. It also forged
a universal conscience that led to the creation of the current human rights system.
20-07337167/168

S/2020/465

Today we are facing a new global crisis of unprecedented magnitude in which
all of our lives are at risk, one that only solidarity and a collective response will
allow us to overcome. It is also within our power to muster the political will to make
the changes necessary to advancing the implementation of this agenda.

168/168

20-07337
