S/PV.8711

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8711th meeting

Thursday, 30 January 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Baati
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations
Letter dated 9 January 2020 from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/30)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-02462 (E)
*2002462*

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

First, I would like to recognize the long-standing
contributions of ASEAN member States to United
Nations peacekeeping. Approximately 5,000 military
and police personnel from seven ASEAN member
States are currently serving in missions around the
world. The increasing number of women peacekeepers
deployed by ASEAN member States is a testament to
ASEAN’s recognition of the critical roles that women
peacekeepers can and must play in implementing
mission mandates. All 10 ASEAN member States
have endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
and we continue to work closely to implement shared
commitments and ensure that peacekeeping remains fit
for purpose.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Letter dated 9 January 2020 from the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2020/30)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Dato Lim Jock Hoi, Secretary-General of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, to participate
in today’s meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/30, which contains the text of
a letter dated 9 January 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank Viet Nam, as
President of the Security Council and Chair of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) for
2020, for organizing this briefing.
At this time of increasingly complex challenges for
global peace and security, cooperative and inclusive
multilateral efforts, including strong partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
are essential. Since its formalization in 2011, the
comprehensive partnership between ASEAN and the
United Nations has become an important component
of the United Nations broad engagement with regional
organizations. Today we are focusing on how ASEAN
and the United Nations can strengthen their cooperation
in addressing threats to peace and security.
2/25

30/01/2020

We are also grateful that six ASEAN countries
have made pledges to the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System. I would like to thank Viet Nam,
Indonesia, Thailand and Cambodia for hosting, on a
rotating basis, the Triangular Partnership Project to
improve the engineering capacity of peacekeepers in
the region and beyond.
Since its formation, in 1967, ASEAN has been
engaged in many regional initiatives on quiet diplomacy,
conflict prevention and peacebuilding in conflict
situations. In 2011, the Security Council supported
ASEAN’s diplomatic efforts to promote peaceful
solutions to end border skirmishes between Thailand
and Cambodia. More recently, ASEAN’s engagement
concerning the situation in Myanmar’s Rakhine state
has had enormous importance for the United Nations. It
is essential that international efforts find a solution to
the plight of displaced persons and refugees still living
in desperate conditions.
Our strengthened cooperation with ASEAN is
crucial to helping advance concrete steps in line with
humanitarian principles and the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State. Those
recommendations require urgent follow-up in their
entirety, including actively creating the necessary
conditions for the voluntary return in safety and dignity
of Rohingya refugees and internally displaced persons
to their places of origin or choice.
The United Nations also welcomes the constructive
dialogue between ASEAN and China towards the
maintenance of regional peace and maritime security.
We look forward to the conclusion of a code of conduct
in the South China Sea to help prevent maritime
disputes. ASEAN plays a key role in the regional peace
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

and security architecture, including bringing together
major regional Powers within ASEAN-led forums. We
encourage ASEAN to use that great convening power
to effectively and creatively address peace and security
threats in the broader Asia-Pacific region.
The situation on the Korean peninsula remains of
deep concern. Through public and quiet diplomacy,
including by hosting historic meetings in Singapore
and Hanoi, the ASEAN region has contributed to
efforts to promote sustainable peace and security and
the complete and verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. With Indonesia and Viet Nam as
active members of the Security Council in 2020, we
hope that stronger links can be built between ASEAN
and the United Nations to advance efforts on the
Korean peninsula.
Looking ahead, there are multiple potential areas of
practical cooperation between ASEAN and the United
Nations in the areas of peace and security.
First, ASEAN and the United Nations can strengthen
cooperation on peacekeeping, including on training,
increasing women’s participation in peace processes
and peacekeeping, and sharing lessons learned with
other regional organizations.
Secondly, the United Nations stands ready to
strengthen concrete technical cooperation, in particular
with the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation
and the recently launched ASEAN Women for Peace
Registry. We look forward to strengthening our
cooperation on implementing the women and peace and
security agenda and to advancing the youth and peace
and security agenda in the region. We also look forward
to our continued cooperation on technical assistance
and capacity-building in the area of human rights and
the strengthened role of the ASEAN Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights.
Thirdly, the United Nations will further strengthen
its technical support for ASEAN in counter-terrorism
and preventing violent extremism, particularly through
the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the
Rise of Radicalization and Violent Extremism.
Fourthly, ASEAN and the United Nations
both recognize the urgency of improving border
management to address cross-border security threats
and transnational organized crime.
Fifthly, ASEAN and the United Nations could
jointly explore developing early-warning arrangements

S/PV. 8711

and threat analysis, including for well-understood
threats caused by inequality and exclusion, as well as
new and emerging threats in areas such as hate-speech
and cybersecurity. That was discussed at the ASEANUnited Nations Regional Dialogue on Political-Security
Cooperation, jointly organized by the United Nations
and Viet Nam in Hanoi last month.
Sixthly, with regard to the climate crisis, the
climate emergency has significant wide-ranging global
implications, including on peace and security. Given
that four ASEAN member States rank among the
10 countries most affected by climate change in the
world, we look forward to strengthening our ties with
ASEAN nations as they take urgent action to strengthen
adaptation and build resilience to disasters. We also look
forward to supporting countries in building their energy
security while decarbonizing their economies as part
of mitigation action in preparation for the twenty-sixth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Finally, after several years of close cooperation
with the United Nations on natural disaster
management, ASEAN recently initiated the provision
of support to conflict- and human-induced disasters.
In that connection, the United Nations will provide
technical knowledge and build on existing relationships
to forge strategic synergies, collaborations and paths
forward for future work, including in the context of the
resilience actions of the complementarities road map
that was noted at the tenth ASEAN-United Nations
Summit in November.
I am deeply convinced of the value of ASEANUnited Nations cooperation for peace, security and
sustainable development. With the presence of two
engaged and dynamic ASEAN countries on the Council
in 2020, I look forward to our two organizations
working more closely together for the future we want
and need.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Dato Lim Jock Hoi.
Dato Lim Jock Hoi: At the outset, allow me to
express my appreciation for this opportunity to brief
the Security Council upon the invitation of Viet Nam,
which holds the Council presidency this month and is
Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) for 2020. ASEAN is also fortunate that

20-024623/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

Indonesia, another ASEAN member State, has been
a Council member since last year, thereby marking a
rare opportunity for ASEAN, with two of its members
sitting in the Chamber.
But beyond our appreciation for the chance to
speak at the Council is our acknowledgement of the
recognition accorded to the important role that regional
organizations, including ASEAN, play in promoting
regional peace, stability and prosperity. Indeed, it
is often said that, because of their knowledge and
familiarity of their respective region’s nuances, regional
organizations are in a good position to complement the
work of the United Nations.
It is my honour to brief the Council today on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
peace and security and the role of ASEAN, which is
based on the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations.
In that connection, I am pleased to touch upon two
matters — first, ASEAN’s contributions to peace,
security and prosperity, and, two, the importance of
ASEAN’s relations with its external partners, including
the United Nations.
As is widely recognized, the global community
today is fraught with many issues and challenges,
from the strategic level to that of our individual
peoples, and from the physical to the digital domain.
The bottom line, however, is how to maintain peace
and stability — because it is peace and stability that
underpin economic prosperity. In other words, without
peace and stability, there can be no economic prosperity;
and without economic prosperity, peace and stability
would be difficult to achieve, much less to maintain.
It is based on that premise that ASEAN, since it was
founded in 1967, has worked diligently for peace and
stability in our part of the world amid diverse political,
economic and social systems. By promoting economic
cooperation and serving as a confidence-building
platform, ASEAN has successfully enabled the SouthEast Asian region to evolve — having been previously
described as the Balkans of the region — into a
Community that provides opportunities to all. Indeed,
the ASEAN Charter underscores the importance of
the principle of comprehensive security to responding
effectively to all forms of threats, transnational crimes
and transboundary challenges.
4/25

30/01/2020

Having gone through difficult times in history
when South-East Asia was deeply affected by wars and
conflicts, the member States of ASEAN hold high the
value of peace, which is clearly specified in the ASEAN
Charter as the very first purpose of ASEAN,
“[t]o maintain and enhance peace, security and
stability and further strengthen peace-oriented
values in the region”.
By signing on to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
in Southeast Asia, ASEAN member States committed
to maintaining peaceful relationships with one
another, guided by the principles of mutual respect,
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, among others. To date,
many of ASEAN’s external partners have likewise
acceded to the Treaty, including several members of the
Security Council, and other States have also manifested
their interest in doing so.
But beyond the political commitment to pursue
and promote a cooperative relationship is the evolution
of ASEAN regionalism anchored in dialogue and
consultation in order to build consensus. The primacy
of that approach has enabled ASEAN member States
to address issues confronting the region, to arrive at
approaches acceptable to all and to manage differences,
thereby enabling them to move forward, notwithstanding
the diversity in their political, economic and social
systems. In our part of the world, we call it the ASEAN
Way — a unique manner of dealing with issues that
is difficult to comprehend for some outside observers,
but is fully understood by ASEAN members. In other
words, the ASEAN Way has become a way of life
in ASEAN.
Another unique contribution of ASEAN to nurturing
a conducive environment for peace and stability is the
ability to initiate and be the driving force on regional
mechanisms and frameworks for promoting dialogue,
cooperation and confidence-building, bringing together
not only its member States but also external partners,
including key players in the region and major global
Powers. The forums with ASEAN at the core — such
as ASEAN+3, the ASEAN Regional Forum, ASEAN
Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) and the
East Asia Summit, long became important frameworks
where the culture of peace and the habit of dialogue and
cooperation are nurtured by ASEAN, thereby helping
prevent disputes and conflicts from arising.
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

ASEAN’s achievements in shaping and promoting
norms that govern inter-State relations and behaviour
in the region have also been duly recognized. ASEAN
has been able to incorporate external Powers into its
established rules and norms, including through their
accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
in Southeast Asia, respect for the ASEAN Way and
ASEAN centrality and abiding by ASEAN’s rules in
participation at ASEAN-led mechanisms. ASEAN has
also actively engaged in efforts to formulate norms and
codes of conduct that complement international law
by ensuring that States behave in amicable ways by
upholding the rule of law when managing differences
and maintaining peace, security and stability.
Maintaining peace and stability in the region has
enabled ASEAN to reap the peace dividend, so to
speak. With a combined gross domestic product (GDP)
of $3 trillion — according to latest available figures,
from 2018 — ASEAN is the fifth-largest economy in
the world, accounting for 3.5 per cent of the global
economy in nominal terms, and as high as 6.5 per cent
in terms of purchasing power parity.
For almost two decades, ASEAN has been growing
at an average annual rate of 5.3 per cent — consistently
above the global average. ASEAN is now a global
trade powerhouse as the fourth-largest trader in the
world, accounting for more than 7 per cent of global
trade. ASEAN’s total trade reached $2.8 trillion in
2018 — more than 90 per cent of its GDP. ASEAN’s
economic growth has directly translated into lifting
people from poverty. Measured in terms of purchasing
power parity, statistics show that the ASEAN population
living below the $1.25 purchasing power parity per day
declined from 47 per cent in 1990 to 14 per cent in 2015.
That trend is expected to continue.
With a population of almost 650 million people,
a rapidly growing middle class and more than half
of its population under the age of 30, ASEAN is a
very attractive market. With such dynamism and
immense potential, ASEAN has become the world’s
top investment destination. In 2018, ASEAN received
$154.7 billion in foreign direct investment flows — the
highest in its history, accounting for almost 12 per cent of
global flows. ASEAN’s efforts in economic integration
have also paid off, with intra-ASEAN trade accounting
for the highest shares in trade and investment, at
23 per cent and 15.9 per cent, respectively. A major
part of ASEAN integration is skilled labour mobility,
which is being facilitated through various mutual

S/PV. 8711

recognition arrangements among skilled professionals
within ASEAN.
It could therefore be rightfully claimed that the
vision of the founding fathers of ASEAN to promote
economic prosperity has today become a reality, but its
positive performance thus far should not be taken for
granted. It is important for ASEAN to keep its market
open and forge ahead with its reform and economic
integration agenda.
It is likewise essential to narrow or close the
development gap, as that would contribute to ensuring
the sustainability of the peace dividend that ASEAN
currently enjoys. It is for that reason that ASEAN puts
a premium on sustainable and equitable development
to make sure every part of the Community, including
the Mekong and the East ASEAN areas, are on track
with ASEAN’s common development path. That is also
why that subregional initiatives such as the Brunei
Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines
East
ASEAN Growth Area, among others, serve as building
blocks for ASEAN-wide integration and development.
It is also in that sense that developing our human
capital, including women, children and youth, has been
high on ASEAN’s agenda. At their most recent summit
last year, ASEAN leaders noted the completion of the
review regarding the implementation of the Initiative
for ASEAN Integration Work Plan III. They tasked
the Initiative’s task force with following up on the
review’s recommendations to improve the effectiveness
of the Work Plan and sustain work on narrowing any
development divide that might exist. Complementing
that initiative are the poverty alleviation programmes
being undertaken across ASEAN. The ASEAN
Ministers Meeting on Rural Development and Poverty
Eradication continues to work to address challenges
brought about by poverty and strengthen resilience at
the community level. Last year, they issued an ASEAN
ministerial statement on adopting a communitydriven development.
Indeed, development must be sustainable — something
that has been enshrined in ASEAN’s agenda. The
ASEAN Community Vision 2025, adopted in 2015,
underlines the complementarity of the United Nations
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with
ASEAN community-building efforts to raise living
standards for our peoples.
It is also worth noting that the sense among
ASEAN peoples of belonging to ASEAN as a regional

20-024625/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

30/01/2020

Community has deepened. To demonstrate ASEAN’s
efforts as a people-oriented, people-centred Community
and enhance ASEAN’s abilities to provide assistance
to our nationals, ASEAN has operationalized its
guidelines on consular assistance by ASEAN member
States’ missions in third countries to nationals of other
ASEAN member States.

with the United Nations Development Programme since
2016, as well as the annual High-Level Brainstorming
Dialogue on Enhancing Complementarities between the
ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which ASEAN has
co-organized with the United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific since 2017.

As ASEAN moves forward towards its goal of
building an ASEAN Community, challenges abound.
Like other regions in the world, we have a number
of issues that could potentially make the South-East
Asian region unstable. ASEAN has taken pragmatic
steps to deal with those issues and prevent them from
making our region volatile, in full cognizance of their
complexities. While external observers oftentimes
view ASEAN as not doing enough, ASEAN’s success
or failure in dealing with those issues should be judged
by whether or not ASEAN has prevented conflict from
arising or spreading further.

Meanwhile, ever since the five-year Plan of Action
to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
was put in place, in 2016, tangible results have been
achieved, with 93 per cent of action lines — or 96
out of 103 — contained in the Plan having been
implemented thus far. That is a testament to the
commitment of our organizations in sustaining our
comprehensive partnership.

ASEAN’s
community-building
efforts
are
complemented and supported by its robust external
partnerships, including with the United Nations.
Beyond being granted observer status by the
General Assembly, there are established modalities
for ASEAN-United Nations relations at various
levels based on mutual benefit, from Secretariat-tosecretariat interaction between our organizations and
the ASEAN-United Nations ministerial meeting to
the ASEAN-United Nations summit, where ASEAN
leaders and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations engage in strategic dialogue. That is aimed
at strengthening ASEAN-United Nations cooperation
in line with the joint declaration on cooperation in
the spheres of political-security, economic and sociocultural cooperation.
We adopted the Complementarities Roadmap
2020-2025 to promote synergy between the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development at the most recent ASEANUnited Nations summit, held in Bangkok in November
2019. Through the Roadmap, ASEAN hopes to
ensure that its Vision 2025 supports and contributes
to the attainment of Sustainable Development Goals.
Likewise, it is meant to ensure that the goals set forth
in the Sustainable Development Agenda are taken into
account as ASEAN pursues its community-building
vision. The complementarities vision is highlighted in a
series of symposiums on the Sustainable Development
Goals that ASEAN has undertaken in its partnership
6/25

Among the areas where ASEAN and the United
Nations have pursued cooperation are, to name but a
few, transnational issues; humanitarian assistance
and disaster response; the prevention and control
of infectious diseases; counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism; preventive diplomacy
and conflict resolution; peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding; nuclear disarmament; capacity-building,
such as on the role of women in promoting peace and
security; and addressing the global existential threat
of climate change, including natural hazards, haze
pollution and changes in global weather patterns, which
have created disturbances previously unseen in terms
of scale and magnitude.
As we witness fluctuating temperatures and
weather disturbances afflicting places previously
unaffected by such calamities, disaster risk reduction
and management as well as resilience must remain
priorities for ASEAN-United Nations cooperation. We
therefore appreciate the continuing role of the United
Nations in enhancing the capacity of the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
Disaster Management through its capacity-building
programmes. ASEAN is also making efforts to better
prepare the ASEAN Community to address existing
and forthcoming challenges, such as natural disasters,
by diversifying its sources of funding.
Terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization
are among the major security challenges that the global
community continues to face. ASEAN itself has not been
spared the terror attacks perpetuated by extremists and
radical groups and individuals and is therefore taking
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

pragmatic steps to address this issue. We have adopted
the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the
Rise of Radicalization and Violent Extremism (20182025) and its work plan, the Bali Work Plan.
ASEAN sees the importance of comprehensive
approaches to counter terrorism and prevent violent
extremism, which dovetails with the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
By adopting the ASEAN Declaration on Culture of
Prevention for a Peaceful, Inclusive, Resilient, Healthy
and Harmonious Society in 2017, ASEAN has taken
steps to promote a culture of prevention by focusing
on understanding the root cause and consequences of
violent extremism, with an emphasis on the importance
of moderation to counter violent extremism, including
radicalization. Such initiatives are complemented
by additional ASEAN and United Nations efforts,
including a range of capacity-building activities to
address the phenomena of foreign terrorist fighters and
terrorism financing.
Given the possibility of extremists and radicalized
individuals developing improvised explosive devices, it
is equally important that ASEAN develop its capacity
to ensure that the various chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear elements, which are primarily
lodged under the medical and science sectors of the
individual ASEAN member States, are protected and
secured, thereby preventing individuals and groups
from using such elements and materials for illicit and
criminal activities.
As ASEAN deepens its community-building
process and our borders become more seamless, we
expect to see an increasing flow of people, whether for
tourism or job opportunities, across ASEAN member
States. Increased flows of people are accompanied
by the attendant social, political, economic and even
security risks, which need to be mitigated. ASEAN
is therefore working on effective border management,
which will contribute to ensuring the security of
ASEAN peoples against transnational crimes and other
cross-border challenges.
Preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention are
a shared area of interest between the United Nations
and ASEAN. As we have stressed, ASEAN itself is
a living testament to the importance of preventive
diplomacy, with conflict prevention being one of
the reasons for its existence. Throughout ASEAN’s
evolution as a regional organization, preventing

S/PV. 8711

disputes from arising, preventing them from becoming
conflicts and preventing the spread of conflict — the
three elements of preventive diplomacy — have been
ASEAN’s key objectives. Cooperation with the United
Nations in further enhancing our capacity to undertake
preventive diplomacy measures, such as, for example,
through workshops organized by the United Nations
in conjunction with the ASEAN Regional Forum,
one of whose key milestones is preventive diplomacy,
is beneficial.
Capacity-building activities such as the ASEANUnited Nations workshops and regional dialogues on
political-security cooperation, a flagship programme
under the ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive
partnership since 2012, has been useful for ASEAN. The
workshops have focused on a range of issues important
to ASEAN: preventive diplomacy, in 2014, conflict
prevention, preventive diplomacy and the prevention of
violent extremism, in 2016, the role of women in the
prevention of violent extremism, in 2018, and more
recently, in December last year, enhancing the capacity
of the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation.
In 2020, ASEAN plans to co-organize with the United
Nations the second ASEAN-United Nations Electoral
Observation Workshop to promote good governance,
human rights and democracy in the region through
training and sharing of best practices.
Apart from solving its own issues, through
its members States ASEAN also makes a tangible
contribution to the work of the United Nations by
participating and contributing to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We note that to date, ASEAN
member States have contributed around 5,000
peacekeepers to various United Nations missions,
including the peacekeeping missions in Lebanon
and South Sudan. All 10 ASEAN member States
have endorsed the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, renewing our collective
engagement with United Nations peacekeeping. Within
ASEAN, we are taking steps to further develop our
peacekeeping-operation-related competencies and
capacities through our ASEAN Peacekeeping Centres
Network and through the Experts’ Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations under the ADMM-Plus. On
that note, I would like to convey our appreciation to our
ADMM-Plus partners for their continued participation
and support to the said Experts’ Working Group and its
practical activities.

20-024627/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

In addition to maintaining peace through
peacekeeping operations and enforcing it through
peace-enforcement mechanisms, building peace is
equally, if not more, important. Peacebuilding has
always been a priority of ASEAN’s agenda, where the
participation of all sectors, including women, plays
a key role. ASEAN leaders themselves affirmed that
in 2017, when they adopted the Joint Statement on
Promoting Women, Peace and Security in ASEAN.
The establishment of the ASEAN Women for Peace
Registry is a step towards the goal of women playing
a greater role in building peace. That is an area where
ASEAN and the United Nations could further enhance
collaboration. It is also encouraging that there is now
momentum for strengthening cooperation between
ASEAN and the United Nations in support of the
enhanced role of women within ASEAN in areas such as
peacekeeping operations, mediation and reconciliation.
ASEAN shares similar goals and a like-minded
vision with the United Nations in its efforts to
pursue the elimination of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction by signing the Treaty
on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(SEANWFZ) in 1995. While the Treaty and its plan of
action are already being implemented, the signing of
the Treaty’s Protocol by the Permanent Five remains
inconclusive. In the light of that, we are hopeful that the
United Nations can support the ongoing efforts of the
States parties to the Treaty and nuclear-weapon States
to resolve all outstanding issues, in accordance with
the objectives and principles of the SEANWFZ Treaty.
We would also like to highlight that ASEAN and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) signed
the ASEAN-IAEA Practical Arrangements, which set
out a framework of cooperation in the areas of nuclear
science, technology and applications and nuclear safety,
security and safeguards for a period of five years.

30/01/2020

for 7 per cent of ASEAN’s GDP. The potential is
massive. If fully utilized, digital integration could
uplift the region’s GDP by $1 trillion by 2025, which
equaled one-third of the region’s GDP in 2019. In that
context, last year ASEAN leaders issued the ASEAN
Declaration on the Industrial Transformation to
Industry 4.0 and reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to
develop a consolidated strategy for the fourth industrial
revolution. ASEAN’s digital penetration is high, with
cellular/mobile phone density now pegged at 128 per
cent, indicating that each person within the ASEAN
region actually owns more than one mobile phone.
Internet subscription is at 50 per cent.
In that context, the ASEAN Smart Cities Network
is a promising initiative that promotes interoperability,
enables cities to share best practices on addressing
urbanization and deepens ASEAN’s integration as
a single digital market. As such, we welcome the
partnerships that various United Nations agencies, such
as the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific, have developed to support the
implementation of smart cities in the region.

Meanwhile, dealing with the so-called remnants
of war, particularly unexploded ordnance, given the
security risk that they pose to our people, remains one
of ASEAN’s priorities, including the establishment of
the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Center. Likewise,
the Expert Working Group on Humanitarian Mine
Action has been established under the ADMM-Plus.
That is therefore one area on which the United Nations
and ASEAN could work further.

But the fourth industrial revolution also poses
challenges for ASEAN, particularly amid the ongoing
rapid urbanization in our region. ASEAN therefore
needs to enhance its capacity to deal with the attendant
risks of technological and scientific development,
particularly in view of the growing sophistication and
transboundary nature of cyberthreats. At the thirtyfifth ASEAN Summit in November last year, ASEAN
leaders emphasized the need to enhance regional
cybersecurity cooperation through a feasible cross-pillar
cybersecurity cooperation mechanism, strengthening
a rules-based cyberspace, as well as supporting the
cybersecurity activities and training programmes of the
ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity Centre of Excellence
in Singapore and the ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity
Capacity Building Centre in Bangkok. We welcome
the United Nations support in those efforts. We also
look forward to collaborating with the United Nations
Group of Governmental Experts and the Open-ended
Working Group on the issue of security in the use of
information and communications technology. The
engagement with those United Nations bodies would be
useful for ASEAN.

The advent of the digital age and the fourth
industrial revolution present many opportunities. As
early as 2017, the digital economy already accounted

The areas that I sketched out are just few of the
those on which ASEAN and the United Nations
collaborate. ASEAN and the United Nations are

8/25

20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

collaborating in many other areas. We look forward to
commencing work on crafting the next plan of action of
the ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive partnership
for the period 2021-2025 to sustain the momentum of
our cooperation.
As the year 2020 marks the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations,
those present can count on ASEAN’s efforts and
commitment to uphold the Charter. We in ASEAN
are committed to multilateralism and its processes, of
which the United Nations remains at the very centre.
The United Nations continues to be the most important
platform for pursuing international cooperation and
dialogue, as well as resolving many of the world’s
most pressing problems. The seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations provides an opportune time for
the States Members of the United Nations, including
ASEAN countries, to work closely together towards
the strengthening of the United Nations for the better,
and in the interest of international peace, security and
prosperity. We therefore look forward to participating
and contributing to the United Nations seventy-fifth
anniversary’s global conversation towards shaping the
future we want and the United Nations we need.
In conclusion, the Council plays a critical role in
keeping and maintaining global peace and stability.
Worth commending are the efforts being undertaken
within the Council to ensure that it remains responsive
to the increasing demands of keeping the peace and
maintaining a secure and stable world for all. We hope
to learn more through exchanges about best practices
and capacity-building initiatives, as we in ASEAN also
continue to evolve our organization so that it remains
cohesive and responsive to the increasing demands and
needs of our region and beyond. A strong, united and
cohesive ASEAN is in the interest of the international
community. We look forward to the continued support
of all our partners so that we will continue to maintain
peace and stability in the region, while we work to bring
greater prosperity and development to the peoples of
ASEAN. Again, allow me to reiterate our appreciation
for this opportunity to speak at the Council today.
The President: I thank Dato Lim Jock Hoi for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for coming here and

S/PV. 8711

providing us with his important briefing, as well as
the Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), Dato Lim Jock Hoi, for his
briefing. I believe that this is the first time that an
ASEAN Secretary-General has come to the Security
Council, which marks a historic moment for all of
us here.
Much has already been said. The ASEAN SecretaryGeneral mentioned that ASEAN was established in
1967, at a time when South-East Asia was marred
by disputes, distrust and anxiety. Today, with a total
population of more than 650 million, we are among the
fastest-growing economies and the engine of global
growth. ASEAN member States are contributing over
5,000 personnel to various United Nations peacekeeping
missions. ASEAN’s collective efforts and its culture of
dialogue and consensus-building — or what we call the
ASEAN Way — dispelled the elements of distrust and
set off a remarkable cycle of peace, trust and prosperity.
I believe that the ASEAN Secretary-General alluded to
that point as well. For those reasons, we believe that
much can be learned from ASEAN, and that ASEAN
will be able to adapt to new challenges if continuous
dialogue between the United Nations and other regional
organizations is strengthened. Let me highlight three
pertinent points on how ASEAN complements the
work of the United Nations and how we can improve
synergies, particularly in the area of peace and security.
First, I will address ASEAN’s collective contribution
to peace and security. We are a firm believer that
conflict benefits no one, and that sweeping the problem
under the carpet does not resolve differences. That is
why in 2015 we established the ASEAN Community
with its three pillars: political-security, economy and
sociocultural communities.
The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast
Asia — which has been acceded to by over 40
countries — our cooperation with ASEAN partners
and the ASEAN Regional Forum are among the ways
in which we expand the ASEAN Way. I believe that the
ASEAN Regional Forum is the only forum to which
many parties, including Korea, are members. We also
promote confidence-building, preventive diplomacy
and conflict resolution approaches.
ASEAN countries also engage with other
continents — with countries of the Pacific, through
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum; the
European Union, through the Asia-Europe Meeting;

20-024629/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

Latin America, through the Forum for East Asia-Latin
America Cooperation; ASEAN-the Southern Common
Market Ministerial Meeting and others. ASEAN also
recently endorsed the Indo-Pacific Outlook. That is
how we would like to strengthen ASEAN centrality
and enhance our community-building process, based
on several principles, including centrality, inclusivity,
non-interference and others.
Within the framework of ASEAN and United
Nations collaboration, enhancing the capacity and
capabilities of peacekeeping personnel is one area
that must be strengthened. ASEAN countries have
participated in peacekeeping operations since as early
as the 1950s under the banner of the Blue Helmets. As
both Secretaries-General mentioned, all 10 ASEAN
member countries have endorsed the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. That is an important part.
There are many areas on which we can work. The
Secretary-General of ASEAN pointed out several of
them. Secretary-General Guterres pointed out six
practical areas of cooperation. We certainly welcome
all of them. I would like to highlight in particular where
we can work together on issues related to peacekeeping,
counter-terrorism, early warning, peace and security,
climate change — which is an important issue for
us in ASEAN — and disaster management. I believe
we are the only region that boasts having all of the
world’s natural disasters, from hailstorms to cyclones
to tsunamis. That helped us develop expertise in
those areas.
My second point relates to ASEAN’s contribution
to emerging non-traditional security challenges. In the
field of non-traditional security, ASEAN’s numerous
platforms of cooperation and engagement — covering
issues such as counter-terrorism, violent extremism,
cybercrimes, illicit drug trafficking and many
more — have also contributed to making the region
much safer. In the maritime domain, for instance,
there is the ASEAN Maritime Forum, established to
address maritime issues in a holistic, integrated and
comprehensive manner.
As I mentioned, South-East Asian States are also
geographically prone to natural disasters. Through
the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management, ASEAN has
developed capabilities to facilitate cooperation and
coordination assistance during disaster relief efforts.
It is also through the Centre that ASEAN countries
10/25

30/01/2020

have worked together to address humanitarian issues
in Rakhine state.
Although there are many thematic issues addressed
within the ASEAN context, I would like to highlight
one important point, which is also under intense
discussion in the Security Council, namely, ASEAN’s
contribution within the framework of the women and
peace and security agenda. We believe that it is crucial
to ensure the full and effective participation of women
in all stages of peace processes. In that connection,
ASEAN has established the ASEAN Women for Peace
Registry — a pool of ASEAN women experts that
seeks to promote gender perspectives in peace and
reconciliation processes in ASEAN. Indonesia is also
working to establish the South-East Asian network of
women peace negotiators and mediators. We hope that
the two forums can be part of the Global Alliance of
Regional Women Mediator Networks.
Those are just snippets of ASEAN’s role in
maintaining peace and security. It is no coincidence
that, for the past 53 years, guns have fallen silent in
South-East Asia.
In conclusion, the region has benefited from
ASEAN’s existence, and we believe the organization
has also contributed to the maintenance of international
peace and security. As a way forward, we envisage a
larger role in sharing the ASEAN Way to address
issues of common concern. We are part of the global
community. We will continue to contribute to finding
solutions to global challenges, as responsible members
of the global society.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for putting this item on
today’s agenda as the culmination of your presidency.
I must say that I was very impressed when I heard the
remarks of the Secretary-General with respect to the
achievements of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) over the years, in particular in
economic terms, but also in other areas. At this stage,
I would like to welcome all ASEAN Ambassadors
present in the Chamber.
The development of ASEAN was always very
important to Germany. After the Second World War,
it was key for Germany to integrate into the European
Union (EU) in 1957. That was perhaps the best thing
that happened for us. On the basis of the experience
of European integration, we always promoted ASEAN
cooperation. As a young diplomat, I remember working
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

with the German Foreign Minister at the time, HansDietrich Genscher, whose close friend was later the
President of Indonesia, Mr. Habibie, who, as Minister of
Research and Technology of Indonesia, was one of the
promoters of ASEAN and of cooperation between the
EU and ASEAN and Germany and ASEAN. President
Habibie passed away last year. He was a very close
friend of Germany.
According to our notes, today we — Germany — have
been the primary development partner of ASEAN since
2016. We signed the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
in Southeast Asia in November 2019. We therefore
happily remain a strong ASEAN partner.
Turning back to the European Union, at the same
time, we have always promoted cooperation between
the European Union and ASEAN. That cooperation
developed over time. We now seek a strategic partnership
with ASEAN. I listened closely to the contributions
of ASEAN to the United Nations. I think that it has
become increasingly clear from our many discussions
that regional partnerships are important. We talk at
length about the partnerships between the African
Union and the United Nations and the EU and the United
Nations. The ASEAN-United Nations partnership is
also very important and can still be strengthened. My
Indonesian colleague mentioned some of the areas in
which cooperation can be strengthened, from security
to climate change to disaster management.
I would like to make a couple of points and start
with the remarks of the Secretary-General pertaining
to commitment to the United Nations and to the Charter
of the United Nations. Germany also firmly believes in
adhering to the United Nations Charter, the international
rules-based order, human rights and accountability
for violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. We encourage ASEAN to embrace
the universality of human rights in its regional policy.
Germany and the European Union stand ready to work
with ASEAN to share lessons learned.
In his statement, the Secretary-General also
mentioned the situation in Myanmar and the challenge
posed by the Rohingya crisis. We take note of a very
encouraging statement, which was released on the
occasion of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers retreat a
month ago, in which ASEAN acknowledged
“the need for ASEAN to be more visible and to play
an enhanced role in supporting Myanmar”.

S/PV. 8711

We welcome ASEAN’s growing commitment to finding
solutions to the Rohingya crisis. We encourage and
support ASEAN in capacity-building at the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
Disaster Management. I would again like to pay tribute
to my Indonesian colleague, who has been very active
in that area.
With regard to upholding international law and the
United Nations Charter, in the light of the decision of
the International Court of Justice with regard to the
case Application of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The
Gambia v. Myanmar) and the report of the Independent
Commission of Enquiry, which were both released
last week, we again urge ASEAN member States, the
Government of Myanmar and the Myanmar military
to ensure full accountability for all crimes and severe
human rights violations that took place in 2016 and 2017.
Impunity for those crimes must end.
Returning to the statement by the ASEAN
Secretary-General, in which he mentioned several
times the promotion of women, an issue that I would
also highlight and support. During our presidency of
the Security Council last year, we worked together
with the members to adopt resolution 2467 (2019),
on sexual violence in conflict and accountability for
perpetrators of sexual and gender-based violence. We
believe that accountability must be ensured and that a
survivor-centred approach to justice has to be adopted.
Accordingly, we strongly support the Independent
Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar, established by
the Human Rights Council, and its important work. We
would also respectfully encourage ASEAN member
States to seek further avenues, by way of regional
cooperation, to effectively address such events in their
region and to prevent their recurrence.
Speaking of conflict prevention, which was also
highlighted by the Secretary-General of ASEAN, I
would like to pick up on what the Secretary-General of
the United Nations mentioned, namely, the situation in
the South China Sea. As a party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Germany
underlines its interest in the universal application of
UNCLOS, which sets out the comprehensive legal
framework for the conduct of all activities in the
oceans and seas, including the implementation of
arbitration rulings.

20-0246211/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
It was a pleasure to have the Secretary-General of the
United Nations here, as well as the Secretary-General of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
Dato Lim Jock Hoi, whom we thank for his briefing and
for highlighting ASEAN’s essential and growing role in
regional cooperation.
ASEAN lies at the heart of our relationship with the
Indo-Pacific region. The United States partnership and
friendship with ASEAN has been consistently guided
by our respect for sovereignty and our commitment
to the rule of law, good governance and sovereignty
enabling economic growth. On the basis of those
foundational principles, the United States supports
strong cooperation between the United Nations and
ASEAN, guided by Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The United States and ASEAN’s
deepening economic relationship has resulted in
explosive growth and tangible benefits on both sides
of the Pacific. United States collective investment in
ASEAN member States stands now at $271 billion, and
American businesses strengthen ASEAN communities
where they operate. We play by the rules, we believe in
fair competition, we abhor corruption. Those principles
build trust, grow human capital and establish lasting,
mutually beneficial relationships.
In addition, the United States is partnering to
advance high-quality infrastructure development
through the Blue Dot Network. The Network
provides a seal of approval for high-standard projects,
demonstrating our enduring commitment to the best
interests of the region. ASEAN also plays a critical
role in reinforcing the international rules-based order,
which is as important as ever in maintaining global
peace and stability. As we see attempts to impede the
lawful exercise of navigational rights and freedoms
under international law, we must steadfastly uphold
those rights and freedoms.
Among the places where the freedom of the seas is
most threatened is the South China Sea. The assertion
of unlawful and sweeping maritime claims, including
through ongoing bullying against long-standing oil
and gas development and fishing practices by others,
threatens the rules-based order that has enabled the
region to prosper. Our position in the South China
Sea and elsewhere in the world is simple: the rights
and interest of all nations, regardless of size, power or
military capabilities, must be respected. We call on all
States to resolve their territorial and maritime disputes
12/25

30/01/2020

peacefully and without coercion; to fashion their
maritime claims and conduct their maritime activities
in accordance with international law, as reflected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; and
to respect the freedoms of navigation and overflight
and other lawful uses of the sea.
We take note of the ongoing negotiations on a
code of conduct for the South China Sea. We have
consistently expressed our support for a meaningful
code of conduct, fully in accordance with international
law, that commits all parties to refraining from
provocative and destabilizing behaviour. However, we
are concerned that, as the document is being negotiated,
the People’s Republic of China has repeatedly engaged
in provocative and destabilizing activity aimed at
pressuring South-East Asian claimant States into
entering joint development arrangements for marine
resources. The most recent example of that type of
coercion is the presence of a large China-flagged
fishing fleet with armed escorts in the vicinity of an
island belonging to an ASEAN country. That follows
interference by the People’s Republic of China with
another ASEAN country’s long-standing oil and gas
activities through the redeployment of a Governmentowned survey vessel, together with armed escorts,
into waters offshore of that country. Such behaviour,
especially amid ongoing code of conduct negotiations,
raises serious doubts about the intention of the People’s
Republic of China to agree to an effective code of
conduct. If a code of conduct is used by some to
legitimize egregious behaviour and unlawful maritime
claims, or is inconsistent with international law, it will
prove harmful to the region and to all who value the
freedom of the seas.
The United States also remains deeply concerned
by the plight of the Rohingya. As we continue to support
Burma’s democratic transition, we urge Burma’s
Government to address the root causes of the situation,
create conditions conducive to safe, voluntary, dignified
and sustainable returns, provide justice for the victims
and hold those responsible for ethnic cleansing and
other grave human rights abuse to account. With regard
to the order of the International Court of Justice, the
United States encourages all parties to respect the
Court’s order and comply with the provisional measures
indicated in it. We welcome ASEAN’s efforts to
address the situation and Rakhine state. United Nations
agencies have unique expertise and capacity, and we
urge the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Centre and
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

the recently established ASEAN Secretariat Ad Hoc
Support Team to work closely with United Nations
agencies and support their ongoing efforts.
The year 2020 also marks the five-year anniversary
of elevating our relationship with ASEAN to a strategic
partnership. Support for a strong, united ASEAN
remains at the heart of our Indo-Pacific strategy. We
greatly value that partnership and the chance to hear
ASEAN’s voice on changing regional dynamics and
challenges. President Trump also looks forward to
listening to that voice when he hosts ASEAN leaders
in the United States in the first quarter of this year.
We hope to discuss our shared principles and vision for
the region, one that sees ever-greater prosperity and
security and is grounded in respect for the rights and
freedoms granted to all nations.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia): It is my pleasure and honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the African
members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger,
South Africa and Tunisia.

S/PV. 8711

Nations Summit in Indonesia in November 2011, and
the adoption in 2016 of the first ASEAN-United Nations
Plan of Action to implement the Joint Declaration,
for the period 2016-2020. We are pleased to hear that
almost all the items included in that ambitious plan of
action, which covers political, security, economic and
sociocultural cooperation, have already been addressed.
In particular, we would like to commend the efforts
made to enhance the cooperation between ASEAN and
the United Nations in the area of peace and security.
We further commend ASEAN’s efforts to promote
mutual respect for the independence, sovereignty,
equality, territorial integrity and national identity of all
nations within their region. These values mirror those
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and create an
important platform for bolstering cooperation with the
United Nations.

We would like to thank the President for organizing
this briefing on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
peace and security, with a focus on partnership with
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We also thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General of ASEAN for their
important briefings.

Through preventive diplomacy, ASEAN plays an
important role in conflict prevention, resolution and
management. The approach to promoting dialogue
to resolve conflict supports the actions envisioned
in Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, which
emphasizes the pacific settlement of disputes. We
believe that Chapter VI should be the first port of call
for Council efforts to maintain international peace and
security. The principles espoused by ASEAN therefore
make it an important and natural partner in the pursuit
of peaceful resolutions to conflicts in the region.

It is important that the Security Council continue
to engage on a regular basis with regional organizations
on ways to encourage the peaceful settlement of
disputes and maintain peace and security in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
On several occasions, regional and subregional
arrangements have proved to be highly knowledgeable
and efficient in dealing with local issues. Their
understanding of local dynamics and deep insight into
the history of events sometimes make all the difference.
We believe that through stronger cooperation, the
United Nations and regional organizations can leverage
their respective comparative advantages in seeking
effective solutions to the increasingly complex peace
and security challenges all over the world.

In that regard, we appreciate ASEAN’s contribution
to efforts to address the root causes of the Rohingya
refugee crises. We would also like to stress the need to
intensify those efforts in order to ensure the refugees a
voluntary, safe and dignified return to their homeland.
The valuable contribution of ASEAN member States
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
the deployment of approximately 5,000 military
and police personnel, as well as the organization of
training programmes, is also commendable. We also
highly value the cooperation between ASEAN and
the United Nations in the field of counter-terrorism
and the adoption by ASEAN, in November 2018, of
its Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of
Radicalization and Violent Extremism.

In that regard, we welcome the significant progress
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
ASEAN since the adoption of the Joint Declaration
on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and
the United Nations during the fourth ASEAN-United

ASEAN’s role as a bridge-builder extending beyond
its members, through such dialogue platforms as the
ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN+3 — China,
Japan and the Republic of Korea, which it initiated — is
also now well established and we are confident that

20-0246213/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

it can contribute to finding solutions to some of the
security issues in the broader region.
We believe that greater consultation in the
decision-making of the Security Council with such
regional organizations as ASEAN, the League of Arab
States, the European Union and the African Union (AU),
is essential for achieving strategic convergence and
coherence with a view to addressing today’s complex
peace and security challenges. In that regard, we are
pleased to note that the United Nations and the African
Union have made significant progress in developing
a strategic partnership to address such challenges in
Africa, which has resulted in joint approaches and
better-coordinated, coherent and effective initiatives to
prevent, resolve and manage conflicts on the continent
based on the spirit of the 2017 Joint United NationsAU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security.
As a testimony of that strategic partnership, the
United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council hold an annual joint
consultative meeting, at which they discuss a range of
matters, mainly related to conflict situations on the
continent. Such joint meetings are preceded by informal
consultations that focus on thematic issues, such as how
to strengthen cooperation between the two organs.
In addition, both organizations work together
to identify a wide range of thematic issues designed
to further promote peace and security in the African
continent. Those issues include mediation; women,
peace and security; electoral support, peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction and development;
and youth, peace and security. The Silencing the Guns
in Africa initiative clearly illustrates that enhanced
cooperation and coordination, in accordance with
resolution 2457 (2019), adopted in February 2019, and
the AU Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa by 2020, on practical steps to attain
the goal of a conflict-free Africa.
Despite that important progress, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is still far from delivering on its promises, and greatly
enhanced efforts are needed if the Security Council is
to fully utilize this tool, under Chapter VIII. We need
to reflect more on such issues as how to strengthen
coordination and coherence between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations regarding
peace and security matters, how to develop a joint
14/25

30/01/2020

decision-making framework to make their joint action
more effective and, most importantly, how to support
peace efforts initiated by regional organizations
through secure, sustainable and predictable resources.
In that regard, we would like to echo the African Union
request to endorse access to United Nations assessed
contributions to fund its peace-support operations,
which are undertaken on behalf of the United Nations
and, in particular, the Security Council.
In conclusion, let me thank you again, Mr. President,
for choosing this important subject for our briefing. We
are confident that under Viet Nam’s able chairmanship,
ASEAN will endeavour to further enhance its
cooperation with the United Nations.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) for their presence here and for
their briefings.
Regional cooperation is a cornerstone of Belgium’s
foreign policy. Regional organizations are often the
best placed to understand and overcome the specific
challenges of their respective regions. South-East
Asia is a region of overall stability, and regional
cooperation has much to do with that. I particularly
commend ASEAN for its work in the area of preventive
diplomacy. We can undoubtedly learn a great deal from
the organization in terms of the promotion of dialogue,
confidence-building and conflict prevention. We also
highlight the contribution of ASEAN countries to peace
and stability beyond their borders through the generous
provision of peacekeepers to United Nations missions.
The training work carried out at the regional level, in
accordance with the ASEAN-United Nations plan of
action for 2016-2020, is of paramount importance in
that regard.
We therefore look forward to the new ASEANUnited Nations plan of action. Among the many areas
of activity envisaged, climate change, transnational
organized crime and human rights are, in our view, of
particular importance. We support the engagement of
the United Nations with the ASEAN Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights and its Commission on
the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children. Moreover, ASEAN countries are among
the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change,
particularly sea level rise. Regional cooperation is
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

crucial in that regard, particularly through risk and
impact reduction strategies.
I would also like to mention two specific issues
where ASEAN can play a positive and decisive role.
First, regarding the resolution of disputes concerning
the South China Sea, it is my hope that the parties
will be able to address the issue peacefully, through
dialogue, and comply with the provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The current
efforts of ASEAN member States and China to conclude
a code of conduct on the South China Sea demonstrate
that that wish is within reach. All the parties should
therefore refrain from any unilateral action contrary
to international law. In addition, they should promote
confidence-building measures. Maritime safety and
security and freedom of navigation and overflight, as
well as the effective fight against piracy and armed
robbery at sea, are at stake.
Secondly, I would like to underline ASEAN’s
involvement, through its Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management,
in resolving the crisis in Rakhine state in Myanmar.
Humanitarian access is a major concern and a
strengthened role of ASEAN, complementary to that of
the United Nations, would be very helpful in that regard.
We encourage the AHA Centre to work to facilitate the
voluntary, dignified and safe return of the Rohingya
refugees. Belgium also stresses the importance of
addressing the root causes of the conflict and of fighting
impunity. In that context, I refer to the unanimous
order issued by the International Court of Justice last
week and emphasize the need to fully implement the
provisional measures provided for therein.

S/PV. 8711

States across the world. For small island developing
States like ours, regional cooperation creates muchneeded buffers that insulate us from the rigours of a
rapidly changing, and often tumultuous, global political
economy. Indeed, threats to international peace and
security are transnational in character and necessitate
collective action in order to yield just and equitable
outcomes. Such threats include climate change, crossborder terrorism, mass human displacement and other
hazards that hold no regard for territorial integrity and
easily overwhelm the capacity of many States. For
small States like ours, the sharing of such burdens on a
regional basis is the only feasible option.
Justice and equity are often born through a shared
history of struggle and solidarity. Collective struggle
shapes collective identities, which in turn fosters deeprooted and meaningful relationships. In the case of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
those relationships are conditioned by culturally
determined modes of interaction among member States
and mediated in line with the principles of sovereignty,
non-interference and mutual respect. In the context of
CARICOM, our regional identity takes the form of unity
in diversity, embodied across our shared institutions,
fostering trust, confidence and a spirit of partnership.
In both cases, a normative “togetherness” is nurtured
without impeding the local cultures and values from
which member States draw their national identities.
For both CARICOM and ASEAN, full respect for
sovereignty is an essential condition for peace.

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We
thank the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for convening
this very useful and timely discussion. We extend our
gratitude to the Secretaries-General for their insightful
remarks on a topic that is dear to the hearts of many
across the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).

What makes ASEAN distinctive from many similar
organizations, however, is its unique method of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution, known as the ASEAN
Way. Based on the norms of pragmatism, reciprocity,
compromise, discretion and non-confrontational
negotiating styles, ASEAN has been able to craft a zone
of stable peace without transcending the traditions of
statehood that regionalism intends to enhance. At a
time when many conflicts seem to stem from clashes of
identity along ethnic, communal or political lines, the
ASEAN Way might offer the United Nations a template
from which we can settle our many differences.
Similarly, the unity in diversity model fomented across
CARICOM can instil in the United Nations a spirit of
togetherness, while allowing local cultures and national
values to flourish.

Regional and subregional organizations act as
conduits that link our global governance structure to
the local and contextual realities found within many

If we truly want to craft a more peaceful and
prosperous world, we can look to regional groups, such
as ASEAN, that have found ways to integrate their

In conclusion, Belgium will continue to support
the strengthening and deepening of synergies between
the United Nations and ASEAN. The organizations
are highly complementary and share the objectives
not only of stability and peace, but also of promoting
multilateralism and a rules-based international order.

20-0246215/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

differences into a singular diverse fabric. That calls for,
above all else, full respect for each country’s right to
self-determination, no matter what political, social or
economic path it may choose.
We stand at a dangerous crossroads today. Some
parts of the world are being consumed by fire, while
others are engulfed by water. As the climate crisis
continues to grow in scope and complexity, we must
all join together nationally, regionally and globally so
that we may weather this storm. As a former Caribbean
regionalist, Forbes Burnham, once said: “Either we
integrate, or we perish.” We must work together in the
interest of our common humankind.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Secretaries-General of the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) for their briefings, which highlighted
how cooperation between ASEAN and the United
Nations cover all the areas regularly addressed by the
Security Council, and beyond.
I would first like to underscore in particular the
importance of the cooperation between the United
Nations and ASEAN in the maintenance of international
and regional peace and security. That cooperation
continues to be strengthened, particularly since the
adoption of the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
at the ASEAN-United Nations Summit in Bali in
2011. There are currently 5,000 ASEAN member
State personnel deployed within United Nations peace
operations. France supports that mobilization by
contributing to the activities of two training schools
for future Blue Helmets, in Cambodia and Viet Nam,
particularly by teaching them French for deployment
in French-speaking areas. The participation of women
in the peace and security agenda is crucial, and France
commends the launch of the ASEAN Women for Peace
Registry over a year ago.
ASEAN has also become a key partner of the
United Nations in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime. ASEAN’s active participation in the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which we will renegotiate this
year, is one of the conditions underpinning its success
in supporting countries of the region in drawing up
national responses to those challenges and encouraging
them to step up regional cooperation.
16/25

30/01/2020

ASEAN and the United Nations have also joined
forces to promote sustainable development. ASEAN’s
close cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, for example, has achieved significant
results in economic and social development across the
region. ASEAN and the United Nations have also been
cooperating on the implementation of priority actions
based on complementarities between the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025 and the United Nations
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The links
between ASEAN and the United Nations have been
strengthened through the establishment of a partnership
based on shared priorities, foremost among which are
tackling inequalities, combating climate change and
preserving the environment.
I also recall that United Nations coordination with
regional organizations is a key tool in accomplishing the
Organization’s mission of fostering peace and security.
That is one of the major thrusts of the SecretaryGeneral’s reform agenda, which France fully supports.
That partnership is part of the framework provided for
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The regional level is essential to reinforce and
sometimes rebuild the bonds of trust and friendship
among countries of the same region that have been
formed based on geographical proximity and historical
and cultural ties. That proximity and the awareness of
local situations bestow full legitimacy on subregional
and regional organizations to be stakeholders in the
resolution of crises close to them.
In that regard, both the Council and ASEAN must
be fully mobilized to ensure that the crimes committed
in Burma, particularly in the Rakhine state, do not go
unpunished. That is a moral and justice imperative.
France notes the 23 January order of the International
Court of Justice in the proceedings on the alleged
violations by Burma in the case concerning Application
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar)
on the provisional measures that it decided on, pending
a decision on the merits, in order to safeguard the
rights of the Rohingya people in Burma. The Burmese
authorities must implement the protective measures
decided on by the Court, ensure unimpeded access
humanitarian aid and create conditions conducive to a
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

S/PV. 8711

voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of the
Rohingya to Burma.

coordination of steps at key multilateral platforms,
foremost among which is the United Nations.

Moreover, as we said last August together with
Germany and the United Kingdom, we welcome the
ongoing negotiations between ASEAN member States
and China to establish a code of conduct in the South
China Sea, in accordance with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and guaranteeing
cooperation with third countries. France calls on all
littoral States to take measures to prevent and reduce
tensions and to promote and maintain peace, security,
stability and safety in the region.

We have had meaningful dialogue in the area of
policy and security, focused on establishing an equal,
balanced and transparent system of inter-State relations
in the Asia-Pacific region. The 2016 Russia-ASEAN
Summit, held in Sochi, was the first high-level meeting
to be convened in Russia in the history of our relations.
The Summit resulted in the adoption of the Sochi
Declaration and the 2016-2020 Comprehensive Plan of
Action to Promote Cooperation between ASEAN and
the Russian Federation.

In conclusion, I wish to underline that France
intends to deepen its relations with South-East Asia,
in particular with ASEAN, as an organization that has
contributed so much to peace and stability in a region
that is central to the Indo-Pacific area. France wishes
in particular to become a development partner of the
organization so as to further bolster our work in the
areas of multilateralism, sustainable development,
peace and security in South-East Asia.

Russia and ASEAN are like-minded on issues
such as establishing an open and balanced security
architecture in the Asia-Pacific region, based on
the principles of the rule of international law,
non-interference in internal affairs, the non-use or
threat of use of force and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We are united in our aspirations to prevent the
emergence in the region of new dividing lines, as well
as the undermining of equality and consensus in the
work of inter-State associations built around ASEAN.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and the Secretary-General of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Dato Lim Jock
Hoi, for their informative briefings on cooperation
between ASEAN and the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security. We also appreciate the
initiative of our colleagues from Viet Nam to convene
this thematic meeting of the Security Council on the
subject of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in this case ASEAN.
We consider ASEAN to be one of the most successful
integrative associations. It plays an important role in
ensuring peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region.
We have consistently called for the strengthening of the
central role of its 10 member States in regional affairs.
We commend their contribution to the work of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
This year marks the twenty-fourth anniversary of
the ASEAN-Russian Federation Dialogue Partnership.
Within that period, we have achieved impressive
progress in every area of our cooperation. A robust treaty
and legal basis for cooperation has been established,
which can now be described as a strategic partnership.
We have launched effective joint mechanisms and our
trade, economic and humanitarian ties are steadily
developing. We have laid the foundation for closer

Recently, however, including at today’s meeting,
we have heard much about a rules-based order that, as
far as we can judge, is based on a selective approach
to international law and the concept of so-called IndoPacific region — a concept that has emerged seemingly
out of nowhere. When we look at geographical maps
and ask the authors of that concept what the difference
is between the Indo-Pacific strategies and cooperation
within the Asia-Pacific region, they say that Indo-Pacific
strategies are ostensibly more open and democratic.
At the same time, they do not include East Africa or
the Persian Gulf as part of the Indo-Pacific region.
Naturally, China does not fall within that region either.
That raises the question of what the added value is of
a format that divides rather than unites. Such dubious
novelties in no way promote regional cooperation or a
unifying agenda.
Alongside other dialogue partners of ASEAN,
Russia is helping the organization to build its
capacities in addressing new threats and challenges,
such as terrorism, transnational crime and illegal
drug trafficking. We are especially focused on the
consistent implementation of the Statement of ASEAN
and the Russian Federation on Cooperation in the
Field of Security of and in the Use of Information and

20-0246217/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

Communication Technologies, which was adopted at
the 2018 ASEAN-Russia Summit held in Singapore.
We are taking steps aimed at harmonizing the
various integration associations and undertakings with
the involvement of the East Asia Economic Caucus,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and
ASEAN. These efforts have laid the foundation for the
creation in Eurasia of an innovative centre free from
barriers and based on the principles of international law
and the norms of the World Trade Organization, as well
as respect for different development models and the
rights of peoples to themselves determine which path
they want to take forward.
That philosophy lies at the heart of the Greater
Eurasian Partnership initiative, which was advanced
by Russian President Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin at
the ASEAN-Russia Summit. We deem it important to
build dialogue and practical partnership between the
SCO and ASEAN given that both organizations work to
resolve the same security and sustainable development
issues in Asia.

30/01/2020

the parties involved. We welcome the mediating role
played by ASEAN and China in resolving the situation
in Myanmar. We note the fact that ASEAN recently
conducted an assessment mission on the needs of
refugees. We believe that the people of a region always
have all of the information they need about the state
of affairs on the ground and are best aware of the
regional specifics.
In January, Hanoi became the President of ASEAN.
We share Viet Nam’s priorities in the Association,
including the focus on increasing its contribution to
the maintenance of peace and stability in the region.
We are convinced that our partners and ASEAN have
all the necessary experience, the tools they need and
the requisite goodwill. We stand ready to support and
develop our cooperation.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency António Guterres, and His Excellency
Dato Lim Jock Hoi for the important information they
have provided today.

Based on the positive experience of cooperation
between the United Nations and the SCO, including the
third high-level meeting on the terrorism and organized
crime nexus, held in New York in November 2019, we
propose that we embark on a process of reflection
on expanding the format of such events to include
ASEAN. It would also be useful for ASEAN and the
SCO Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure to exchange
experiences on a well-developed legal and treaty basis
and effective mechanisms for inter-State cooperation.

No region is immune to the increasing large-scale
challenges that we are currently facing. Inequality,
social tension, conflict and vulnerability to disasters
and climate shocks are among the most pressing
challenges, with very unfavourable repercussions for
civilians and the achievement of an inclusive sustainable
development that leads to peace. Hence there is an
increasingly urgent need to seek solutions to these
common challenges. Multilateralism and international
cooperation play a decisive role in this process.

In connection with the ideas that have being
expressed here about the territorial disputes in the
South China Sea, I would like to underscore that our
view is that any territorial disputes in that region must
be resolved between the States in question on a bilateral
basis, in the context of the subject of today’s meeting,
which is aimed at building cooperation and advancing
a unifying agenda in the region. It is unacceptable
to impose a particular vision of the resolution and
settlement of disputes and of thorny issues on the basis
of narrow national interests, especially if this is being
done by States that are located many thousands of
kilometres from the region.

We acknowledge the fundamental role of the United
Nations as a catalyst for solutions that meet the specific
needs of each context. Therefore, close cooperation
with regional organizations such as the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) make possible a
stronger and more effective multilateral international
system based on diversity, mutual cooperation and
shared international principles. We are pleased to see
such cooperation taking the form of tangible initiatives
to bring about peace, development and human security.
An example is the contributions made by thousands of
ASEAN personnel to peacekeeping operations, which
include an increasing number of women.

We also do not see any added value in raising the
subject of Myanmar here in the Security Council. The
problem of the return of the Rohingya refugees should
be resolved through bilateral consultations between

As we have noted, climate change is one of the
main conflict multipliers of our times and has a major
impact on that region of the world, where four of the
10 countries most vulnerable to climate change are

18/25

20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

located. Our own region, the Caribbean, is also affected
by that reality, and we can therefore identify with
the efforts being deployed by ASEAN to build local
capacities in the areas of the mitigation of, preparation
for and response to natural disasters, particularly in
urban areas.
ASEAN-United Nations cooperation in building
more resilient communities is an important example
of multinational cooperation in that area. Given the
climate crisis, there is a need to continue fostering
complementary regional and multilateral strategies to
avert greater adverse effects. Joint action is the only
way to do so.
Another important area of cooperation is the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
ASEAN and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) and the ASEAN-FAO
agriculture programme. Both of these initiatives are
aimed at promoting a more resistant, sustainable and
inclusive food sector.
We also stress the work being done in sensitive
areas such as respect for human rights, particularly the
rights of women and children. ASEAN’s initiatives to
promote the women and peace and security agenda by
providing an increasing number of women peacekeepers
should be highlighted and replicated. We also wish to
underline the technical support provided by the United
Nations to ASEAN strategies to combat terrorism and
prevent violent extremism, with the participation of
women, young people and civil society.
We wish to acknowledge ASEAN’s humanitarian
assistance and cooperation in the repatriation process
of Rohingya refugees. We reiterate our call for such
regional actions to be replicated to benefit those people,
who have already suffered enough, and for the ASEANUnited Nations leaderships to join forces to bring an
end to the crisis.
Although Myanmar’s primary responsibility to
resolve this serious situation is clear, we as a region and
the international community as a whole have the duty
to continue working to ensure a climate of dialogue
and cooperation that will allow for the safe, voluntary
and dignified of Rohingya refugees to their territory.
We are hopeful that this comprehensive partnership
between ASEAN and the United Nations will
continue to strengthen and remain firmly committed
to implementing shared strategies for peace that are
inclusive and people-centred.

S/PV. 8711

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate your delegation, Mr. President, for its
excellent work at the helm of the Council for this month
of January.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
Secretaries-General Guterres and Dato Lim Jock Hoi
for their briefings.
The United Kingdom has a strong and longstanding relationship with the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN). We have been party to the
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia
since 2012, and just last year we appointed our first
dedicated ambassador to ASEAN, John Lambe.
We work together closely on issues that matter to
our mutual peace and security. The United Kingdom
is an ASEANAPOL dialogue partner. We second
United Kingdom staff to work on humanitarian
assistance at the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management
and on cybersecurity at the ASEAN Cyber Centre. We
have bilateral defence relationships with nearly every
ASEAN member, and the Royal Navy has maintained an
almost unbroken presence in the region for the last two
years. That is say nothing about our wider people-topeople links, partnerships on trade and investment,
development, science and innovation.
Since ASEAN’s establishment, the organization
has played a key role in maintaining peace and security
in South-East Asia and the wider Asia-Pacific region.
But ASEAN also makes a tangible and valuable
contribution to global peace and security. I want to
touch on three areas of particular relevance to the
Council’s work, namely, peacekeeping; women, peace
and security; and, of course, climate change.
On peacekeeping, we welcome the fact that
ASEAN States contribute 5,000 peacekeepers currently
serving in United Nations peace operations and that
they have all endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative. We hope to work together more on
future training partnerships, including through the
A4P light coordination mechanism, to further develop
peacekeepers’ critical capabilities and implement all
eight pillars of the A4P.
Concerning women, peace and security, we
welcome the establishment of the ASEAN Women for
Peace Registry and ASEAN member States’ efforts
to ensure that women are at the negotiating tables

20-0246219/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

during peace processes. At the nexus of those two
issues — women in peacekeeping — we welcome in
particular the commitment of Indonesian Minister for
Foreign Affairs Marsudi to pursue reforms of national
and United Nations policies that will increase the
number of women in peacekeeping and strengthen
their role.
With regard to climate change, ASEAN States
recognize that climate change increasingly poses
threats to our individual and collective security. The
United Kingdom and Italy, as the Chairs of the twentysixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP26) in Glasgow later this year, are looking
forward to working with ASEAN partners to secure
ambitious COP26 outcomes and to accelerate actions to
reduce emissions, protect our environment and adapt to
the consequences of climate change.
I want to touch briefly on three specific issues
facing ASEAN and its wider neighbourhood, namely,
Myanmar, the South China Sea and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
On Myanmar, the Council will soon discuss the
accountability issue further, following the International
Court of Justice order and the report of Myanmar’s
own independent commission of inquiry last week. For
now, I reiterate that the United Kingdom encourages
Myanmar to comply with the Court’s legally-binding
provisional measures and to implement the commission’s
recommendations. More broadly, the United Kingdom
welcomes ASEAN’s continued engagement on the
Rohingya crisis, and we encourage ASEAN to focus on
overseeing the implementation of the recommendations
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State to help
create conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified
return of Rohingya and build trust between Myanmar
and the refugees in Cox’s Bazar. We urge the AHA
Centre to work closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Rakhine
and hope that there will be other opportunities for
the Council and ASEAN to engage on how we make
progress towards a lasting resolution to that crisis.
Regarding the South China Sea, we call on all
coastal States to take steps that reduce tensions and
support maintaining and promoting peace, security,
stability and safety in the region. We welcome ongoing
negotiations between ASEAN members and China to
achieve a rules-based, cooperative and effective code
20/25

30/01/2020

of conduct in the South China Sea that is consistent
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS). We underline the importance of States
complying with their international law obligations,
particularly UNCLOS.
Finally, on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, we are concerned at Kim Jong Un’s recent
declaration that he no longer feels bound by the
moratorium on nuclear and intercontinental ballistic
missile tests. The international community, including
ASEAN, must remain united on the need for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return to
negotiations with the United States and must continue
upholding United Nations sanctions agreed by the
Council on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
until that country delivers concrete steps towards
de-nuclearization.
In conclusion, ASEAN is a dynamic, growing
region. Economically, it has been predicted that
ASEAN will become collectively the fourth largest
economy in the world by 2030. It is our hope that by
2030, ASEAN economic might and potential will be
matched also by its contribution to regional and global
peace and security. The United Kingdom, for our part,
stands ready to work towards that goal in partnership.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his excellent overview. I warmly
welcome the Secretary-General of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and thank
him for his comprehensive briefing on cooperation
between ASEAN and the United Nations. Let me also
congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the chairmanship
of ASEAN this year.
ASEAN has played a significant role in providing
peace and enhancing security in the South-East Asia
region and globally for 52 years. We support ASEAN’s
commitment to promoting peace and security in the
wider Asia-Pacific region, as well as to resolving
disputes peacefully, which includes full respect for
legal and diplomatic processes. Further, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
we support deepening United Nations cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations in order
to ensure more effective conflict prevention and
mitigation. We acknowledge ASEAN’s commitment to
multilateralism and a rules-based international order.
Today’s challenges are global in scope and nature and
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

must be tackled jointly. Multilateral cooperation is key
to contributing to the regional peace and security.
We commend ASEAN’s work on addressing
emerging non-traditional security issues, such as
climate change. As climate change is the most serious
challenge in the near future, we need to accelerate
that work.
We recognize ASEAN’s interest in promoting
cybersecurity and welcome the important steps that it
has taken to build a rules-based cyberspace, including
the implementation of the 11 voluntary, non-binding
norms of responsible State behaviour contained in the
2015 report of the Group of Governmental Experts
on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security (A/70/174). Global digital cooperation is
needed to address the emerging non-traditional, crosssectoral threats to peace and security, and we welcome
ASEAN’s efforts to enhance cooperation with the
relevant United Nations bodies to combat the threats
that emerge from cyberspace.
We welcome the efforts of ASEAN member States
to advance discussions with China on a code of conduct
on the South China Sea. We encourage both parties,
ASEAN and China, to implement the 2002 Declaration
on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea in
its entirety.
We count on ASEAN to play an active role in
settling international disputes through peaceful means
and in providing necessary support to its member States
to address the root causes of crises. We note the recent
order of the International Court of Justice indicating
provisional measures for the protection of the Rohingya
in Myanmar. We expect Myanmar to duly comply with
the Court’s order and report back on measures taken
within the timeline indicated by the Court.
In conclusion, we express our support for ASEAN
Community Vision 2025: Forging Ahead Together.
We think that cooperation between the United Nations
and ASEAN could be further strengthened to maintain
peace and security and accelerate prosperity for the
650 million people in the region.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and Secretary-General Dato Lim Jock Hoi for
their briefings. I welcome my old friend, Dato Lim Jock
Hoi, to New York.

S/PV. 8711

China supports the United Nations in deepening
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, with a view to consolidating
and strengthening collective security mechanisms and
jointly safeguarding international peace and security.
In the 53 years since its founding, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has worked in
earnest to advance regional economic integration. It
has also worked hard to build a regional cooperation
architecture with ASEAN at its centre. At present,
the ASEAN region is, on the whole, peaceful and
prosperous. ASEAN and the ASEAN-centred East
Asian regional cooperation platform have played an
important role in that. The relationship between the
United Nations and ASEAN has grown increasingly
closer in recent years, with ever-improving cooperation
mechanisms and expanding areas of cooperation. China
highly commends that relationship.
With regard to bolstering cooperation between the
United Nations and ASEAN, China would like to make
some proposals.
First, we should firmly defend multilateralism
together. At present unilateralism and protectionism
are on the rise, and factors of instability and
uncertainty are multiplying, dealing heavy blows to the
international order and the global governance system.
That makes it even more important and pressing to
strengthen multilateralism. The United Nations and
ASEAN should work together to defend multilateralism
in regional and international affairs; unswervingly
safeguard the international system — with the United
Nations at its core — and the international order, based
on international law; support ASEAN in its continued
adherence to the ASEAN Way, characterized by mutual
respect, consensus and accommodation to the comfort
level of all parties; and make a positive contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Secondly, it is important to respect the leadership
and role of regional organizations and countries of a
region when it comes to regional affairs. Because of
geographic, historical and cultural factors, regional
organizations and countries of a region have unique
advantages in handling hotspot issues in the region
concerned. The international community should fully
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned and encourage
regional and subregional organizations and countries of
the region concerned to play a leading role in mediation.

20-0246221/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

ASEAN members have been gravely affected by
terrorism and violent extremism. It is therefore
necessary to consider the regional counter-terrorism
situation and provide strong support and cooperation
to ASEAN members in their counter-terrorism efforts,
with a view to implementing the Council’s counterterrorism resolutions and the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as to join efforts
to combat terrorist financing, drug trafficking and
transnational crime. China applauds the important
contributions of ASEAN members to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, we should boost economic and social
development and connectivity in order to promote
peace through development. All ASEAN member
States are developing countries. As such, accelerating
their development is a primary task and a fundamental
strategy to tackle regional risks and challenges.
The United Nations should further leverage its own
mechanisms and advantages in resources and capacity,
step up coordination with ASEAN and lend greater
assistance to its members in their implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in order
to help narrow regional development gaps and promote
youth employment and social stability. Connectivity
is an important foundation for the interlinked and
integrated development of the region. In the interest of
greater synergy, we support stronger alignment between
the regional connectivity initiative and the national
development strategies of the ASEAN countries.

30/01/2020

with regional and subregional organizations, including
ASEAN, staunchly support multilateralism and join
hands in building a community of shared future
for humankind.
My statement was supposed to end here, but in the
light of statements delivered earlier, allow me to speak
for another hour.
The focus of this meeting is cooperation between
the United Nations and ASEAN. We should not be
discussing Myanmar here. Unfortunately, some
countries have used this meeting to pressure Myanmar.
China therefore feels it necessary to state its position
on this issue. China pays close attention to the Rakhine
state issue in Myanmar. We have been actively working
with Myanmar and Bangladesh and encourage them to
resolve their issues through dialogue and consultation.
So far, China, Myanmar and Bangladesh have had
three informal meetings with their foreign ministers,
all of which registered progress and produced
important consensus.

As a good neighbour and partner to ASEAN
member countries, China attaches great importance
to developing its relations with ASEAN. China is the
first dialogue partner to join the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and the first country to
publicly express its willingness to sign the protocol to
the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone with ASEAN. China has been an active supporter
of ASEAN’s centrality in regional affairs, guided by
the China-ASEAN Strategic Partnership Vision 2030,
and through mechanisms and platforms such as the
10+1 and 10+3 frameworks and the East Asia Summit.

ASEAN has played an important role in facilitating
Myanmar-Bangladesh dialogue, building mutual trust
and improving the humanitarian situation for the
people in Rakhine state. China commends ASEAN
and supports its continued efforts along those lines.
Lately — thanks to the joint efforts of the countries
concerned, the countries of the region, China and
ASEAN — Myanmar and Bangladesh have had good
interactions, Myanmar has taken a series of positive
measures, and progress has been made in resolving
the Rakhine issue. The situation on the ground has
continued to improve. The international community
should cherish the hard-won momentum, help promote
bilateral dialogue and consultation between Myanmar
and Bangladesh, encourage them to expedite the
repatriation of the people who have fled from chaos
and work to create a sound external environment. The
Council should play an active and constructive role
in those efforts by providing the necessary support
and assistance to the countries concerned. Excessive
pressure would only be counterproductive.

We have deepened cooperation with ASEAN
member countries, built mutual political trust, jointly
pursued the Belt and Road Initiative and helped maintain
regional prosperity and stability. The China-ASEAN
relationship has become a pacesetter for East Asian
regional cooperation. China stands ready to work with
all countries to bolster the Organization’s cooperation

China takes note of the International Court
of Justice’s interim decision on Myanmar and the
Government of Myanmar’s response, as well as
the report recently submitted by the Independent
Commission of Enquiry. The Rakhine issue has very
complex historical, ethnic and religious components.
China supports Myanmar and Bangladesh in their

22/25

20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

continued efforts to properly resolve the relevant issues
through negotiation. The international community
should play a constructive role in that regard. China also
supports the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar in her ongoing efforts.
In their statements today, some representatives made
reference to the South China Sea issue. The United
States representative made unfounded accusations
against China, which my country firmly rejects.
It should be noted that the United Nations is not the
right forum for the discussion of the South China Sea
issue, nor should that issue be addressed in the Security
Council. At present, the situation in the South China
Sea is largely stable and improving. Specific disputes
are being resolved by the countries directly concerned
through negotiation and consultation. On the other hand,
China and ASEAN members are jointly committed to
maintaining peace and stability in the South China
Sea. Facts have shown that this dual-track approach is
the proper way to resolve the South China Sea issue.
Regrettably, this process has suffered from the constant
disruption and sabotage of some countries external to
the region, such as the United States.
China has always respected and supported the
navigational and overflight freedom enjoyed by the
States in the South China Sea under international law,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea (UNCLOS). Even as they enjoy those freedoms,
States should fully respect the sovereignty and security
interests of coastal States.
China firmly opposes the attempts of any country
to infringe upon its sovereignty and security interests
in the name of freedom of navigation.
In fact, there has never been any issue with freedom
of navigation or overflight in the South China Sea.
What is really worrying is the fact that some countries,
such as the United States, under the pretext of freedom
of navigation, sent military ships and aeroplanes to the
South China Sea to demonstrate their strength. That is
an act of provocation and threat to coastal States. That
represents the greatest risk to security in the South
China Sea and should be resolutely condemned by
all States.
As a firm defender of regional peace and security,
China has always pursued a defence policy that is
defensive in nature. Under international law, it is the
legitimate right of a sovereign State to deploy defence
facilities on its own territory. The United States has

S/PV. 8711

repeatedly accused China of militarization in the South
China Sea. However, it is the United States that has
hundreds of military bases across the world and has
deployed hundreds of thousands of troops outside its
own territory. The United States asks other countries
to comply with international law but it has not even
acceded to UNCLOS. Moreover, it has withdrawn from
international agreements and mechanisms one after
the other.
The United States talks here about peace and
stability in the South China Sea, but it has stirred up all
kinds of disputes in many parts of the world, becoming
a source of turbulence in the world. How can such a
country be in a position to accuse others anywhere? On
what grounds? I can tell the representative of the United
States that the label of militarization is not the right one
for China but could make a more appropriate one for the
United States.
Just now, some representatives referred to the
South China Sea arbitration case. I would like to
take this opportunity to emphasize that the Chinese
Government has solemnly declared that the South
China Sea arbitration award is null and void and has
no binding force. China did not accept or participate
in the arbitration. China neither accepts nor recognizes
the award.
Just now, the issue of the Korean peninsula was
mentioned by some representatives in their statements. I
wish to take this opportunity to say that in order to push
the parties concerned to resume dialogue on the Korean
peninsula issue and settle their disputes by peaceful
means, China and the Russian Federation proposed
not long ago a draft resolution on strengthening the
political settlement of the Korean peninsula issue. The
draft resolution is still on the Council’s table. We have
organized several rounds of consultations. We will keep
an open mind and hope that everyone can put forward
constructive ideas. Let us work together to create a good
environment for making contributions to easing the
situation on the Korean peninsula, pushing the parties
concerned to resume dialogue, resolving differences
through dialogue and achieving the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula and its long-term peace and
stability.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
Viet Nam would like to extend its appreciation to
His Excellency António Guterres, Secretary-General

20-0246223/25

S/PV.8711

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

30/01/2020

of the United Nations, and His Excellency Dato Lim
Jock Hoi, Secretary-General of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), for their presence
and profound insights into cooperation between the
United Nations and ASEAN.

to build trust and confidence, strengthen preventive
diplomacy, navigate differences and engage in issues of
common concern. Those mechanisms, with the passage
of time, have instilled a culture of peace as a force for
harmony, peace and stability in the region and beyond.

The importance of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
has been recognized since the founding of the United
Nations, as set out in Chapter VIII of its Charter.
We express our strong support for deepening such
cooperation and are pleased to see substantial
progress in collaboration between the United Nations
and ASEAN.

Such ASEAN success stories could complement
the efforts of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. That said, we
welcome the 2011 Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
and the subsequent adoption of the Plan of Action to
Implement the Declaration for the period 2016-2020.
The fact that more than 90 per cent of the Plan of
Action has been implemented reflects the unwavering
commitments of both the United Nations and ASEAN
to advancing cooperation, both in scope and in depth.

For the United Nations, ASEAN is a very
important, active and reliable partner, with outstanding
achievements in the fields of peace and security. If the
United Nations marks its success in saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, ASEAN is
recognized for its success in turning Southeast Asia
into a region of friendship and cooperation and its
crucial role in maintaining peace, security and stability
in the region and beyond. We believe that ASEAN, with
its commitment, efforts and experiences over more than
five decades, could make a greater contribution to the
work of the United Nations.
Founded on shared values, the United Nations
and ASEAN have been working closely to promote
multilateralism and to uphold the principles of
international law. From the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia to the ASEAN
Charter, ASEAN’s long experiences in shaping and
communicating norms should be shared to help inspire
and reinforce peaceful and friendly relations in various
corners of the world. The establishment of the ASEAN
Community in 2015, the first community in Asia, is a
powerful example of how to work in unity and harmony
and of how to work together in the face of common
challenges and in pursuit of common interests.
Engagement with external partners through
ASEAN-initiated mechanisms is another prominent
success of ASEAN as a testimony to the values of
genuine dialogue, mutual understanding and respect.
Mechanisms such as ASEAN plus 1, ASEAN plus 3,
the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum
and the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus,
with ASEAN playing the central role, have served as
avenues for consultation and cooperation and created
a conducive environment for all parties concerned
24/25

The convergence between the United Nations
and ASEAN has gained greater relevance in today’s
context of the complex and growing challenges that
we face — from terrorism to transnational crimes,
from human trafficking to people smuggling and from
cybersecurity to climate change. No country is immune
to and no region is insulated from such challenges,
which necessitate more effective collaboration between
the United Nations and ASEAN under various forms,
including capacity-building activities, dialogue,
exchange of information and sharing of expertise,
experiences, lesson learned and good practices.
It is necessary to emphasize the importance of,
and continued support for, the centrality of ASEAN
in the regional architecture and the central role of the
United Nations in the global multilateral system. It is
necessary to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and ASEAN in the various areas agreed upon,
including the peaceful settlement of disputes, preventive
diplomacy, disarmament and non-proliferation,
maritime cooperation, maritime security and disaster
management, as well as to explore other potential areas
of cooperation, taking into account that both sides are
embarking on developing a new plan of action for the
next five years.
It is necessary to render greater support and
assistance in order for the United Nations and ASEAN
to successfully implement the United Nations 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025. In that regard, Viet Nam, as the
Chair of ASEAN in 2020 and a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, is committed to pursuing a
20-02462

30/01/2020

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

more fruitful partnership between the United Nations
and ASEAN and calls on the support of the Council to
achieve our three priorities in 2020.
First, we must enhance the efficient and effective
participation of ASEAN member States in peacekeeping
operations. We therefore deeply appreciate the
triangular partnership projects and look forward to
further cooperation in the areas of capacity-building,
equipment and gender mainstreaming.
Secondly, we need to promote the women and peace
and security agenda at the regional and national levels
by strengthening the participation and contribution of
ASEAN women. As the twentieth anniversary of the
women and peace and security agenda is approaching,
the Government of Viet Nam plans to host a global
event with a focus on the role of women in building and
sustaining peace.

S/PV. 8711

Thirdly, we must focus on implementing the
Complementarities Roadmap 2020-2025 between
the United Nations 2030 Agenda and the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025. In that regard, we propose the
convening of a high-level dialogue between the United
Nations and ASEAN on sustainable development on the
occasion of the United Nations-ASEAN summit, to be
held in Viet Nam later this year.
Today’s meeting will help bring ASEAN closer to
the United Nations and bring the United Nations closer
to ASEAN. We hope that the momentum created today
will be carried into the future to forge a more robust
cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

20-0246225/25
