VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

-----------------~~---

9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations sy_stcm
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of those Territories;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementa_ti_on
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, Bnt1sh
Virgin Islands, l'vwntse:rat a_nd Turks ~~d. Cai~os_ Islands, including the possible dispatch of vis1tmg missions
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/30.

Question of the Cayman Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 27 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory
in April 1977 at the invitation of the administering
Power, the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 28
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 29
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cayman Islands;30
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Cayman Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Invites the attention of the administering Power
to the obs:ervations, conclusions and recommendations
of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to
the Territory in April 1977 31 and expresses it appreciation to the members of the Visiting Mission for
the constructive work accomplished and to the administering Power and the Government of the Cayman Is27 Ibid., vol. I, chaps. III and IV, and vol. IV, chap. XXVI.
28 ibid., vol. IV, chap. XXVI, annex.
29 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meet-

ing, paras. 12-21.
30 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l), vol. IV, chap. XXVI.
31 Ibid., annex, paras. 486-511.

167

---------------

lands for the close co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;
5. Re':fuests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to continue to take all necessary
measures, in consultation with the Government of the
Cayman Islands, to expedite the process of decolonization in the Territory in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration;
6. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that
urgent attention should be given to the diversification
of the economy of the Cayman Islands, as an important
element in the process of self-determination;
7. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system in the development and
strengthening of the economy of the Territory, and
requests those agencies and organizations to respond
appropriately to the development needs of the Cayman
Islands;
8. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the Government of the Cayman Islands, to pay particular attention to the training of
qualified local personnel with a view to their increased
participation in the over-all development of the Territory;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
full examination of this question at its next session
in the light of the findings of the Visiting Mission,
including the possible dispatch of a further mission to
the Cayman Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/31.

Question of the United States Virgin
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with rcoard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the G;'anting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,:i2 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
April 1977 at the invitation of the administering Power,
the Government of the United States of America,s:i
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 31

=~

Ibid., vol. I, chaps. III and V, and vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
· Jbul., vol. IV. chap. XXVII, annex.
4
3 Ibid.,
Thirty-second Session. Fourth Committee 17th
meeting, paras. 47-50.
'

163

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the United States Virgin Islands;35
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Takes note of the observations, conclusions and
recommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in April 1977 ;36
5. Expresses its satisfaction to the members of the
V,isiting Mission for the constructive work which they
accomplished, as well as to the administering Power
and the Government of the United States Virgin Islands
for the co-operation and assistance extended to the
Mission;
6. Requests the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, to continue to
take all necessary measures, in consultation with the
Government of the United States Virgin Islands, to
enable the people of the Territory to exercise fully
their right to self-determination in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration;
7. Requests the administering Power to encourage
further and meaningful discussion regarding the political and constitutional status of the Territory and
to take such additional measures as would ensure preservation of the identity and cultural heritage of the
people .of the United States Virgin Islands;
8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of the United States
Virgin Islands, to safeguard the inalienable right of
the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of its
natural resources by taking effective measures which
guarantee the right of the people to own and dispose
of those natural resources and to ,establish and maintain control of their future devdopment;
9. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic development of the United States Virgin
Islands are an important element in the process of selfdetermination and, to this end, calls upon the administering Power, together with the Government of the
United States Virgin Islands, to take all measures
necessary to achieve a viable and stable economy in
the Territory;
10. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, 36 to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the United States Virgin
Islands;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session in the
35 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
36 Ibid., annex, paras. 364-381.

light of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including
the possible dispatch of a further mission to the United
States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/32.

Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,s1
Recalling its resolutions 3432 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 and 31/50 of 1 December 1976,
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland38 and of Guatemala, 30
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Belize, 40
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners, 41
Reaffirming the principles established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, set out in its resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, in particular that all peoples
have the right to self-determination, by virtue of which
right they freely determine their political status and
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development,
Noting that, in the Bogota Declaration of 6 August
1977, it was agreed that "a solution of the Belize question should be found by the peaceful methods consecrated in the charters of the Organization of American States and the United Nations, and in accordance
with respect for its territorial integrity and with the
principle of the free self-determination of peoples",
Noting that, in July 1977, negotiations took place
between the Government of the United Kingdom, as
the administering Power, acting in clos,e consultation
with the Government of Belize, and the Government
of Guatemala, pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 4
of resolution 31 /50,
Deeply regretting the interruption of the negotiations
and the continued failure of the parties concerned to
negotiate an agreement in conformity with the principles established in resolutions 3432 (XXX) and 31 /50,
Concerned that the obstacles placed in the way of
the people of Belize to prevent them from exercising
their right to self-determination and independence without fear have not yet been removed,
Convinced that the people of Belize should be assisted in a practical manner to exercise freely and without fear their inalienable right to self-determination,
independence and territorial integrity,
37 Ibid., chap. XXIX.
38 Ibid., Thirty-second

Session, Fourth Committee, 20th
meeting, paras. 5-11, and 22nd meeting, para. 109.
39 fbid., 24th meeting, paras. 1-18.
4 0 Ibid., 22nd mee,ting, paras. 4-3 I.
41 Ibid., paras. 33-103.
