United Nations

S/PV.5264

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5264

th meeting
Tuesday, 20 September 2005, 10.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Romulo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Philippines)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Katti
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Idohou
Mr. Valle
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Mr. Moeller
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Valinakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Baconschi
Mr. Rogachev
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Shareef
Mrs. Patterson

Agenda
The role of civil society in conflict prevention and the pacific settlement of disputes

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-51380 (E)

*0551380*

S/PV.5264

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The role of civil society in conflict prevention and the
pacific settlement of disputes
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Peru, Slovakia and
Switzerland in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Tuliameni
Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure and the understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, I welcome the
participation of Mr. Paul van Tongeren, Executive
Director of the European Centre for Conflict
Prevention; Mr. Andrea Bartoli, Chair of the Columbia
University Seminar on Conflict Resolution and faculty
coordinator of the Columbia University Conflict
Resolution Network; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, founder
and Executive Director of the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

2

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2005/594, which contains the
text of a letter dated 7 September 2005 from the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I
welcome the Ministers of Denmark, Greece, Peru,
Romania, Slovakia, Switzerland and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
As another measure to optimize the use our time
in order to allow as many delegations to take the floor
as possible, I will not individually invite speakers to
take seats at the table or invite them to resume their
seats at the side of the Council Chamber. When a
speaker is taking the floor, the Conference Officer will
seat the next speaker on the list at the table.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Paul van Tongeren, Mr. Andrea
Bartoli and Mr. Vasu Gounden.
Before giving the floor to those speakers, I shall
give the floor to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General, Department of Political Affairs, to
make a statement on behalf of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Kalomoh: First of all, I would like to
apologize on behalf of the Secretary-General, who, due
to an unavoidable scheduling conflict, is unable to
deliver his statement at this important meeting. He has
asked me to do so on his behalf, and I have the
pleasure of delivering that statement.
“Last week, world leaders renewed their
commitment to promote a culture of prevention
of armed conflict as a means of effectively
addressing the interconnected security and
development challenges of our time. They also
pledged to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations for the prevention of armed conflict. And
they decided to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission that will play a key role in
preventing the recurrence of armed conflict.

S/PV.5264

“Civil society made a significant impact on
the process leading to the summit. Last June’s
hearings marked a new and welcome step forward
in United Nations-civil society relations. So did
the Conference on the Role of Civil Society in the
Prevention of Armed Conflict and Peacebuilding,
held in New York last July, where 500
representatives from civil society around the
world gathered to adopt an action agenda.
“My message to you today is simple: civil
society’s role in conflict prevention needs to be
fully recognized. Both the United Nations and
regional organizations have to do more to tap into
civil society’s comparative advantages, namely a
strong local presence and experience. Local
ownership and participation are essential for the
success of peace processes, be it conflict
prevention, peacemaking or peacebuilding.
Dialogue, transparency and accountability must
remain a priority.
“Civil society is often far out in front of us
in identifying new threats and concerns. This is
certainly one of its most important roles. Civil
society organizations are also indispensable in
‘track-two’ and ‘people-to-people’ diplomacy,
which is often integral to successful official
diplomacy and post-conflict political and
reconciliation processes. At times, they can reach
parties on the ground that Governments or the
United Nations cannot reach.
“Civil society organizations can also
complement the work of the United Nations by
offering valuable analyses originating in the field,
by forging partnerships to implement United
Nations decisions, by increasing the sustainability
of United Nations operations and by creating
networks to advocate for peacebuilding. For all
these reasons, civil society organizations would
have an important role to play in the deliberations
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
“The 2005 world summit produced some
remarkable commitments from Member States.
However, for these words to be turned into
action, and for prevention and peacebuilding
strategies to become more effective, all actors —
Governments, international financial institutions,
regional organizations and civil society — need
to work together as partners.

“I am committed to doing my part, and I
urge you all to do yours.”
The President: I thank Mr. Kalomoh for his
statement. I now give the floor to Mr. Paul van
Tongeren, Executive Director of the European Centre
for Conflict Prevention.
Mr. Van Tongeren: I am honoured to be invited
to this meeting, and I thank the representative of the
Philippines very much for this invitation to address the
Council today.
Promoting peace and security in the twenty-first
century requires a fundamental shift in how we respond
to the challenge of violent conflict. It is intolerable that
millions of civilians die from violent conflict at a time
when the international community has the knowledge
and resources to prevent it. As described in the Human
Development Report 2005, “Violent conflict is one of
the surest and fastest routes to the bottom of the
[Human Development Index]”, and it endangers the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
In response to the recommendation on the role of
civil society in the Secretary-General’s 2001 report on
the prevention of armed conflict (S/2001/574), civil
society organizations from around the world organized
themselves and formed the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict. After three years of
dialogue, consultation and research all over the world,
15 regional action agendas and finally one global
Action Agenda on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding were formulated. These action agendas
were presented at the Global Conference on the Role of
Civil Society in the Prevention of Armed Conflict and
Peacebuilding, which took place in July of this year,
here in this building. In the global Action Agenda, we
call for a fundamental change in dealing with conflict:
a shift from reaction to prevention. We believe that this
shift is not only possible but that it is much more costeffective.
Prevention is at the heart of the United Nations
mission and was the founding purpose of the United
Nations 60 years ago. Still, this is not reflected in the
current design of the United Nations. As stated in the
report of the Secretary-General entitled “In larger
freedom”, peacebuilding is still a “gaping hole in the
United Nations institutional machinery” (A/59/2005,
para. 114).

3

S/PV.5264

Following the two high-level reports of 2004, we
propose that the United Nations take up a stronger
steering and catalyzing role, and act as a convener in
the field of peace and security. We recommend that the
post of Under-Secretary-General for Peace and
Security be created.
Regions or countries prone to conflict should be
better monitored. Better early warning indicators and a
peacebuilding infrastructure should be developed,
based on local capacities for peace.
We believe that it is very important that an update
of the 2001 prevention of armed conflict report be
released soon. The progress report planned for 2004 is
still on hold. We hope, however, that now that the
summit is over, that report will be published soon.
In addition, we propose a more in-depth review
of the role of the United Nations in the field of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding be undertaken in 2010,
by organizing a multi-stakeholder conference on
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, aiming for a
coherent and integrated approach on prevention and a
mid-term review of the Peacebuilding Commission,
with input from regional organizations and civil
society.
Due to time limitations, I cannot reflect too much
here on all the different important roles of civil society,
so I will simply say that we strongly support Kofi
Annan’s conclusion in the Security Council debate on
the role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding
just last year (see S/PV.4993), when he stated that the
partnership between the United Nations and civil
society is not an option, but a necessity.
The Security Council should reform its working
methods to increase legitimacy, inclusiveness and
representativity by implementing the recommendations
of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United NationsCivil Society Relations — the Cardoso panel — to
strengthen the Council’s engagement with civil society
and by deepening and improving the planning and
effectiveness of the Arria formula meetings by
lengthening lead times and covering travel costs to
increase the participation of actors from the field.
Security Council field missions should meet regularly
with appropriate local civil society leaders. Further, the
Council should support the establishment of an
advisory or expert group on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, to consist of practitioners, academics
and representatives of civil society organizations.

4

Within the United Nations country teams a focal point
for prevention and peacebuilding should be appointed.
Finally, we support the creation of a
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
believe
its
effectiveness would be enhanced through cooperation
with civil society with peacebuilding experience. It
should report to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly. We ask the Council to support
proposals to include in the mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission the establishment of formal
country-level mechanisms such as civic forums to
ensure that local civil society is a key partner in its
efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the Chair
of the Columbia University Seminar on Conflict
Resolution and faculty coordinator of the Columbia
University Conflict Resolution Network, Mr. Andrea
Bartoli.
Mr. Bartoli: I thank the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of the Philippines, His
Excellency Alberto Romulo, and through him the
Government of the Philippines and its representatives
here in New York, who organized this open debate
during its presidency of the Security Council.
I have been asked to present the perspective of
academic centres as part of civil society’s contribution
to conflict prevention and the pacific settlement of
disputes, through the lens of the organization I founded
in 1997 at Columbia University, here in New York
City: the Center for International Conflict Resolution.
By the way, some students from the Center are here in
the room and I am very pleased to see that. My
intuition
is
that
this
contribution
involves
understanding and experimentation.
Human yearning for peace is infinite, and yet at
times it lacks proper words and images. Individuals,
groups, States and nations fall prey to their own limits
as they explore the challenging world in which they
exist, to which they belong, for which they toil. The
first academic contribution to conflict prevention is
therefore to offer, sharpen and sustain the language that
allows all of us, as the human family, to understand the
conflicts in which we live, the ones that are coming
and the ones we fail to recognize.
That is why we must be grateful for the labour
and creativity of so many scholars who have given us
the words to describe, understand and respond to the

S/PV.5264

world of conflicts. Without academia we would not use
such words as “development” or “genocide” the way
we do today. Even the word “prevention” would not be
in our vocabulary as it currently is. So I am sure that
all in this Chamber are grateful, as I am, to those giants
who gave us the International Convention for the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Charter of the United Nations. Many of them were
academics, and dedicated to the human family.
They came from all backgrounds and belief
systems, for indeed conflicts are a common human
experience. All conflict resolution literature is in
agreement that conflicts are a part of life, along with
disagreements, differences and distances. Conflicts are
most commonly solved without resort to violence;
actually, most of the time the use of violence
exacerbates them.
The second contribution of academia is thus the
study of ways in which conflicts have been
constructively addressed without resorting to violence.
This research is not an empty promise; rather it is
recognition that all of us as humans have been fighting
against each other and solving conflicts since time
immemorial. All human societies have dealt with the
fundamental issue of conflict prevention and
resolution. All human societies have developed,
together with their own language, ways to describe and
address conflict constructively.
We must be simultaneously proud and ashamed of
this legacy, because on the one hand no human society
has ever been completely deprived of peace and on the
other hand no human society is ever free from the
threat of impending violence and destruction.
Academic centres are taking this legacy seriously,
incorporating it into the experimentation that is needed
to address the impending challenges of the moment.
The role of academics today, as interpreted by a
centre of higher learning such as the Center for
International Conflict Resolution, is to keep looking
for what is still not apparent and to give a name to
violence and peace in a way that is attentive to the
challenges of the moment, intelligent in its approach,
rational in its methods and responsible in its
prescriptions. It is a contribution of understanding and
experimentation.
An example comes to mind, such as the one
advanced by Professor Su Hao, a colleague at the

Foreign Affairs University in Beijing, who is working
on conflict prevention in a regional context, or by our
colleagues at the Swiss Peace Foundation, who are so
dedicated to the Early Recognition of Tension and
Fact-Finding (FAST) risk profile, an experimental way
to provide early warning.
Being part of the Community of Sant’Egidio —
the only non-governmental organization cited by the
Secretary-General in his 2001 report on the prevention
of armed conflict (S/2001/574) — which I have
represented at the United Nations since 1992, I had the
good fortune of contributing to the peace process in
Mozambique. We discovered then that while all can
make war, at the same time all can make peace, civil
society included. That discovery led to a renewed
search in a spirit of thoughtful experimentalism.
Columbia University welcomed this innovative
approach, which made it possible for the university to
become a meaningful point of reference, a space of
synthesis and responsibility in the field of international
conflict resolution.
Traditionally, universities have been stronger than
other sectors of civil society. By educating the elites
and often being supported by governing forces,
universities have frequently used their autonomy to
foster a human search beyond the constraints of
institutionalized politics. Universities have been places
in which stabilitas encounters innovation.
I therefore want to recall that on 26 and 27 April
2006 the prayer for peace that was initiated by Pope
John Paul II in Assisi in 1986 will be held in another
centre of higher learning: Georgetown University in
Washington, D.C. At a time when the use of religion by
violent forces seems to be so prevalent, it is
indispensable to strengthen the synergy between people
of good will and people of learning: believers and
seekers, academics and decision makers.
I come from a country, Italy, which takes pride in
its many old universities. Names such as Bologna and
Padua are recognized everywhere in the world as
centres of higher learning. With them, a network of
centres of higher learning is now capturing the whole
globe from Baghdad to Bombay, from Beijing to
Boston. Countries must be proud of their centres of
higher learning, and we should all welcome the
wisdom of the Hadiths, authentic sayings attributed to
the prophet Muhammad, such as “He dies not who
gives life to learning”.

5

S/PV.5264

The Security Council is an extraordinary, unique
human space. I hope it will keep its openness to
academic learning. Since 1998, the Center for
International Conflict Resolution has contributed a
course on conflict prevention taught at United Nations
Headquarters for United Nations officials, diplomats
from the missions and Columbia University students.
Ingenuity will lead us to try new solutions and new
forms of dialogue and interaction. This very open
debate is proof of it.
It is my hope that through the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, which held a very
promising meeting last year on academic contributions
to peace sponsored by the University of Rome/La
Sapienza, and the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict, which held its plenary
conference here just two months ago, and other
channels, free and open communication will be
maintained among all centres of learning and the
United Nations system.
Let us keep learning together. It was beautifully
put by the old rabbis, speaking about shared learning:
O chevruta o mituta, an Aramaic expression that we
can translate as “Either together or dead”. Indeed, let
us keep learning together and stay alive together.
The President: I now give the floor to the
founder and Executive Director of the African Centre
for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes, Mr. Vasu
Gounden.
Mr. Gounden: Let me take this opportunity to
thank the President, his Permanent Mission to the
United Nations and his Government, as well as the
other members of the Security Council for giving civil
society this opportunity to present our views before
this body. Your initiative, Mr. President, is a sober
reminder of the changes taking place in international
relations.
In the report of the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations, the Chairman
of the Panel and former President of Brazil,
Mr. Fernando Henrique Cardoso, indicated that,
“The rise of civil society is indeed one of
the landmark events of our times. Global
governance is no longer the sole domain of
Governments. The growing participation and
influence of non-State actors is enhancing
democracy and reshaping multilateralism. Civil

6

society organizations are also the prime movers
of some of the most innovative initiatives to deal
with emerging global threats”. (A/58/817, p. 3)
It is in this context and with the understanding
that the complex conflicts of today require the
collective wisdom and effort of all sectors of society in
the emergence of a new form of multilateralism based
on the opening of the Charter of the United Nations —
“We the peoples” — that we the peoples — States,
civil society and the private sector — need to forge a
new partnership. That partnership must reject
distinctions based on wealth and power and on
geographic size and population. It must be based on
collective wisdom, with each partner driven by its own
comparative advantage, expertise and opportunity.
At the outset, let me indicate that we recognize
and respect that the settlement of political disputes
between States and within States is, and should remain,
the domain of nation-States. Civil society should
complement the role of nation-States and remain
outside the formal structures of the United Nations,
since its strength, legitimacy and flexibility derive
from its independence.
However, today conflicts are multifaceted and
complex in nature, and they increasingly require a
comprehensive strategy involving a multiplicity of
actors, including civil society. There are many stages to
a conflict and many dimensions to a conflict.
Depending on the complexity of the conflict all those
stages and dimensions require different actors with
different strategies and skills.
In our own case, as the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes (ACCORD), we
have met and worked with warlords in Somalia when
many States where not able to meet with them. We
have trained and prepared rebel groups in Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for negotiations,
and they will testify to the role that we have played in
empowering them to enter negotiations. We have also
assisted the Facilitator for the Inter-Congolese
Dialogue, former President Masire of Botswana, to
prepare his mediation team and advised him on
mediation process and strategy during the actual talks.
As we speak, almost 30 United Nations officials
from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are
being hosted by our institution in South Africa, for a
course for senior mission-leaders. In January 2005, we
completed
and
submitted
the
post-conflict

S/PV.5264

reconstruction framework document for the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) after
we were commissioned by NEPAD to develop and
manage a process for the development of such a
document.
These initiatives are practical examples of civil
society and governmental and intergovernmental
cooperation towards conflict prevention and the pacific
settlement of disputes.
I turn now to one of the most important
developments to come out of the United Nations
reform process: the Peacebuilding Commission. Its
introduction and purpose could not have been timelier
for a country like Burundi, which has just emerged
from conflict but faces huge challenges, has very few
resources, and is confronted with competing donor and
non-governmental organization (NGO) priorities for
assistance. The need could not be more urgent for the
centralized coordination of development efforts that
bring all actors together to work out, with the
Government of the host country and the local
population, a post-conflict reconstruction agenda and a
sustainable development agenda. However, the
Commission will be stillborn unless it can mobilize the
broadest set of relevant constituencies. To do that, it
must make itself accessible to all relevant actors at the
local, national, regional and international levels
through all the forums of the United Nations.
In the minute remaining, let me indicate that,
apart from a new partnership, the world needs a shared
consensus. All good conflict management practitioners
know that one cannot make headway in resolving a
conflict without first getting the conflicting parties to
have a shared understanding of the problems
confronting them. In building a new partnership, we
need to develop a shared consensus on the nature,
causes and manifestations of the security threats that
confront the world today. With such a shared
understanding, common solutions will follow.
In 1945, we united under this body to bring peace
to the world. Today, 60 years later, we are divided
about how to bring peace to the world. Let not future
generations say that here stood a people who presided
over a United Nations of divided nations. Let us forge
a new partnership and build a new consensus.
The President: I invite His Excellency Mr. Per
Stig Moeller, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark,
to take the floor.

Mr. Moeller (Denmark): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and for directing the attention of the Security
Council to the importance of civil society’s
involvement in conflict prevention and in the pacific
settlement of disputes. I also welcome the participation
of representatives from civil society in today’s
meeting, and I am glad to have heard what they have
said.
At the outset, I would like to fully associate
myself with the statement to be made later this
morning by the representative of the United Kingdom
on behalf of the European Union.
The approaches that we take to peacebuilding and
to conflict prevention must be similar. If we are unable
to nurture and build sustainable peace, we cannot
prevent new conflicts from breaking out or, indeed,
prevent old ones from relapsing into new violence.
Consequently, our efforts to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission are also relevant from a conflict
prevention perspective. The establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission is an inspiration of hope
for those who suffer from the effects of armed
conflicts. And it brings hope to those civil society
organizations and individuals who work tirelessly to
raise their societies out of the ashes of conflict. As
agreed at the summit, we must ensure that this new
body begins its work no later than at the end of this
year.
The role played by civil society in conflict
prevention is not only important; it is indispensable.
Allow me to mention just a few of the situations in
which we would be at a loss without civil society.
First, the sustainable, long-term solution for the
protection of human security is to address the root
causes of conflict. To tackle those causes, it is
imperative to involve local civil society. Dialogue and
cooperation with civil society is key in our efforts to
reach the overarching goal: the continued peaceful
development of democratic and pluralistic societies.
In Denmark, we have realized the pivotal role of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in conflict
prevention. In our Africa Programme for Peace, we are
contributing to the work of civil society to enforce its
important role in the prevention of local conflicts.
Danish NGOs play an active and crucial role in
Danish-funded projects throughout the world, and they
work closely with local NGOs.

7

S/PV.5264

Secondly, a basic prerequisite for conflict
prevention is early warning. In order to take timely and
sufficient steps to avoid the eruption of conflict, it is
imperative that the necessary knowledge and
information be available. Early response demands early
warning.
No one is better placed to spot the early signs of a
potential conflict than civil society. National and
international NGOs, national human rights institutes,
women’s organizations and representatives of
minorities and indigenous peoples are all examples of
civil society representatives who possess first-hand
knowledge of rising tensions in fragile societies. We
depend on members of civil society to sound the alarm,
and we should listen to them and act when necessary.
Finally, civil society often plays a crucial role as
peace facilitators and local partners for mediation
between parties in conflict. In societies torn by ethnic,
political or religious tension and distrust, the difference
between open conflict and reconciliation can be the
active involvement of civil society. Confidencebuilding between estranged parties is the foundation
for building the peace.
We have seen how the activities carried out by
NGOs often have great impact. Let me cite some
examples. In northern Uganda, Denmark supports the
activities of Save the Children, which are aimed at
creating an enabling environment for peaceful
coexistence and peacebuilding. Those activities include
peace clubs in schools, parents’ support groups to
promote conflict prevention and the dissemination of
children’s peace messages through the mass media.
Another example is mine action. A Danish NGO in
Afghanistan runs a programme in which ex-combatants
are hired to help in mine clearance. In that way, they
become peaceful breadwinners, thereby significantly
reducing the risk of their recruitment by destabilizing
elements.
Civil society cannot play the role of peace
facilitators in a vacuum. Civil society needs the
support and understanding of national Governments
and of the international community, including the
Security Council. We need to provide a secure
environment in which representatives for civil society
can operate; political encouragement and economic
support are of equal importance. Capacities for
prevention and peacebuilding must be strengthened
through further information-sharing, coordination and

8

mutual assistance between Governments and civil
society. In that regard, the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission would benefit greatly by the involvement
of civil society.
The Security Council has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, the Security Council cannot discharge those
duties in solitude. As it is true for civil society, it is
equally true for the Council that it cannot play its vital
role in a vacuum. The interdependency and the
interrelation between the actions taken by the Security
Council in New York and the role played by actors in
the field, including civil society, call for close dialogue
and cooperation.
One concrete step is to have an NGO focal point
in United Nations integrated missions. In civil-military
planning and in peacebuilding activities, civil society
should be considered a partner and a contributor. In
general, the views of civil society should be reflected
in the reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on mandated operations.
Another appropriate area is the development of
conflict prevention strategies. The Council should
explore new ways in which to establish a cooperative
framework with civil society. We could — as the
presidency has done today — take greater advantage of
the opportunity to invite representatives of civil society
to our open meetings, or we could hold traditional
informal meetings with NGOs.
In conclusion, dialogue, information-sharing and
cooperation between Member States and civil society
in New York and, most important, in the field
constitute important elements in ensuring that peace
and prosperity are not just an aspiration but a fact.
The President: I invite His Excellency
Mr. Teodor Baconschi, State Secretary for Global
Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Romania, to
take the floor.
Mr. Baconschi (Romania): My delegation is
gratified by your presence, Sir, in the chair of the
Security Council. I must say that the Council summit
held recently under the Philippines presidency made a
powerful impression on us. I wish to congratulate you
on arranging a timely — and, I trust, rewarding —
discussion on the potential of civil society, in particular
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), to contribute
effectively to United Nations action aimed at averting

S/PV.5264

conflict or settling disputes by peaceful means in
accordance with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter. That is a rich topic, as it relates to the role of
important partners in the peace efforts of the United
Nations and of its Security Council. I shall
nevertheless be brief, since Romania associates itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the United Kingdom on behalf of the European
Union.
The international community’s approach to
conflict prevention and the settlement of disputes
continues to evolve in response to the changing nature
of threats to peace and security in today’s world. In
past years, the United Nations system has expanded its
capacity for the early detection of potentially
dangerous situations, for preventing the escalation of
tensions and to help parties to manage and eventually
settle peacefully their disputes. However, even when
the analytical and planning capacities of the
Organization are displayed at their finest, realities on
the ground make clear that there is a continuous
demand to further identify and put together additional
resources.
Our debate today is therefore more than welcome
as a means of fostering reflection on enhancing the
capacity, knowledge, resources and tools of the United
Nations to ensure better outcomes in conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Having acknowledged and taken stock of the evergrowing contribution of civil society in these
processes, we should explore further avenues and
modalities for its deeper involvement. The added value
provided by the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society organizations
in the work of the United Nations has been repeatedly
emphasized in this very Chamber, where we
recognized that these components of civil society are
highly instrumental in making a difference at
practically all stages of a conflict and in ensuring that
whatever political solutions emerge to end a conflict
are durable and sustainable.
Such organizations are actively involved in
conflict prevention, based on a series of assets such as
firsthand knowledge of the situation on the ground and
unhindered contacts with the relevant players. As a
result, in certain cases, NGOs and civil society
organizations are more effective in sensing emerging
crises, thus becoming invaluable resources for a

dedicated early warning system for international
agencies acting in the field.
In other cases, such organizations are able to
produce the most accurate assessment of the danger of
escalation in a specific dispute, which is always a
crucial element in halting a conflict before it actually
breaks
out.
Moreover,
unlike
international
involvement, which is occasional, temporary and
fragmented, the continued presence of civil society
creates opportunities to build long-term relationships,
thus creating a sense of trust among the parties to a
dispute as well as opening up more reliable and
sustainable channels for dialogue. The longevity of
their presence and their subsequently enhanced
credibility provide civil society organizations with a
superior capacity to access and influence actors
involved in the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
they allow them to explore innovative ways and means
to assist in the process. Finally, since most of today’s
conflicts have at their core ethnic or religious issues,
neutral actors such as multi-ethnic or inter-faith-based
civil society organizations are in a privileged position
to overcome sectarian divisions and foster better
understanding among the religious and ethnic
components of society.
Given the potential represented by the knowledge
and intuitive understanding of civil society actors,
emphasis should be placed on promoting an improved
and upgraded cooperation between the United Nations
system and civil society organizations, to make
activities associated with conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes more sustainable and
cost-effective. Conflict prevention encompasses
modalities such as participation, empowerment and
national ownership, enabling a timely reaction before a
dispute reaches the conflict stage. The international
community must help to foster home-grown political
processes in which civil society shares ownership of
prevention processes with the international community
and local governmental actors.
Dialogue among civil society actors is to be
encouraged and facilitated to allow for healthy debate,
nurture transformations, build consensus and translate
policy into practice. In countries where communities
are distrustful of one another or where conflict has
deeply eroded societal structures, there is a particularly
great need to explore all effective models for
participatory conflict prevention
and
dispute
settlement, including, as appropriate, enhanced

9

S/PV.5264

cooperation between civil society organizations and the
United Nations system and its relevant mechanisms
and partners.
In that context, I would like to highlight the role
of the media. By giving voice and visibility to all
people — including and especially the poor, the
marginalized and members of minority groups — the
media are well placed to help remedy inequalities,
corruption, ethnic tensions and the human rights abuses
that form the root causes of so many conflicts. Since
the worldwide toll of journalists and critical support
staff killed covering the story of a conflict or a postconflict situation has been spiralling, we should also
contemplate more thoroughly the need to promote and
ensure respect for freedom of expression and opinion,
as well as the basic principles of international
humanitarian law.
We witnessed on Friday the adoption of the
outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly of September 2005. We
commend the recognition of the positive contribution
of
civil
society,
including
non-governmental
organizations, in the promotion and implementation of
development and human rights programmes, which
ultimately are key factors in the prevention of
conflicts, and of the importance of their continued
engagement with Governments, the United Nations and
other international organizations.
The contribution of civil society to conflict
prevention and management is also an important
“lessons learned” chapter from the developing story of
enhancing the relationship of the United Nations with
regional organizations. Such an understanding of
multilateralism is aimed at creating more appropriate
avenues and mechanisms for cooperation with a view
to the better implementation of our common tasks.
Mr. Valinakis (Greece): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you for having convened this meeting on a
most important and timely issue. I wish also to thank
you for having provided us with a useful concept
paper. Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union.
The prevention of violent conflicts lies at the
heart of the United Nations mandate. In the past few
years, many efforts have been made to increase the
effectiveness of the Organization in this field and to

10

move from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention.
The report of the Secretary-General of 2001
entitled “Prevention of armed conflict” gives conflict
prevention a prominent place in the agenda of the
United Nations and emphasizes its importance for the
establishment of lasting peace and security. The same
report and Security Council resolution 1366 (2001)
clearly recognize that non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and civil society play an important supporting
role in national efforts for conflict prevention.
We have also witnessed increasing activity on the
part of the Security Council in the field of conflict
prevention and closer interaction in this regard with
civil society. This has been manifested in its various
fact-finding and confidence-building missions to areas
of potential armed conflict. The Council also receives
and considers a significant number of reports
containing information provided by NGOs concerning
situations that threaten the political stability and
prosperity of States.
Important conferences have also been held
recently, and the recommendations that have been
made could move the process significantly forward.
The prevention of conflicts is a difficult and
complex activity that requires the involvement of many
actors. Today the task of conflict prevention lies not
only with national Governments and the United
Nations but also with civil society, such as NGOs, the
private sector and development agencies.
There has been a general realization that most of
today’s internal conflicts are caused mainly by weak
governance, the absence of democratic institutions,
large-scale abuses of human rights, lack of socioeconomic
development,
systematic
ethnic
discrimination, the previous history of the conflict and
its regional context.
In our view, civil society can play a crucial role
in the prevention of conflicts by providing independent
analysis of a particular situation, by addressing the root
causes of conflicts at an early stage, by educating
people on the horrors of war and by raising public
awareness on those issues and thus mobilizing political
will and action. Moreover, international and local
NGOs, due to their flexibility, outreach and
commitment, can respond rapidly to early signs of
tensions that have the potential to escalate into a

S/PV.5264

violent conflict. NGOs can also provide a continuous
platform for debate and a tool for action and hence
secure greater responsiveness and accountability.
Civil society and NGOs complement the efforts
of the United Nations. Indeed, in many of today’s
multifunctional peacekeeping operations, civilian and
military tools are mutually reinforcing and play an
important role in promoting lasting peace and
development. In the post-conflict phase, civil society is
engaged in numerous activities, such as promoting
human rights and the rule of law, strengthening
democratization,
consolidating
peace
and
reconciliation, disarming and reintegrating excombatants and providing civic education, training and
research.
Although civil society and NGOs can play a vital
role in the democratic process and in consolidating
durable peace and stability, still their capacity, and
particularly that of local actors, is weak. In our view,
that capacity should be further built and developed. In
that respect, closer and better coordination and
cooperation with the United Nations and with regional
and subregional organizations is needed.
The United Nations should also better integrate
the views and insights of those important stakeholders
into its policy measures on conflict prevention. The
Security Council, in particular, should be aware of
those views through the reports it receives on potential
conflict situations. The Council should also take into
consideration the views of local actors when visiting
areas of potential conflict. The Arria formula meetings
are particularly useful tools since they provide the
Security Council with independent information
concerning situations that could potentially destabilize
a country. Those meetings have mobilized the opinions
of Council members on the need for preventive action.
We strongly support their continuation in the future.
In conclusion, I would like to stress my country’s
full support for all the conflict prevention activities of
this Organization. We believe, however, that the future
strategies of the United Nations in this area should
involve mostly local actors and should build their
capacity to prevent and resolve local conflicts. Durable
peace can be established only if the needs of the people
concerned are adequately addressed and their views
and voice have been heard.
The President: I invite His Excellency
Mr. Abdulkader Shareef, Deputy Minister for Foreign

Affairs and International Cooperation of the United
Republic of Tanzania to take the floor.
Mr. Shareef (United Republic of Tanzania): I
wish to thank the Secretary of State of the Philippines
for convening this important session. I wish also to
thank Mr. Paul van Tongeren, Mr. Andrea Bartoli and
Mr. Vasu Gounden for their insightful presentations.
We find the topic of today’s debate useful and
relevant to that of last week’s Security Council summit.
Whereas the summit focused on the role of States and
intergovernmental institutions in preventing and
resolving conflicts, today’s topic on the role of civil
society in the same endeavour is a complementary
imperative.
In today’s conflicts and wars and in this era of
terrorism the major victims are ordinary men, women
and children. Civil society should, therefore, have a
high stake in preventing conflicts, as they are the
immediate beneficiaries of peace and security in every
society. The role and effectiveness of civil society in
preventing conflicts and promoting peace and security
are enhanced by the extent to which civil liberties are
enjoyed in that society: by permitting freedom of
expression and association in shaping and influencing
opinion and allowing for participation in political
action on issues of conflict, peace and security at both
the national and international levels.
The primary focus for action to prevent conflicts
in a democratic society should be national parliaments.
Citizens and their organizations are the constituencies
to whom legislators are accountable. Civil society —
as individuals or community organizations, with the
help of the media — is strategically placed to influence
the policies and decisions on conflicts and peace and to
persuade or compel Governments to take timely and
appropriate action to avert impending conflicts. To that
extent, Governments should be partners with civil
society in preventing conflicts.
Civil society organizations — especially
institutions such as universities, research centres, the
media and human rights groups — should be in the
forefront in the early detection of systemic stresses and
strains on society that could be the root causes of
violent conflicts. Early warnings of impending crises
have often come from civil society. The same
organizations should generate awareness and spur early
political
action
nationally,
regionally
and
internationally to defuse and resolve problems which

11

S/PV.5264

could develop into violent conflicts and wars. That role
requires
organization,
capacity-building
and
networking among civil society organizations with
different mandates.
Civil
society
organizations
have
been
instrumental in reducing or resolving conflicts between
groups and nations by maintaining informal lines of
communication to promote understanding. They have
been useful in decreasing tension, anger, fear and
misperceptions between conflicting parties. They have
also been able to facilitate and prepare the groundwork
for more formal negotiations. They should be
encouraged to use their specialized knowledge,
experience and resources in assisting conflicting
parties to resolve their differences and foster
reconciliation. Civil society organizations have the
advantage of informality and are less politically
constrained from taking action in a critical manner, but
they should also remain constructive and responsible.
At the same time, we should be on our guard and
not hesitate to take preventive action against sections
of civil society that deliberately engage in propagating,
inciting and fuelling conflicts. Only last week we were
compelled to take action in a case of incitement to
terrorism. Our memories of the virulent propaganda of
Radio Mille Collines, which spread the ideology of
genocide in Rwanda, are still fresh, and we are striving
to moderate inflammatory journalism in sections of the
media in Côte d’Ivoire to rescue the peace process
there.
While acknowledging the positive contribution of
civil society organizations in preventing and resolving
conflicts, our practical experience in the Great Lakes
region of Africa has taught us that proximity matters
when it comes to preventive action. Our specific
recommendation, then, is that civil society
organizations near conflict areas should play a
proactive role and seize the initiative to move
Governments to take action to prevent and resolve
conflicts. Other non-governmental organizations
outside the neighbourhood of the conflict should play a
complementary role.
Encouraged by Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), the role of women’s organizations in conflict
resolution in the Great Lakes region has been effective
and encouraging. Women’s organizations are currently
playing an active role in preparing for the next Great
Lakes region summit in Nairobi later this year.

12

Let me conclude by emphasizing the importance
of partnerships in conflict prevention and resolution.
We need to build an effective partnership between
States and civil society organizations so that they can
be twin pillars of conflict prevention and resolution
efforts. We should also establish a firm collaborative
partnership between States, civil society, regional
organizations and the United Nations system that can
help create a more peaceful world.
Finally, let us create meaningful partnerships
between national, regional and international civil
society organizations, including with the United
Nations, at all levels. The Security Council will be able
to make more and better informed decisions with input
from civil society, as has been aptly demonstrated
under the Arrias formula relationships.
The President: I invite His Excellency Mr.
Eduard Kukan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Slovak Republic, to take the floor.
Mr. Kukan (Slovak Republic): Slovakia
appreciates and commends the efforts of the
Philippines presidency of the Security Council, which
took the initiative for our thematic debate today. We
feel very strongly about the role played by nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in conflict
prevention and would like to add several observations
in our national capacity and from our own experience.
We find it very reasonable and worthwhile that
the Security Council would like to lend a helping hand
in the area of prevention and conflict resolution to the
Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed
Conflict, an integrated, global programme for research,
consultation and discussion, as well as to thousands of
small activists on the ground at locations of emerging
or full-on conflicts. For the same reason, it is necessary
that we support the conclusions of a number of events
jointly organized by the United Nations Department of
Public Information and the NGOs.
The citizens of Central Europe had an
opportunity to experience the strength of civil society
in the 1990’s. Civil society offered them a peaceful
road to the resolution of inter-ethnic issues lingering
from the past and served as a catalyst for political
change. In Slovakia, we have very fresh memories of
that period, when our country was overlooked at the
corner of the international democratic community for
our own political reasons. The period was a cradle of
cooperation between forces oriented towards

S/PV.5264

democracy and like-minded civil society entities. Due
to the aforementioned specific track, Slovak NGOs
gained an assortment of practical knowledge, skills and
experience, which can be seen as very specific civil
society know-how.
Nowadays, the cooperation between Slovak
diplomacy and NGOs is broadly used in several fields,
such as domestic and foreign affairs, official
development assistance and democratization processes
in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. Such
NGO engagement helps to avoid the risk of conflict
and possible destabilization of the region as a whole.
The birth of this systematic cooperation dates
back to the late 1990’s. It was also the time when the
bloodiest conflict in Europe since the Second World
War, which took place in the former Yugoslavia, was
coming to an end. In my country, we initiated the socalled Bratislava process, which involved, alongside
democratic representatives from the former Yugoslavia,
various Slovak NGO entities and those from the former
Yugoslavia. The Bratislava process contributed its own
part to peaceful political change in Belgrade and the
fall of the Slobodan Milosevic regime.
In the last few years, civil society organizations
in Central and Eastern Europe undoubtedly have
demonstrated their capacity for tolerant and peaceful
means of conflict prevention. I can well recall the
respect for non-violence shown by youth movements
and a variety of Ukrainian NGOs during the recent socalled Orange Revolution.
Finally, facing the threats and challenges of the
twenty-first century, we believe that the United Nations
needs to be able to intervene to avert regional and local
conflicts more effectively. In order to enable the
Organization to really do so, we are convinced that it
might be of tremendous benefit for it to maintain a
constant and effective dialogue with the NGO sector, a
sector that would operate courageously at centres of
conflict. This applies especially to prevention and postconflict periods, because, during a conflict, NGO
operations are objectively limited, perhaps with the
exception of deliveries of humanitarian aid.
Therefore, let us follow the slogan, “cooperation
is appreciated”, also speaking of the contribution of
NGOs to conflict prevention. Let us combine the same
goals and diverse tools, and we can profit more for the
benefit of us all.

The President: I invite His Excellency Mr. Oscar
Maúrtua de Romaña, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Peru, to take the floor.
Mr. Maúrtua (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. Minister for Foreign
Affairs, for the manner in which the Philippines is
carrying out its role as President of the Security
Council, which involves this initiative to discuss the
role of civil society in conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
In the last decade, the nature of conflict has
varied substantially. We are no longer dealing with
conflicts between nation-States, but rather with armed
domestic conflicts within States. Since the fall of the
Berlin Wall, more than 33 civilian conflicts have
started or have been reactivated, leaving close to 5
million dead, 17 million refugees and serious
humanitarian crises. Today, several of these domestic
armed conflicts occupy a large part of this Council’s
agenda and have warranted the deployment of complex
peacekeeping operations.
For Peru, the role of civil society — that is,
organized non-governmental social actors such as
NGOs, unions, business associations, academic groups,
student and religious groups, among others — is
fundamental in both the prevention of domestic armed
conflict and their contribution towards peacemaking
and national reconstruction efforts. The need to have a
civil society whose primary role is the prevention of
armed conflict is undeniable.
Since in this debate we are confining ourselves to
the prevention of conflict and the role of civil society, I
will focus my comments on three subjects: first, the
conditions that lead to such conflicts; secondly, the
action of civil society in the prevention of conflict; and
finally, phenomena that threaten collective security.
As has been recalled at the current High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly, security,
development and respect for human rights converge in
the prevention of conflicts — that is to say, it is the
precarious levels of life and the exclusion affecting a
great part of the population, particularly in the
countries with the lowest indices of human
development, that become a threat to security and
where the majority of conflicts that we face today have
their origin. Therefore, it is no coincidence that the
majority of these conflicts take place in the African
continent.

13

S/PV.5264

This is why we regard as very positive Council
resolution 1625 (2005) of 14 September, which
reaffirms the need to adopt a strategy for the
prevention of conflicts that takes into account the basic
causes of these conflicts and that pays special attention
to building the preventive capabilities required in
Africa.
Work on development policies, including
building their own national capacities, is the primary
preventive action those countries require. Thus, we
need a new multilateral partnership for collective peace
and security that tackles the various adverse factors
that developing countries face, such as education,
health, trade, investment, technology and foreign debt,
among many others.
There are various ways civil society can and
should contribute to conflict prevention, in relation to
situations at risk of turning violent and to the
transformation of the conditions that create those
situations.
Civil society has the duty to warn of situations
where political violence is imminent. It must fight for
public freedoms, the freedom of expression and the
construction of legitimate and democratic institutions
that ensure the rule of law and good governance. It
must keep watch on transparency in the public
administration’s use of resources, which are often
scarce. It must be uncompromising with respect to
corruption and be an active agent for denouncing the
illegal traffic of small arms and light weapons and
transnational organized crime.
Civil society must also be an agent of alternatives
for scientific and technological development in order to
optimize the management of natural resources. It must
support preventive diplomacy and mediation, including
through the peaceful settlement of conflicts, when it is
entrusted with those tasks. Through the action of local
and international non-governmental organizations, civil
society also has an active role to play in helping to
mobilize the international community’s resources and
to guide the best use of international cooperation,
among other tasks.
In the end, when civil society does not contribute
to conflict prevention, when its capacities are not
called on or when its voice is silenced, it can end up
caught in the problem of confrontation and polarization
that generates violence, while the social fabric that it
represents and in which it functions is torn apart. When

14

there is no space in which civil society can act, the risk
of an escalation of violence grows exponentially. That
is why the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
future Peacebuilding Commission, maintains contact
with civil society, not only for settling conflicts and
laying the foundations for the national reconstruction
of failed States but also for the prevention of such
conflicts.
Thus, a number of practical mechanisms are
needed so that those bodies remain informed of the
situation of civil society through other actors, rather
than exclusively through dialogue with government.
Those contacts could include prestigious NGOs such as
Doctors without Borders, Care International and
Amnesty International and, above all, contacts with
national civil society, with local NGOs that are part of
the society in which a violent conflict is emerging.
Regrettably, in the outcome document of the
High-level Plenary Meeting, the focus on prevention is
limited. It is therefore appropriate to encourage the
mobilization of civil society in the prevention of
conflicts. It is not only a question of avoiding violent
conflicts
that
exacerbate
poverty
and
underdevelopment, displace millions of people, destroy
property and infrastructure and leave social scars that
are very difficult to heal. It is more a human and, of
course, economic issue. It is a question of providing
resources for the development of societies before those
funds later have to be spent on costly military
operations and colossal reconstruction efforts, which
are not necessarily successful.
Finally, I want to refer to potential conflict areas
that some sectors of civil society have repeatedly
brought to the attention of States. One such area is
environmental degradation, which has exacerbated the
destructive potential of natural disasters and, in some
cases, has even provoked such disasters. Another is
that of limited resources such as water. Peru, a highly
diverse country whose topography encompasses the
ocean, an arid coast, the Andes and the Amazon, is
very concerned about such conclusions, which are
based on studies that need to be expanded and
furthered rather than hidden or watered down.
The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565) considered that
environmental degradation and the destructive nature
of natural disasters constitute a threat to global

S/PV.5264

security. Therefore, with the support of civil society,
we must continue to carry out a strategic, shared vision
of sustainable development whose three dimensions —
economic, social and environmental — are given
adequate consideration.
Peru aspires to join once again in the work of the
Security Council next January, after more than two
decades. If that comes to be, Peru will make the
problems I have mentioned and the important role of
civil society relevant elements in its approach to the
complex situations on the agenda of this noble Council.
The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Micheline Calmy-Rey, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Switzerland.
Mrs. Calmy-Rey (Switzerland) (spoke in
French): First, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. Switzerland, as co-chair of the
Group of Friends on conflict prevention, has a special
interest in this important topic.
Civil society, whether at the local or international
level, is well placed to send out early-warning signals
of emerging crises; analyse the social and cultural roots
of a conflict; broaden the range of issues to be
addressed in a peace agreement in order to better
reflect the full scope of public concerns; gain access to
militant movements when official actors encounter
practical or political difficulties; prevent, address and
resolve disputes at the community level; promote
respect for international human rights and
humanitarian standards by all State and non-State
parties; and promote social and political reconciliation
in the aftermath of violence.
The involvement of civil society is useful not
only in elaborating a peace agreement; it also offers a
way to ensure an agreement’s success. Peace
settlements enjoy greater legitimacy and sustainability
if they are anchored in societies and reflect the needs
of the various sectors of the population.
In that context, two important questions need to
be asked. First, at the institutional level, how can
cooperation between the Security Council and civil
society organizations be strengthened? Secondly, at the
policy level, how can civil society’s contributions in
peace-settlement and peacebuilding efforts be better
integrated?
With respect to the institutional level, I strongly
believe that the creation of a Peacebuilding

Commission, to which Member States have just agreed,
is a valuable opportunity to promote civil society’s
involvement in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts. Switzerland proposes the inclusion of the
principal institutional actors of the United Nations in
the deliberations of the Commission. I am thinking in
particular of the chair of the United Nations
Development Group, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and/or the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Those three institutions already
have solid experience in cooperation with civil society.
Furthermore, we propose that the Peacebuilding
Commission directly involve representatives of civil
society, academic institutions and the private sector
when that is useful. Thus, rather than creating
additional institutional frameworks for cooperation
with civil society, we should elaborate a mandate for
the Peacebuilding Commission that allows for the
involvement of all relevant actors, including civil
society.
In a more general context, I believe it is essential
for the Security Council to have a genuine partnership
with the Economic and Social Council, which
possesses complementary expertise and privileged
links with civil society. The new Peacebuilding
Commission could provide a framework for
strengthening such cooperation between the Council
and the Economic and Social Council.
At the policy level, Switzerland welcomes the
fact that the Security Council has been giving
increased attention in recent years to reconciliation and
post-conflict reconstruction. I should like to encourage
the Council to continue to explore how civil society
can better contribute to those efforts. This could be
done, for example, by systematically examining the
past and the potential role of civil society in peace
processes when designing peace operations and
systematically applying the principles of resolution
1325 (2000) when assessing peace missions.
Women and girls are particularly affected by
armed conflict. I therefore attach the greatest
importance to the equal participation of women in
peace and reconstruction processes. Sustainable peace
agreements can be reached only if the entire population
has a voice in shaping them. Resolution 1325 (2000)
represents a milestone in that direction, and we must
continue our efforts to translate it into action, in
particular by supporting women’s organizations
working in the field in the service of peace.

15

S/PV.5264

The United Nations must serve as an example in
involving civil society in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. The partnerships that already exist
between the United Nations and independent
institutions can provide a useful means of developing
such civil society participation. Switzerland supports a
number of institutions that have strong links with the
United Nations, such as the Geneva International
Centre for Humanitarian Demining; the Geneva Centre
for Security Policy; the Centre for Democratic Control
of Armed Forces; the Harvard Program on
Humanitarian Policies and Conflict Research; the
Small Arms Survey; and the Geneva-based War-torn
Society Project International.
My country also actively supports civilian
initiatives to promote peace, such as the Geneva
Initiative, which had its origin in Israeli and Palestinian
civil societies. That initiative, which is fully in line
with and complementary to the third phase of the
Quartet’s road map, proposes a comprehensive and
realistic model for a permanent agreement that takes
into account the vital interests and aspirations of both
Israelis and Palestinians.
In conclusion, I should like to recall that
Switzerland has extensive experience in cooperating
with civil society organizations. We intend to continue
our efforts to strengthen the participation of civil
society in conflict prevention and settlement, as well as
in peacebuilding.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and the 12 countries that have aligned themselves
with this statement.
May I first thank you, Mr. President, for having
arranged this debate. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh and our
colleagues from civil society, Mr. Van Tongeren,
Mr. Bartoli and Mr. Gounden, for the insights that they
have bought to our discussion. It is good that we
should hear those statements before contributing
ourselves.
The European Union has cause to be grateful for
the role that civil society has played over the past two
decades in contributing to the prevention of violent
conflict and peacebuilding throughout the world,
including within the European Union’s own
neighbourhood. We recognize the contribution that
civil society makes to strengthening democracy and

16

promoting human rights, both within individual nations
and at the global level. Civil society plays an essential
role in all phases of the conflict cycle.
Let us be frank: there are different views among
members of the Council on the legitimacy of some
civil society organizations and on the role that such
organizations should be allowed to play in comparison
with that played by Governments. The European Union
believes that all United Nations Member States should
accept the legitimate right of civil society to express
views, make recommendations and express concerns
and disagreements with Governments, even though at
times that may be a difficult process. It is through such
genuine dialogue that democracy is strengthened and
that Governments are better able to meet the needs of
their people.
We should ensure — post-summit — that we all
do more to prevent conflict. In that respect, the United
Nations itself needs to be much more active.
Governments and civil society must work closely
together to reduce the risks of violent conflict breaking
out. International and regional organizations must also
engage purposefully with civil society if they are to be
effective in addressing and managing conflict. With
that objective in mind, the EU strongly supports many
of the recommendations of the Cardoso report on
United Nations-civil society relations, published one
year ago.
Local civil society’s understanding of points of
tension can give useful early-warning indicators. For
example, civil society can draw attention to violations
of human rights, which can often be an early indication
of incipient conflict. The EU believes that the new
Human Rights Council should have clear means for
interaction with civil society and that the High
Commissioner for Human Rights should continue to
engage with civil society regularly.
Interaction between civil society and the
international community is vital if we are to carry out
our responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity — as recognized, for the first time, at
last week’s summit. Civil society can also help reduce
hostility and begin the rebuilding of trust between
different groups that might otherwise resort to fighting.
In particular, the role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, as we have just heard, is vital in

S/PV.5264

rebuilding the peace after conflict, just as resolution
1325 (2000) underlined.

with local civil society, as Council missions to Africa
have done in the past two years.

For its part, the EU has given considerable
resources to supporting civil society in its role in
preventing and resolving conflict and in post-conflict
peacebuilding. In the Sudan, the European Centre for
Development Policy Management, supported by the
international
non-governmental
organization,
Saferworld, has facilitated capacity-building for civil
society in both political dialogue and development
programming. In Nepal over the past three years, the
European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights
has undertaken microprojects on empowerment and
human rights education.

The Security Council should also continue, in our
view, discussions with civil society here in New York.
The Arria formula meetings are extremely useful for
that purpose. Those meetings bring the Council reliable
and independent information about the situation on the
ground in a particular area of tension, and often new
ideas for possible resolutions.

The EU has had a long-term confidence-building
programme in Georgia, aimed at building capacity
among a range of peacebuilding non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). We also work closely with
many international and national NGOs in developing
strategies on conflict prevention and work on what to
do about fragile States.
I would like to say a few words about the first
Global Conference on the Role of Civil Society in the
Prevention of Armed Conflict and Peacebuilding, about
which Mr. Van Tongeren has already spoken to us. The
Conference set out principles for the engagement of
civil society in this field and agreed a wide-ranging
agenda for action. We particularly agree with the
Conference
recommendation
for
a
structural
mechanism for consultation with civil society and the
new Peacebuilding Commission. Like the three
representatives of civil society and many other
speakers, the European Union believes that proper
interaction between civil society and the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission will better permit the
Commission to do its work. We need to profit from the
experience and views of those working on the front
line. We also agree that the Peacebuilding Commission
might, in due course, play its own part in supporting
States, at their request, when they are on the verge of
lapsing or relapsing into conflict.
The paper circulated as food for thought for this
meeting raised the question of collaboration between
the Security Council and civil society in the
development of conflict-prevention strategies.
When Security Council missions visit regions at
risk of conflict, they should take time for meetings

In addition to the Arria meetings, the Council
should also consider inviting representatives from civil
society to address it during its debates. We should do
that more frequently.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
European Union’s interest in seeing the dialogue
between the Security Council and civil society
strengthened. Let us be brave enough to listen to points
of view from across the spectrum, because through this
dialogue we will make better policies and have greater
opportunities to ensure that those policies become
effective. We all share an interest in the prevention of
conflict, and civil society can and does make a vital
contribution. We should recognize it and benefit from
it.
Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation thanks your country for
having organized this public debate, which allows us to
reflect further on conflict prevention, following the
adoption of resolution 1625 (2005) on this question at
the Security Council summit held on 14 September
2005. We listened with genuine interest to the
contributions of the representatives of civil society on
its role, and we express our deepest appreciation to
them.
The emergence of civil society at the both the
national and the international levels as an autonomous
actor and as a force of change results from a
remarkable awakening of the governed, and from
progress in communications technology. This
phenomenon is one of the essential characteristics of
globalization. Organized society is hardly a recent
phenomenon. As long ago as the nineteenth century,
Tocqueville hailed the movement of associations in
American society as reflecting citizen participation
which could generate social progress. But never before
in human history has civil society asserted itself so
ambitiously to participate in decision-making in the

17

S/PV.5264

public sphere, in local communities, in national life
and in international life.
While public power as represented by the State
embodies the exercise of State authority, and leads to a
given reality, civil society, for its part, is the seat of the
moral conscience and the place where the aspirations
and expectations of the governed are voiced. Civil
society is a driving force for public protest and even an
additional actor, although its purpose is in no way to
supplant the State’s governing function. It aims to
contribute to the monitoring of the Government sphere
and give legitimacy to its actions. When these
functions are well understood on all sides, there can be
at least a relationship of tolerance, but also one of
mutual benefit and even of partnership, which makes it
possible to develop a synergy that benefits society as a
whole.
Civil society has real potential in shaping the
public sphere and in acting as a social intermediary,
and thus in the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
prevention of violent conflicts. The complexity of
problems and challenges related to preserving State
stability and to the promotion of worldwide sustainable
development requires a participatory national and
international mobilization. The role of civil society is
considerable in this. An effective conflict prevention
strategy requires the active involvement of civil society
in order to make best use of the comparative
advantages of civil society. The Constitive Act of the
African Union rightly emphasizes the need to establish
a partnership between Governments and all segments
of civil society.
Thanks to its involvement in society and its
retention of an identity distinct from that of the State
apparatus, civil society can contribute to early warning
mechanisms. This function has become particularly
well developed in recent years, where civil society has
shown its capacity to organize the collection, analysis
and assessment of first-hand information on underlying
trends of national communities, which allows for the
identification of sources of potential tension and latent
conflicts that could escalate. The West African
Network for Peacebuilding has been outstanding in this
field, working to strengthen regional conflict
prevention capacities, in close cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

18

Civil society can encourage well-targeted locallybased action to reduce tension in crises and crucial
phases of processes which could escalate out of
control. By way of example, let us recall the calming
and moderating role played by non-governmental
organizations in the holding of elections, through,
among other methods, civic education, education for
tolerance and election monitoring in order to
strengthen the candidates’ confidence in the legality of
the balloting, and so forth. Civil society thereby
contributes to the promotion of a culture of peace in
the countries concerned.
Civil society can contribute to mobilizing
national and international solidarity to support selfhelp efforts of disadvantaged communities and people
who are victims of social exclusion, above all when a
scarcity of income causes increased rivalry for access
to power in order to gain control of resources
mobilized by the State.
Civil society can mediate between conflicting
groups competing for power by promoting the
consolidation of democratic institutions and the
peaceful transfer of power and through its ability to
lend legitimacy to those who govern. This role was
clear in the central and recognized position of certain
moral or religious authorities in the national
conferences held in Africa in the 1990s, which served
as forum for dialogue and arbitration of national
conflict. The great majority of such forums, brought
about peaceful regime change. This was the case in my
own country.
Civil society can also help focus popular
movements seeking peaceful regime change in a crisis
of legitimacy or a breach of the national consensus,
and can provide new, visionary, honest leadership to
get a country which is in difficulty back on track.
Nonetheless, the structures of civil society can be
operated effectively only when their level of
organization and their influence on the society
concerned so allow. It is in the interest of Government
leaders throughout the world to be aware of the
advantages of promoting the emergence of a
responsible civil society at both the national and
international levels. Such awareness can help civil
society organizations acquire the means of best
fulfilling their social role and can promote their
mobilization at the international level, as well as their
access to intergovernmental decision-making centres

S/PV.5264

where disputes are settled and where development and
cooperation policies are defined at different levels.
Here they can provide their local know-how in the field
and can better determine the details of decisions made
in order to contribute to their implementation or to
provide oversight for them.
The Security Council is in the forefront of this
new awareness. This has led, over the past several
years, to the regular holding of Arria formula meetings
with civil society organizations, which now go beyond
international non-governmental organizations to
encompass local non-governmental organizations, both
in New York and, during Security Council missions, in
the field. We reiterate here our support for the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General’s
Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil
Society Relations, especially as regards the relations
between the Security Council and civil society.
We also encourage the United Nations to study
carefully the contribution of international NGOs and
civil society to our reflection on the ways and means of
ensuring better prevention and the pacific settlement of
disputes, as summarized in the final document of the
Forum held by the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict at United Nations
Headquarters from 19 to 21 July 2005. It contains very
relevant recommendations for the coordination of
consistent strategies for the promotion of conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): I am pleased to join previous
speakers in welcoming you, Mr. Secretary, and in
congratulating your delegation on convening this
meeting on such a highly relevant subject. It is indeed
an honour to have His Excellency Mr. Alberto Romulo
presiding over our session today. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh for his statement and
welcome the valuable contributions made by Mr. Paul
van Tongeren, Mr. Andrea Bartoli and Mr. Vasu
Gounden.
For decades, our concept of security has been
associated with military response. This unidimensional
approach is now, however, being redefined to integrate
root causes of conflict into the concept of security
threat. Conflict prevention is directly dependent on a
certain level of quality of life. Hunger, poverty, poor
health and lack of education, although not necessarily
the direct causes, are powerful factors in catalysing
conflict.

It is time for the United Nations, and in particular
the Security Council, to consider managing the
interconnection of various political and socioeconomic factors in conflict situations. This approach
makes explicit the need for an increasing role for civil
society in conflict prevention and the pacific settlement
of disputes.
Citizen-based associations and movements,
educational institutions, charities, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and even corporations now show
a growing understanding that they should also
contribute to common efforts towards avoiding the
scourge of conflict or preventing the relapse into
conflict after a peacekeeping operation is deployed.
Their participation is more than welcome and will be
complementary to the initiatives of Governments.
The Secretary-General’s Panel of Eminent
Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations
concluded that the constructive engagement with civil
society must promoted for the identification of global
priorities and the mobilization of resources. According
to the Panel, chaired by the former President of Brazil,
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the engagement of civil
society is not a threat to Governments, but a powerful
way to reinvigorate domestic policies for the wellbeing of populations.
When peace processes are being implemented,
the contribution of civil society is particularly relevant
to promote inclusiveness and local ownership,
including through increasing public awareness and
turning public opinion in favour of peace initiatives.
Their participation is also welcome in promoting
reconciliation and education for peace.
A word must also be said for the need to explore
synergies and complementarities among civil society,
Governments, regional organization and the United
Nations. Their efforts must be coherent and compatible
with this Organization’s legitimacy as the main global
actor in peace and security.
I should stress the need for increased attention to
the coordinated planning of our response to crisis with
the help of specific mechanisms for that purpose in the
United Nations. Accordingly, we hope the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission will be
of much help.
Available instruments must be constantly
improved and adapted to the changing needs of our

19

S/PV.5264

response to crisis. In particular, a joint reflection on the
roles and responsibilities of different actors will allow
the United Nations to devise increasingly efficient
ways to mobilize and finance civilian capabilities on a
global basis to assist countries threatened with conflict.
Meeting the complex changes of conflict
prevention and the settlement of disputes cannot be
attained without the mobilization of a wide range of
actors and the ability to make full use of the expertise,
resourcefulness and comparative advantages of all
sectors of society. Before the eruption of conflict, early
analysis, early warning and preventive diplomacy are
sorely needed. And in a post-conflict phase, structural
rebuilding and long-term reconciliation have become
as important as military response.
In dealing with an ever-changing array of
conflicts, increased attention has to be paid to all
fundamental
political,
economic,
social
and
humanitarian dimensions. The complexity and
sensitivity of the United Nations role have multiplied
our responsibilities. Our contribution to peace has been
and must continue to be enriched by the active
participation of civil society.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Mr. President, my delegation congratulates
you on having convened this debate on the role of civil
society in conflict prevention and the pacific settlement
of disputes. Also, I am grateful for the constructive and
interesting statements by the representatives by civil
society who are with us today: Mr. Paul van Tongeren,
Mr. Andrea Bartoli and Mr. Vasu Gounden. I thank
them for their statements, which will help us adapt to
what is a new framework for the United Nations and
for the Security Council.
Since the inception of the United Nations, the
way in which societies evolve has been changing. This
has been especially true in recent decades as new
actors have been incorporated into the national
decision-making processes, which had previously been
conducted exclusively by Government representatives.
As a consequence of this evolution, consultation with
civil society is today an element that cannot be avoided
in a nation’s decision-taking process.
This evolution is positive because by giving
decisions a better substantive base it contributes to
better identifying priorities and allocating resources
with a broader social consensus. This unquestionably

20

leads to greater legitimacy for a Government’s
decisions.
At the international level something similar is
happening; the participation of civil society at the
United Nations, especially in recent years, has been
constantly growing. Here, Argentina supports many of
the recommendations set out in the report of the Panel
chaired by former President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso of Brazil (A/58/817). This participation is
translated into greater influence by public opinion,
which has in turn brought greater democratization to
the international system, at the same time helping to
strengthen multilateralism.
The world today is much more interlinked than in
the past. So, unfortunately, are conflicts. It has become
evident that, by itself, a direct response to violence can
eliminate neither the underlying conflict nor its causes.
The Security Council has therefore begun to
develop new means of responding to conflict. Thus, it
has modified classic concepts regarding sanctions and
peacekeeping operations, which are now much more
complex and more multidisciplinary, and has begun to
venture into areas such as human rights, development,
election monitoring and post-conflict reconstruction.
We recall that our recent reform created the
Peacebuilding Commission to provide a solution for
armed conflicts that goes beyond the military and
extends to all areas in order to achieve lasting peace.
In the future, it is very possible that the
international community will have to move towards
acting before conflicts, not after them; that is to say,
acting preventively and proactively before conflicts
develop. It is not enough to limit peacekeeping to
rebuilding a damaged community; it is obviously better
to try to avoid a conflict before it erupts.
In that context, it is appropriate to ask ourselves:
what is the role of civil society in conflict prevention?
As we know, a conflict expresses tensions existing
within a society. The task of preventing those tensions
from being channelled into violence requires that all
sectors of a community be involved. States have the
primary responsibility to protect their populations.
However, conflict prevention goes beyond the State
level and involves all of society’s actors, not only
Governments. It does not diminish, but rather
increases, the responsibility of Governments towards
their own citizens, since it includes the obligation to
gather and take into consideration public opinion,

S/PV.5264

which naturally includes the views of civil society
organizations.
Various civil society actors have prominent roles
in that process. Public opinion is among the most
important elements, but let us recall that there are
others. In the framework of the Global Compact, for
example, private sector activity is important. It can
often contribute to post-conflict reconstruction and
should be utilized in such areas as small-arms
monitoring, ensuring compliance with Security
Council-imposed sanctions and the sustainable
exploitation and legitimate trade of natural resources.
A successful peacebuilding phase is the best
guarantee for preventing the recurrence of conflict, as
we said. Hence, the Peacebuilding Commission will be
a valuable tool for interaction with civil society,
particularly with women and communities, given their
role in creating sustainable conditions for peace and
reconciliation.
Another question that we should ask ourselves is:
what role does civil society play in the work of the
Security Council? Its influence is indisputable. How
can we fail to recognize that warnings from many nongovernmental organizations have helped the Council
more than once to prevent potential massacres? How
can we deny that inaction following such warnings has
led to tremendous catastrophes?
We believe that the Security Council should
systematically incorporate the contributions of civil
society into its analytical processes. Today, there are
various useful mechanisms for doing that. The easiest
is simple consultation. Council member States can and
should consult the opinion of members of civil society,
not only in order to hear their points of view, but also
to better evaluate their positions. A customary
mechanism is, as we know, the Arria formula, which
has already become a classic tool of the Security
Council. My country believes that more frequent use of
the formula will undoubtedly strengthen the Council’s
preventive role. Establishing more regular and more
formal cooperative frameworks for work with civil
society organizations, not only in the Security Council
but also in groups of States, will serve to strengthen
preventive work.
In conclusion, Argentina shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view that, in a world of interconnected
threats and opportunities, we must respond effectively
to current challenges and defend the cause of larger

freedom. We will be able to do that only through
extensive, profound and sustained global cooperation
among all States, which will undoubtedly include
relations of effective cooperation with civil society.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In today’s global world, the fabric of
international relations is ever more complex. The
primary actors continue to be States; however, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and other
elements of civil society are increasingly involved in
international activities. As a result, the challenges
facing the United Nations in the areas of security and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts are becoming more
complex. International peace and security are being
understood ever more broadly and, in particular, are
acquiring an intra-State dimension. I am thinking, for
example, of situations involving massive and blatant
human rights violations.
The comprehensive nature of threats to
international peace and security requires that we
develop a comprehensive strategy for conflict
prevention and for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In such a strategy, we believe, a useful role could be
played by civil society, together with the efforts of
States and organizations.
Civil society often acts as an important link
between Governments and political groups of various
kinds and helps to establish a dialogue between the
parties to a conflict. The activities of civil society are
closely intertwined with the issue of defending human
rights. In many cases, relevant non-governmental
organizations serve as indicators pointing to dangerous
trends affecting human rights that could potentially
lead to conflict situations. Therefore, those NGOs are
an element of early conflict prevention. At the same
time, we need to take into account the fact that
information coming from NGOs may not be free of
subjectivity.
Without active involvement by civil society in the
extremely important initial phases of post-conflict
peacebuilding, in which there is a particularly high risk
of relapse into conflict, it is not easy to undertake
stable, long-term efforts to restore normal public life,
to ensure the irreversibility of the peace process, to
guarantee the establishment of political institutions and
to establish or restore judicial and law-enforcement
systems. We are closely following the development of
an initiative aimed at a global partnership to prevent

21

S/PV.5264

armed conflict. We are confident that that process,
which is being promoted by components of civil
society, will provide good support for conflict
prevention efforts by States.
In conclusion, we believe that the practice that
has been established, of interaction between the
Security Council and non-governmental organizations,
is commendable and in keeping with the Council’s real
needs in the area of conflict prevention and settlement.
The Russian delegation will help to ensure that that
useful cooperation continues in its current, tested
formats.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): We appreciate the fact that
non-governmental and civil society organizations are
playing key roles in development, humanitarian relief,
human rights and other activities. World leaders
acknowledged this in their world summit outcome
document last week by welcoming
“the positive contributions of the private sector
and civil society, including non-governmental
organizations,
in
the
promotion
and
implementation of development and human rights
programmes” (General Assembly resolution 60/1,
para. 172)
and stressed the importance of their continued
engagement.
Similarly, in today’s world, non-governmental
and civil society organizations also play a significant
role in conflict prevention and resolution and in the
pacific settlement of disputes. My delegation is
therefore very grateful to the Philippines, under the
distinguished leadership of Foreign Minister Romulo,
for the timely initiative to organize this meeting. I wish
also to thank the three guest civil society groups for
their contribution to the debate.
The causes of many of today’s conflicts are often
highly complex, multifaceted and intertwined.
Consequently, their prevention and resolution requires
a comprehensive strategy and approach that effectively
address all related issues and phases of conflict
involved. To that end, the efforts at conflict prevention
and resolution undertaken by Governments and
international interlocutors such as the United Nations
can be made more effective if they are reinforced or
supplemented by the parallel efforts of civil society
organizations.

22

A variety of civil society organizations and
groups, such as traditional community organizations,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), academe,
religious organizations and other social groups have
been making their unique contributions, bringing their
individual capacities, experience and resources to bear
in preventing, mitigating or otherwise addressing
causes of conflicts.
For example, traditional organizations can
support the peace process by mediating among the
parties to a conflict. Academe can play a useful role in
promoting confidence-building measures. In the field
of humanitarian assistance and human rights,
international and national NGOs lead the way on the
ground. In efforts at poverty eradication and
sustainable development, the nurturing of the private
sector must be an important aim, given its key role in
the pursuit of sustainable growth and development.
For these reasons, it is clear that dialogue and
interaction between the Security Council and civil
society must be strengthened. In fact, as has been
mentioned by previous speakers, the Panel of Eminent
Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations,
chaired by former President Cardoso of Brazil,
recommended in its report of June 2004 that
“Security Council members should further
strengthen their dialogue with civil society, with
the support of the Secretary-General” (A/58/817,
p. 46).
We agree with that recommendation. For some
years the Security Council has been carrying on a
dialogue with groups representing civil society under
the Arria formula, which is a welcome process whose
potential should be further exploited. Furthermore, in
dealing with country- or region-specific conflicts, the
Security Council has engaged during field missions in
interaction with local civil society leaders, local and
international humanitarian NGOs and other groups that
represent, or are operational in, the affected countries
or regions.
In the same vein, we are pleased to note that a
number of encouraging activities are already in place
or envisaged for the future. For example, concerning
conflict prevention in Africa, the Security Council’s
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa has held seminars inviting the
participation of civil society organizations, and this is
commended. In the field of United Nations

S/PV.5264

peacekeeping and in other peace operations, too, the
support and cooperation of civil society is often
critically important for their success. With that in
mind, my delegation is planning to convene an
informal meeting of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping, which I chair, inviting civil
society groups to present their views and engage in
dialogue with Member States on relevant issues.
Civil society is also expected to play a key role in
promoting human security. For the first time in United
Nations history, the concept of human security is
reflected in as important a document as the 2005 world
summit outcome document, adopted last week. In
paragraph 143 of that document, world leaders stressed
“the right of people to live in freedom and dignity, free
from poverty and despair”.
Leaders recognized
“that all individuals, in particular vulnerable
people, are entitled to freedom from fear and
freedom from want, with an equal opportunity to
enjoy all their rights and fully develop their
human potential.”
The concept of human security calls for a
comprehensive effort to address the various threats that
individual persons and local communities face, and to
that end the active involvement of civil society is
critically important. The United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security was established in part precisely to
achieve that objective, namely by supporting projects
of relevant United Nations agencies that specifically
promote partnership with civil society groups, NGOs
and other local entities. The Trust Fund that Japan has
been promoting has funded 133 projects in 104
countries to date, including such projects as a local
partnership for urban poverty reduction in Cambodia,
assistance to local community learning centres in
Nepal, rebuilding of local communities in north-east
Sri Lanka, and support for the coping mechanisms of
crisis-affected Congolese households.
In conclusion, through today’s discussions, we
are again reminded of the important role played by
civil society in conflict prevention and settlement. As
we follow the outcome document and rise to the
common challenges of the day, the Security Council
must further strengthen dialogue with civil society. We
support all efforts that take us in that direction.

Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to begin by welcoming the fact that you,
Mr. Minister, are presiding over this meeting. I also
wish to thank the representatives of the three nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) for their
presentations.
The pacific settlement of disputes is one of the
important principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Conflict prevention is also what the
United Nations has been actively engaged in over the
years. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have both emphasized the importance of conflict
prevention and the pacific settlement of disputes in
relevant resolutions.
It is clear that the primary responsibility in that
regard lies with the Governments of the countries
concerned. The United Nations and the international
and regional organizations concerned also have
important roles to play. This constitutes an important
component of resolution 1366 (2001) and should be
adhered to in future endeavours related to conflict
prevention and the pacific settlement of disputes.
We have noted that in recent years some civil
society organizations have been playing an
increasingly active role in conflict prevention. They
have undertaken a great deal of useful work and played
a complementary role in the international community’s
peace efforts, as confirmed by General Assembly
resolution 57/337 and Security Council resolution 1366
(2001).
We believe that civil society should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in their participation in activities related to
conflict prevention and to the pacific settlement of
disputes and, in their work in the field, maintain
objectivity, impartiality and neutrality. This is
imperative for their work to achieve positive results.
In their participation in conflict prevention,
various civil society groups can put to good use their
expertise and experience in various fields to promote
dialogue and reconciliation. At the same time, civil
society organizations must proactively cooperate with
and assist the Governments concerned and the
international community, especially the United
Nations, and avoid encroaching on their primary roles
or causing hindrances. Of course, the United Nations
should also, in appropriate ways, listen to the views
and proposals of civil society.

23

S/PV.5264

In brief, we hope that civil society organizations
will continue to play their own constructive roles in
conflict prevention and the pacific settlement of
disputes, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like first of all to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having organized
today’s discussion. This meeting and the discussion we
are embarking upon are a clear demonstration that the
international community today values the contribution
that players other than States can make to preventing
and settling conflicts around the planet. That in itself is
a welcome development.
Over the past 15 years civil society has regained
its role, and today the companies, unions, associations,
and academic institutions — in short, the NGOs in
their
totality
—
are
receiving
deserved
acknowledgement of their place in one of the founding
missions of our Organization: the role of civil society
in conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
How does civil society play that role? First of all
by participating in discussion. When there is discussion
in a society criticizing the excesses of public
authorities, experience shows that it is much more
difficult for a Government to distance itself from the
rule of law and, more generally, from good governance.
The support provided by the international community
to strengthening civil society has therefore become one
of the most meaningful elements of the in-depth action
to prevent conflict.
But civil society does not have the same political
legitimacy as institutions. They need to gain that
legitimacy, which cannot be done overnight. I am
encouraged, however, by the progress made worldwide
in acknowledging civil society’s role, even in the most
fragile countries.
Let us not forget in this respect the role of women
and their associations in preventing crises by
minimizing their worst effects and by taking action to
remedy them. How many times have we been struck by
their contribution in the Great Lakes region — a
contribution that has been recognized by the Council
and one that France fully supports.

24

Nevertheless, we must recognize in this
discussion that, like political society, civil society can
also be acting wrongfully. The non-governmental actor
is sometimes, unfortunately, the proxy for an
unscrupulous State. At other times, though thankfully
not often, it can even be the vector of violent, criminal
action, as the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Tanzania has just underscored in his statement. And in
some cases, too, one of the monstrous manifestations
of civil society can be an actual mafia.
However, thankfully, civil society is most often a
powerful aid to peace. I was simply observing that we
should always remain vigilant. Our Council is fully
committed to the role of civil society in post-conflict
situations.
In the wake of the decision taken by our heads of
State and Government to establish a peacebuilding
commission, I would like to highlight one point: no
just, lasting peace can be established through the
efforts of the State alone. The case of Mozambique,
moreover, illustrates this point. Private actors can
contribute, as in Mozambique, in the settlement of
conflicts. The robustness of any peace agreement
depends on the extent to which the emerging society
remains active, critical, involved, independent — in
short, a civil society.
We also need to pay tribute to the efforts of
NGOs in the implementation of reconstruction
programmes, such as those in the field of demining, to
which the Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs alluded,
or in the difficult matter of reintegrating child soldiers
in wounded, weakened societies that are often torn
apart by years of conflict.
Finally, let me reiterate France’s support for the
various institutions which enable civil society to be
associated with the work of the Security Council and to
express our desire to see them strengthened and used
more often. I am thinking in particular of the Arria
formula, but also of the meetings organized during
Security Council missions. In the field of conflict
prevention, the knowledge of societies which NGOs
possess is a valuable asset, as the Council has rightly
realized.
In terms of the Arria meetings, we need to think
about making them more interactive. My delegation is
prepared to participate with NGOs in brainstorming on
this subject.

S/PV.5264

Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate the
proposal already made by France in this forum with
respect to the monitoring of civil society via annual
reports on the most vulnerable countries.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that France
welcomes the fact that the Security Council today has
publicly reaffirmed the extent to which civil society is
an essential part of any peacebuilding endeavour.
Mr. Katti (Algeria) (spoke in French): Let me
say, Mr. Secretary, how very pleased we are to see you
among us, presiding over our meeting. We wish also to
congratulate you and your delegation for having
organized this debate on a very relevant and timely
topic.
The extreme complexity of post-cold-war
conflicts has inevitably led to a radical reversal both in
what we do and how we do it. Of course, there are no
textbook cases and every situation has its own
specificities. We must, however, recognize the
conceptual and operational efforts made thus far by the
United Nations and in particular by the Security
Council in the search for effective responses to the
challenges of peace and security. In fact, sustained
attention is now being given to the issue of what might
be termed the emergence of civil society in the search
for lasting peace.
Without venturing into a legal and political
debate on the definition of civil society, this can be
considered to encompass, inter alia, religious groups,
traditional communities, councils of elders, trade
unions, human rights defence groups, women’s and
youth organizations, the media and the academic
world. Those segments of civil society have been
recognized as useful actors in conflict prevention and
in the search for peace and its consolidation.
Thus, before elaborating on those thoughts I
would like to refer to the Cardoso report (A/58/817) on
future relations between the United Nations and civil
society — a report which we believe constitutes an
ambitious platform for partnership setting out ways and
means of better integrating civil society into the overall
work of the United Nations. As members know, the
report recommends that the Security Council improve
the planning and effectiveness of Arria formula
meetings, which can further strengthen the dialogue
between the Council and civil society and which my
delegation will of course continue to encourage. It
seems to us useful, in addition, when a specific

situation requires it, for members of the Security
Council on mission in the field to meet with leaders of
local civil society.
We have also noted that civil society
organizations, in particular in Africa, participate in
peace initiatives that have been established by public
authorities
or
by
international
institutions.
Considerable work is also done by civil society in
raising awareness, in strengthening community
dialogue and in building local capacity for the pacific
settlement of disputes through the organization of
seminars, conferences and training workshops on the
culture of peace and through providing human rights
education. There are also situations where the use of
traditional conflict settlement mechanisms, for
example, working with councils of elders and religious
or tribal chiefs, has defused crises, avoiding otherwise
inevitable humanitarian tragedy. Finally, one cannot
fail to mention the joint initiatives by States and local
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for civil
harmony and national reconciliation, along with those
that are transborder in nature or that involve major
international NGOs.
Those are a few examples of participatory
conflict management that the United Nations system
and the Security Council could encourage.
Crisis prevention requires coherent and
coordinated action by all actors involved, State and
non-State alike. At the global level, the contribution of
the United Nations, and of international financial
institutions in particular, remains fundamental. From
that standpoint, we believe that the effectiveness and
sustainability of measures to tackle the root causes of
conflict necessarily depend on the continued
involvement of the various local and international
actors. Such involvement can make it possible to
strengthen State structures, the rule of law and
democracy; to create or consolidate national crisis
prevention infrastructure; to develop the economy; and,
above all, to create the conditions for the flourishing of
civil society and the strengthening of its potential to
promote peace and stability.
In fact, a greater involvement of civil society in
preventing conflict, social tension and all other
phenomena that can jeopardize civil peace and the
security of citizenry is to be encouraged. However,
respect for the law and the legal framework by
representatives of civil society remains fundamental.

25

S/PV.5264

Along the same lines, we believe that the
contribution and involvement of international actors
must strictly respect the United Nations Charter and
the underlying principles of international relations —
cooperation, respect for national sovereignty and noninterference in the internal affairs of States in
particular, but also those that guide humanitarian
action — universality, neutrality and non-selectivity.
Mrs. Patterson (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this thematic
debate. We compliment the Philippines delegation,
especially Ambassador Baja, for its conduct of the
presidency during this exceptional month. The
leadership of your delegation resulting in the adoption
of two resolutions at the summit-level meeting was
particularly noteworthy.
We welcome today’s thematic debate to discuss
supporting and advancing democratic governance to
prevent conflict, both within and across borders. In this
respect, I would like to thank our three speakers on this
topic.
If it is to be truly effective in helping States
prevent conflict, civil society — or perhaps more
appropriately, free society — must be as inclusive as
possible and allow the views of a wide range of actors
to be heard and considered. While they may often vary
widely in their degree of organization, autonomy and
influence, actors as diverse as non-governmental
organizations, community, cultural and religious
organizations, trade and professional associations,
representatives of the private sector such as individual
proprietorships,
partnerships,
corporations
and
business associations, research and academic
institutions and, especially, individuals all have roles to
play in a truly vibrant society. As the presidential
statement we will adopt today notes, only when the
widest possible range of opinion is reflected can civil
society genuinely be a force for conflict prevention and
conflict resolution.
Free societies are most valuable as marketplaces
where free ideas compete. The free exchange of ideas
is a bulwark against those who use violence or
intimidation to achieve their goals. When individuals
and groups have the freedom to express their views and
pursue their legitimate ambitions without fear of
retribution, the risk of internal conflict among them
will almost certainly diminish. Efforts to expand

26

freedom at all levels are among the most effective
ways of lessening the risk of conflict.
During his recent visit here, President Bush cohosted the launch of the United Nations Democracy
Fund. Through this Fund, democratic States will work
to help others join the democratic family. As Secretary
of State Rice said last Saturday, the path to democracy
is often long and imperfect, and it is different for every
nation. One way the United Nations can support
countries seeking self-government is to encourage the
development of free institutions.
The United States firmly believes that building
the institutions that promote and sustain freedom and
democratic ideals creates the necessary foundations for
free societies, and those foundations will prevent
conflict. Where conflict already exists, these same
principles can serve as a basis for lasting peace and
reconciliation. All free societies have certain things in
common. Democratic nations uphold the rule of law,
impose limits on the power of State and treat women
and minorities as full citizens. Such nations protect
private property, free speech and religious expression.
Democratic nations grow in strength because they
respect and reward the creative gifts of their people
and democratic nations contribute to peace and
stability because they seek national greatness in the
achievements of their citizens, not through oppression
of elements of their own citizenry or their neighbours.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Philippines.
History has shown that States are willing to do all
they can in the name of peace. They have gone to war
and sent their brave men and women into battle. They
have shown a willingness to divide their people,
compromise their territory, surrender their resources
and risk their future. They have been willing to do all
this in the name of peace. What they have not been too
willing to do was to allow individuals or groups of
individuals to participate in preventing or settling
conflict. That has been reserved to States and the
institutions they created.
For far too long States jealously guarded the
prerogative to wage peace. Many States have resisted
the entry of civil society into the realm of State-toState relations, particularly in the area of international
politics and security.

S/PV.5264

In spite of that resistance, civil society has proven
itself an important partner in preventing and settling
conflict. Those of us who laboured with civil society in
building internal and regional peace, trust and
confidence, even in the face of profound potential
conflict, can attest to this.
Last year, in June, the Philippine presidency of
the Security Council convened an open debate on the
role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Council’s 4993rd meeting marked the first extensive
discussion by the Security Council on the contribution
civil society can make in ensuring that once peace is
achieved, conflict is not allowed to return.
That meeting provided the historic opportunity —
the first time ever, I believe — for representatives of
civil society to participate in the debate of the Council.
It opened the doors even wider for civil society in the
most delicate affairs of States, in the maintenance of
peace and security of mankind — which is the primary
responsibility of this Council.
Knowing full well the role that civil society can
play in carrying out its primary responsibility, the
Security Council must nurture and encourage a
meaningful role for civil society in preventing conflict
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Today, the Philippine presidency is once again
privileged to convene an open debate on the role of
civil society. The Philippines deeply appreciates the
active participation of Member States in this open
debate. We are also grateful to the three representatives
of civil society for their views and practical
suggestions. Their contribution is most valuable, as it
is borne of experience and reality.
The complex nature of threats to international
peace and security is a theme that has received muchdeserved attention, not only during the meeting of
heads of State and Government last week, but for much
of the year, starting from the issuance of the report of
the High-level Panel in the fall of 2004. It is now
recognized that the need for a comprehensive strategy
for conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes is vast and urgent. We now realize that
Governments have real and serious limitations in being
fully responsive to the need to effectively meet these
complex threats.
My own country’s experience teaches this
important lesson. After years of violence, the

Philippines is one step away from successfully
concluding its search for peace in the southern
Philippines. We were able to achieve dramatic progress
in our peace talks with secessionists because of the key
role that our partners for peace have played. Malaysia
brokered the peace talks and led the international
monitoring team; Brunei and Libya contributed peace
monitors; other individual members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference extended
political support; and donor countries and aid agencies
increased the prospects of growth and progress as
peace dividends.
However, our search for peace would not have
reached that far if not for the active role played by civil
society. Civil society helped in making both sides
understand difficult issues, study best practices and
appreciate the value of peace. Religious civil society
groups were primary movers in building understanding
and tolerance by encouraging interfaith dialogue and
cooperation. They helped reduce the potential for abuse
of religion and faith as further fuel for conflict. It is
this particular experience that provided one of the
inspirations for my country’s interfaith initiatives here
in the United Nations. The role that civil society can
play in promoting interfaith dialogue and cooperation
was once again highlighted in last week’s historic
Interfaith Summit.
Communities, donor agencies and civil society
must be integrated in any approach to a comprehensive
strategy for conflict prevention and the pacific
settlement of disputes. All sectors involved —
Governments, communities, donor agencies and civil
society — must coordinate efforts and act on the basis
of their respective strengths to support and complement
each other in achieving the goal of preventing and
resolving disputes. The goal must be holistic and not
merely involve the limited objective of stopping
conflicts. Overall development resulting in social
stability would deflect discontented elements in a
society in conflict from resorting to violence again.
When conflicts break out within a State,
sometimes the biggest barrier to peace is the inability
or the unwillingness of parties to talk and enter
dialogue. Non-governmental organizations often serve
as communication links between governmental and
opposition forces, even as they carry out their
humanitarian and development roles. In our region, we
have seen civil society actually help broker peace. In
Aceh, for example, I believe that the seeds of peace

27

S/PV.5264

planted helped bring about the peace that we are once
again building.
While its important role in peace-making
activities is recognized, civil society, as a player in
interdicting the conflict cycle, should also continue to
evolve new and future-oriented ideas. If it positively
directs its attention towards community growth and the
promotion of the welfare of society, its voice will grow
stronger in a way that is supported and strengthened by
international and local actors.
In my region several possible conflicts have been
peacefully managed, thanks to the help of civil society.
Among those issues was the potentially difficult
situation of the conflicting claims in the South China
Sea. Track Two workshops explored the possibility of
cooperative regimes in the South China Sea to build
trust and confidence and to create an atmosphere in
which disputes could be addressed. Today, we have the
ASEAN-China Declaration on the Code of Conduct in
the South China Sea. Civil society has helped
transform the South China Sea from waters of
contention to a sea of peace and cooperation.
Sixty years ago, the peoples of the world brought
forth the United Nations. No role was given to civil
society. Today, civil society has proven its worth in our
common search for peace. States have shown their
willingness to share with civil society, which is a close
and meaningful partner, the task of building peace. Let
us now show that together we can expand the frontiers
of peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I invite the representative of Canada to take the
floor.
Mr. Rock (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak before the Council on the
role of civil society in conflict prevention and the
pacific settlement of disputes. This discussion comes at
a critical time, as we collectively begin to chart the
course ahead on implementation of the outcome of last
week’s summit, and we are particularly indebted to the
Philippine presidency for drawing attention to this
issue.
It has been 15 years since the Secretary-General
issued his initial report on the prevention of armed
conflict. Our experience has shown that conflict
prevention is something that Governments cannot

28

undertake effectively in isolation. Across a spectrum of
conflict prevention roles, civil society organizations
provide crucial assistance. The unique attributes of
civil society — including its independent nature, its
global reach and its high level of community
integration — make civil society an invaluable partner
for the Council and our national Governments.
Canada welcomes the recent adoption of Security
Council resolution 1625 (2005) and its declaration on
strengthening the effectiveness of the Security
Council’s role in the prevention of armed conflict.
Resolution 1625 (2005) identifies clearly the
importance of civil society contributions and the need
to work to strengthen the capacity of civil society.
We all know the important role of civil society
organizations, both indigenous and international, in
crisis detection and early warning. But civil society
organizations fulfil widely varying functions across the
conflict cycle — everything from advocacy to
accompanying vulnerable populations as they move to
long-term monitoring and reporting. They can also play
an instrumental role across thematic lines, for example,
in ensuring the inclusion of a gender perspective and a
role for women in the prevention and the resolution of
conflicts, as called for in the World Summit
declaration.
In Canada’s experience, civil society partners are
also valuable in efforts to mobilize political will on a
global scale, as evidenced by the key role played by
civil society coalitions in the campaign to ban
landmines and in efforts to establish the International
Criminal Court.
In June of this year, more than 500 civil society
organizations from across 15 regions gathered here in
New York and produced the Global Action Agenda of
the Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed
Conflict. The Action Agenda charts the range of
functions that civil society can perform and provides
important recommendations for national Governments
and the United Nations system. We support and
encourage its implementation.
The Action Agenda stresses the need for the
international community to shift its focus from reaction
to prevention. Better prevention requires better and
more timely information, as well as a rapid response.
(spoke in French)

S/PV.5264

Today, I would like to focus on three of the more
concrete ways in which we can collectively move
ahead in the coming months to better incorporate civil
society organizations and maximize our effectiveness
in that regard.
First, the Council has already begun to avail itself
more frequently of civil society expertise and
information through the Arria — formula mechanism.
We welcome that but would strongly urge the Council
to deepen that trend. For example, it could consider a
more proactive use of informal meetings and broad
consultations with civil society groups, not only to
gather information on situations already of interest but
also to allow groups to sound the alarm on newly
emerging conflicts and issues of concern. That
approach could lead to the Council’s timely
consideration of those issues and a more rapid and
effective Council response.
Secondly, monitoring and reporting mechanisms
that are in place for specific situations should clearly
identify the mechanisms through which civil society
groups can channel information to the Security Council
for consideration or intervention. An excellent example
of that is the recent adoption of Council resolution
1612 (2005), which establishes a monitoring and
reporting mechanism for children in armed conflict and
expressly includes the participation of the relevant civil
society organizations. The Council should consider
applying that model in other areas of its activity.
Finally, as we move to implement the outcome of
last week’s summit through the establishment of both
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council, we need to ensure that their structures and
mandates permit them access to the most relevant and
timely information and expertise available on country
situations, including that provided by civil society
organizations in the field. By involving civil society
from the start we can be sure that our efforts will be
based on valid information and be mutually supportive.
In conclusion, Canada strongly believes that civil
society organizations are not only the eyes and ears of
the international community on the ground but also our
collective conscience. We therefore strongly encourage
more open cooperation with civil society and look
forward to working in coming months for the more
extensive participation of civil society in United
Nations conflict prevention efforts.

The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.
“Recognizing the complex nature of threats
to international peace and security, the Security
Council underlined the need for a broad strategy
for conflict prevention and pacific settlement of
disputes in line with Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations.
“The Security Council stressed that the
essential responsibility for conflict prevention
rests with national Governments, and that the
United Nations and the international community
can play an important role in support of national
efforts for conflict prevention and can assist in
building national capacity in this field and
recognized the important supporting role of civil
society.
“The Security Council reaffirmed the need
for this strategy to be based on engagement with
Governments,
regional
and
subregional
organizations as well as civil society
organizations, as appropriate, reflecting the
widest possible range of opinions.
“The Security Council underlined the
potential contributions of a vibrant and diverse
civil society in conflict prevention, as well as in
the peaceful settlement of disputes. They noted
that a well-functioning civil society has the
advantage of specialized knowledge, capabilities,
experience, links with key constituencies,
influence and resources, which can assist parties
in conflict to achieve peaceful solution to
disputes.
“The Security Council noted that a vigorous
and inclusive civil society could provide
community leadership, help shape public opinion,
and facilitate as well as contribute to
reconciliation between conflicting communities.
The Security Council also underscored the role
that these actors could play in providing a bridge
to dialogue and other confidence-building
measures between parties in conflict.
“The Security Council underscored and will
strengthen its relationship with civil society,
including as appropriate, through, inter alia, the

29

S/PV.5264

use of ‘Arria-formula’ meetings and meetings
with local civil society organizations during
Security Council missions.
“The Security Council agreed to keep this
item under review.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2005/42.

30

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
