S/PV.8236

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8236th meeting

Tuesday, 17 April 2018, 4.50 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-11153 (E)
*1811153*

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Since the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), the Secretary-General has on many occasions
called for its full implementation. However, rather than
implement the resolution of the Council, we have seen
parties to the conflict sustain intense military activity
at an enormous human cost. Today, we have been asked
to provide an update on the humanitarian situation in
Raqqa and Rukban. We have also been asked to cover
humanitarian issues in Syria at large, in particular in
Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin.
Let me start with Raqqa city and Rukban. The
population of those two places total only about 1 per
cent of the number of Syrians in need of humanitarian
help, but their needs are no less important than those of
the 99 per cent of their compatriots needing assistance
in other parts of the country.
On 1 April, the United Nations undertook an
assessment mission to Raqqa. Since the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant was forced out of Raqqa in October,
nearly 100,000 people have returned to Raqqa city.
However, conditions are not conducive to returns, due to
the high levels of unexploded ordnance and improvised
explosive device contamination, widespread and severe
infrastructural damage, and a lack of basic services.
More than 50 casualties of remnants of war have been
reported every week. With the onset of spring, we
are concerned that children playing outside will be
particularly vulnerable. An estimated 70 to 80 per cent
2/19

17/04/2018

of all buildings inside Raqqa city have been destroyed
or damaged.
While public services are slowly resuming — with
at least 37 bakeries operating, for example — the city
lacks electricity and mobile communications, and water
is being pumped at only a very limited capacity to the
outskirts of the city. As many as 95 per cent of households
that have returned to Raqqa are food insecure. Health
services are lacking or severely limited. Some schools
have reopened, although they are lacking school
materials and other supplies. Following the 1 April
assessment, United Nations agencies are planning
deliveries of humanitarian assistance and programmatic
interventions. This response will support the ongoing
activities of the humanitarian organizations already
active inside Raqqa that are providing food, health care
and other basic services. It will also complement the
ongoing response for those displaced and in need across
north-eastern Syria, where nearly 900,000 people are
receiving assistance each month.
In Rukban, some 50,000 people continue to be in
need of sustained humanitarian assistance. Water and
basic health care are being provided from Jordan, but
there is a pressing need for better service provision
and, in some cases, for referrals elsewhere for medical
help. People in that area last received assistance,
delivered from Jordan, in early January. Approval for a
United Nations inter-agency convoy from Damascus to
Rukban was received from the Government of Syria on
18 March. Humanitarian agencies are working closely
with the United States, the Russian Federation and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent to make this delivery possible,
noting the importance of finalizing arrangements for
the safety of the operation, since the current security
guarantees permit movement only to an area some 10
kilometres outside Rukban. Discussions continue on
how aid can be best delivered, providing safe delivery
of life-saving help to those in need.
The town of Douma and other areas in eastern
Ghouta are now under the control of the Government of
Syria. After years of deprivation under siege, those who
remain in the area still require urgent assistance that
we, as the humanitarian community, have yet to be able
to provide. Access to reach people throughout eastern
Ghouta is critical. The United Nations and partners
are responding to the mounting humanitarian needs
of the 155,000 people displaced from eastern Ghouta
with food, shelter, health care and other assistance and
protection services.
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

However, for those in the overcrowded sites for
internally displaced persons around eastern Ghouta,
as well as for those who left on buses for Idlib and
Aleppo governorates, the situation is precarious. Of the
155,000 who have been displaced, about 63,000 have
moved north to Idlib and Aleppo, joining the nearly
400,000 people who have been displaced from southern
Idlib since 15 December. As a result, there has been
a 25 per cent increase in Idlib’s displaced population,
with 1.2 million of the governorate’s 2 million people
now displaced, many of them multiple times. This
extreme situation puts incredible pressure on the host
communities and the humanitarian actors working
cross-border to provide assistance and services.
Fighting among non-State armed opposition groups in
Idlib is further complicating the situation for those in
need in the area. Those remaining in Afrin, as well as
the 137,000 people who were displaced to Governmentcontrolled Tell Rifaat and the surrounding areas, are also
in dire need of humanitarian aid and must be granted
freedom of movement. This includes those who need
medical evacuation from Tell Rifaat to nearby Aleppo.
Between 2 and 4 April, several Turkish-facilitated
United Nations cross-border shipments consisting of
food supplies, health and other relief items were sent
to assist people in need in Afrin district. On 25 March,
the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
delivered assistance to 50,000 people in need in Tell
Rifaat. Overall, while these are positive developments,
humanitarian partners are still struggling to gain
sustained access to Afrin, and freedom of movement
for internally displaced persons remains very limited.
On 25 March the United Nations also submitted a
request to the Syrian authorities for the deployment
of an inter-agency surge team to scale up the United
Nations operational capacity in Syria. Response to a
request for an additional 17 United Nations staff to
be deployed for a four-week period was received on
11 April, authorizing the deployment of 12 United
Nations staff.
As we approach the conference to be held in Brussels
on 24 and 25 April, we have an immediate opportunity
to make progress on easing the humanitarian suffering
by ensuring that the humanitarian operations are fully
funded. With an appeal that is currently less than
15 per cent funded, I cannot overstate the importance
of sustaining and scaling up the international response.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his informative briefing.

S/PV. 8236

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
Various delegations have been constantly calling
on us to report to the Council on the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018). Let me oblige. In the context
of the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018),
Russia, in coordination with the Government of Syria,
has undertaken unprecedented efforts to improve the
situation in eastern Ghouta, where illegal armed groups,
with external support, have held the civilian population
hostage for several years. After lengthy and intensive
negotiations, those militants who are unreconciled
have been evacuated from the area and bloodshed has
been prevented. The process of returning the evacuated
population is under way, and some 60,000 people have
already returned.
On the whole, the situation in eastern Ghouta
is stable. In order to maintain law and order, prevent
provocations, protect civilians and provide them with
humanitarian and medical aid, joint efforts have been
organized between Russian military-police units and
Syrian law-enforcement bodies. Issues related to the
restoration of infrastructure in the towns of eastern
Ghouta are being discussed. Rubble is being cleared
in Douma with the help of construction equipment
provided by Russia. Water and electricity supplies
are being re-established. Daily bread deliveries have
started. Rebuilding eastern Ghouta will require
focused cooperation on the part of the international
community, including through the United Nations and
its specialized agencies. We call on our colleagues to
join these efforts.
However, the situation in Raqqa is disastrous. The
coalition expelled the terrorists of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant more than six months ago and has
occupied the territory since then, practically speaking.
It has done nothing to restore the city, which was
destroyed by aerial bombing. People are returning at
their own peril and risk and are frequently being blown
up by mines and improvised explosive devices.
Nobody really knew what was going on in Raqqa.
Until very recently, no efforts had been made even
to have the United Nations assess the population’s
humanitarian needs. Only recently, thanks to our
persistent pressure, has one such mission, albeit a
very short one, taken place. Even in the space of a

18-111533/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

few hours, however, the specialists were able to see
with their own eyes that Raqqa lies in ruins. There is
literally not a single whole building standing. There are
still piles of bodies under the rubble. People are being
blown up by mines every day. There is no electricity,
water or basic social services. Not a single school or
hospital is functioning. The so-called local council,
contrary to the coalition’s assurances, began work only
this month, and it has become clear, and not just to us,
that they are totally incompetent. Where did they get
these impostors? Whom do they represent? How can
they be entrusted with people’s lives and safety? As we
understand it, there have already been several protests
against the American occupation, which has done the
residents no good. The only effective way out of the
situation in Raqqa will be to restore the functioning of
Government structures there.
Another grey area is the Rukban displaced persons
camp, which is near the United States military base
at Al-Tanf. It is important to say once again that the
mere fact of its existence is a gross violation of Syrian
sovereignty. It is a continuing cause of concern for
Syria’s neighbours in Jordan. The coalition forces
blocked access to the area for a long period of time,
and it took a great deal of effort to get them to issue
an official permit with security guarantees. The Syrian
authorities gave the green light immediately after that,
but so far we have seen no practical steps to provide
humanitarian assistance.
The situation in Raqqa and Rukban should be
constantly monitored by United Nations humanitarian
personnel. It is vital that sustainable access be provided
to them. Now we have a question for the coalition
countries. What are they doing to implement resolution
2401 (2018)? What are they doing to ease the situation
in Raqqa, Rukban and besieged Fo’ah and Kafraya?
And they need not bother taking the discussion to a socalled broader format. They should have the courage to
answer our questions and not try to change the subject.
However, I do now have a few words to say in a
broader context. We have been quite startled by the
hypocritical behaviour of the United States, Britain
and France in the past few days. Less than a day after
the missile attacks, their organizers started coming up
with peculiar political initiatives, despite the fact that
every element in their proposals was already present
in the existing relevant resolutions, which simply had
to be implemented. Through their act of aggression,
the troika of the United States, Britain and France
4/19

17/04/2018

and those who supported or welcomed their actions
declared their solidarity with one party to the conflict.
An aggressor does not have the moral right to create
international legal documents regarding the victim
of that aggression. Russia is working with every side
in the Syrian conflict. Our position has always been
based on the importance of implementing resolution
2254 (2015) and returning to the Geneva talks, without
preconditions, and above all without making them
conditional on so-called regime change.
Before the missile attacks, we could see that the
Syrian Government was ready to hold talks in Geneva.
Now those efforts have suffered a major setback. It is
hard to imagine that after all that has happened, the
Syrian authorities are enthusiastic about talking about
a political settlement in their country on the Western
troika’s orders. If the aim is to bomb the President of
Syria into sitting down at the negotiating table, present
that as a victory over him — because according to
them he understands only force — and through those
negotiations to remove him and put him on trial as a
so-called war criminal — as Washington, London
and Paris have directly threatened — then the aim is
unachievable. They should have no illusions. First they
have to repair the damage that they themselves have
done to the prospects for a political settlement.
However, the Western capitals are encouraging
bellicose pronouncements by the radical opposition,
which has set up Al-Assad’s departure as a precondition
for its participation in the Geneva consultations, and now,
inspired by the 14 April missile strikes, is demanding
that the coalition start a war with Damascus in direct
repudiation of the principles of resolution 2254 (2015).
What is needed is for the so-called Riyadh opposition to
abandon its destructive position and begin to implement
the Security Council resolution, which it has already
drifted far away from. And their sponsors should also
drop their belligerent rhetoric about the lawfully elected
President of Syria, since they themselves insist on the
importance of rejecting preconditions.
The idea of creating a mechanism to establish who
is responsible for the use of chemical weapons no longer
makes any sense when Washington and its allies have
already identified the perpetrators and, essentially,
appointed themselves their executioners.
Apparently the impression has been created
that — encouraged by the Western troika’s oh-soencouraging air strikes and the new lot of sanctions
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that Washington has promised us — Russia will have to
change its position. It is time that the West understood
that this logic has never worked in the past with regard
to Russia and will not work in the future either. The
British and French delegations hastened to set up plans
for Syria a few days ago. We too have a plan. We do not
claim it to be exhaustive, but permit me to acquaint the
Council with it.
First, there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict. We are all familiar with the political basis
for a settlement. We must work together to implement
resolution 2254 (2015), which the negotiations in the
framework of the Astana process and the results of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi are
designed to assist. We urge the United States and its
allies to end their aggressive actions and threats to use
force against the sovereign State of Syria, in violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. They serve only to make the prospects for peace
more distant.
Secondly, we urge them to halt all efforts to create
new realities in Syria, undermining its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, working to maintain the foreign
occupation of parts of Syria and its further division,
plundering natural resources and inciting hostility
between various sectors of the country’s population.
Thirdly, we urge all States and Syrian opposition
groups to cease their aggressive and hateful rhetoric
directed at Syria’s legitimate authorities and at Russia,
and to stop taking steps intended to bring about a
violent overthrow of power.
Fourthly, we call on States that wield corresponding
influence to work to finally and irrevocably separate the
armed groups from terrorists and to embark on genuine
international cooperation in combating terrorism,
without double standards.
Fifthly, we urge the international community to
join the efforts to bring Syria humanitarian assistance
without delay and to reject any manipulation of the
issue for political purposes.
Lastly, we call on opposition entities to immediately
abandon any incitements to external aggression through
provocations using chemical weapons, and on their
Western sponsors not to exploit such provocations.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,

S/PV. 8236

for his briefing today. The Security Council has been
preoccupied, especially of late, with the situation in
Syria, which has seen dangerous and accelerating
developments. That is why we need to address all these
developments in an appropriate manner and further our
efforts to reach a comprehensive political solution to
the crisis in Syria.
Resolution 2401 (2018), adopted unanimously by
the Council less than two months ago, addressed the
humanitarian situation across Syria. The resolution
demanded a cessation of hostilities for at least 30 days
without delay in order to allow the United Nations
and its partners to deliver humanitarian assistance
and ensure the evacuation of the sick and wounded, in
accordance with international law. We underscore once
again the Council’s demand in resolution 2401 (2018)
for unhindered and sustained access for humanitarian
convoys, including medical material. We remind
all parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and we call for an immediate end to all attacks on
civilians, residential areas and medical facilities, in
accordance with the resolution.
We are deeply frustrated by the failure of
compliance with resolution 2401 (2018). We call on
the parties with influence to work with the Syrian
authorities in particular and to urge them to implement
resolution 2401 (2018), pursuant to international
humanitarian law. We expect the guarantor countries
of Astana agreement — Russia, Iran and Turkey — to
ensure progress on that front, in accordance with the
declaration issued by the tripartite summit held in
Istanbul on 4 April.
We agree with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Sweden regarding our concern over
the humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta and Idlib,
in northern Aleppo. We also express our concern at the
increasing obstacles facing the United Nations and its
efforts to reach civilians who had fled eastern Ghouta.
We call on the Syrian Government to facilitate the
access of United Nations staff to camps for internally
displaced persons.
Regarding Raqqa, we thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for his update today following the
recent humanitarian assessment visit. We welcome
the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to prepare the necessary
humanitarian plans in order to provide assistance to

18-111535/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

Raqqa and remove all mines and explosive devices,
which pose a threat to the safe return of internally
displaced persons and refugees.
Concerning the situation in Rukban, we stress the
need to ensure sustained humanitarian access to camps
in the area from inside Syria. We urge the United
Nations and its partners to deliver this assistance as
soon as possible.
In closing, we urge Member States to participate
actively in the donor conference on the humanitarian
situation in Syria which will be held in Brussels
next week, given the conference’s important role in
alleviating the situation of the Syrian people, whose
suffering is now in its eighth year, with no serious
settlement in view.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for the
second time today for his update on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. His briefing serves to remind
us — if a reminder were needed — of the scale of the
humanitarian crisis facing Syria and the humanitarian
community. Over 12 million people, half of Syria’s
population, are now displaced inside and outside the
country. The 700,000 people who fled their homes
since just the beginning of this year as a result of the
unremitting and horrific violence join this mass of
humankind seeking shelter and protection.
Resolution 2401 (2018), unanimously adopted on
24 February, sought to provide relief for those inside
Syria by ensuring a durable humanitarian pause in
the conflict. We deplore the lack of implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) to date. It is imperative that we
all increase our efforts to ensure its full and immediate
implementation across Syria. In that regard, the Astana
guarantors must live up to their commitments, as
articulated in the joint statement by their Presidents on
4 April.
We reiterate the Council’s demand in resolution
2401 (2018) for unimpeded and sustained access for
weekly humanitarian convoys — I repeat, weekly
humanitarian convoys — including with medical
items. We remind all parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law and call for an immediate end to all attacks
on civilians, civilian objects and medical facilities, as
demanded in resolution 2401 (2018).
6/19

17/04/2018

We are gravely concerned for the civilians remaining
in Douma, who have been subject to intensive violence,
leading to the deaths of civilians and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. We call on the Syrian authorities
to grant facilitation letters for humanitarian convoys to
Douma immediately.
We are also concerned about the increased obstacles
facing the United Nations in gaining access to civilians
who have fled eastern Ghouta. We call on the Syrian
authorities to immediately facilitate sustained access
for United Nations personnel to internally displaced
persons’ camps. In addition, the Syrian authorities
must immediately grant the visa requests for staff of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as
part of the much-needed humanitarian surge currently
under way.
We reiterate that any evacuation, from eastern
Ghouta or elsewhere, must be voluntary and in line with
international law. Those who decide to leave should do
so to a safe place of their choice, and with the right to
return. An increased United Nations presence is vital to
respond to the needs, not least the protection needs, of
both those remaining in eastern Ghouta and for those
arriving at reception sites.
Turning to Raqqa, we thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for his timely update, which
comes following the recent humanitarian assessment
mission. We welcome the planning now under way
for assistance to these areas. Improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) represent a hidden and deadly threat to
the people returning to Raqqa. We are deeply troubled
by the high number of victims of these devices cited
in latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/243).
The clearing of mines and IEDs will be essential for
the safe return of internally displaced persons and
the rehabilitation of communities. We call on all to
contribute to the implementation of this provision of
resolution 2401 (2018).
We are gravely concerned about the situation of
civilians in Rukban, many of whom are women and
children. Sustained humanitarian access is essential, as
is the need to find longer-term and durable solutions
to the situation there. We call on the United Nations
and its partners to undertake the planned humanitarian
delivery to Rukban as soon as possible.
The humanitarian situation in Idlib is also
extremely worrying, given the rapid increase in
internally displaced persons fleeing to the governorate
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and months of attacks on health-care facilities. The
cross-border deliveries of humanitarian aid continue to
constitute a lifeline for Syrians in acute need in Idlib.
We are also concerned about the situation of
the almost 140,000 people displaced from Afrin.
We welcome the scaled-up humanitarian response,
including deliveries to areas hosting internally
displaced persons. We call on the Syrian authorities to
ensure freedom of movement for internally displaced
persons to access medical services, and on Turkey to
enable the safe, voluntary and dignified return of those
who have been forced to flee.
The scale of the crisis in Syria and the humanitarian
response needed remains immense. The humanitarian
community is undertaking a herculean task, and we
commend all those working in extremely challenging
conditions. We must stand with them and the people
of Syria. In that regard, we are deeply troubled by the
acute lack of financing for United Nations humanitarian
operations in Syria. We call on all Member States
to make substantial commitments at the Brussels
conference next week and to disburse those pledges
as early as possible. Sweden can be counted upon to
continue contributing generously to the humanitarian
response in Syria.
Finally, let me reiterate what has been said in
this Chamber numerous times before, as it deserves
to be repeated: the only sustainable way to solve the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is through a political
solution to the conflict. At this critical time, we must
seek to revitalize the United Nations-led political
process, try to put our differences aside and shoulder
the responsibility entrusted to the Council.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock once again
for his briefing. As always, he informs us and puts the
gravity of Syria’s humanitarian situation in perspective.
First, given all of the interesting accusations we
heard earlier, I want to make a few points crystal clear.
The 75 members of the Global Coalition to Defeat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) joined forces
to liberate people from ISIS control in Iraq, and the
Coalition continues our campaign to eradicate ISIS in
Syria. Despite the difficulty of the task, our operations
have succeeded in rolling back the so-called ISIS
caliphate and addressing a dire threat to our collective
peace and security.

S/PV. 8236

The Coalition made those gains while the Al-Assad
regime and its backers focused their guns mostly on the
Syrian opposition groups that were not ISIS terrorists.
While we went after ISIS and actually achieved lasting
gains for the Syrian people, the Al-Assad regime was
busy bombarding civilians in places like Aleppo, Idlib
and eastern Ghouta. The Coalition’s operations were
carried out in scrupulous regard for the laws of war
and to minimize civilian casualties. In Raqqa, our
partners conducted a neighbourhood-by-neighbourhood
evacuation of civilians ISIS had trapped in the city.
The United States will once again put on the
record that United Nations humanitarian convoys are
welcome at any time in Raqqa or Rukban. We welcome
that assistance and are ready to do everything that we
can to assist it. As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
noted, a United Nations inter-agency team successfully
carried out an assessment in Raqqa just two weeks ago.
In Rukban, Coalition forces are also acting to support
humanitarian efforts and have worked with the United
Nations and other partners to provide requested details
on operational security and medical evacuations.
The bottom line is that the United States is ready to
support humanitarian deliveries. The delay, as always,
continues to be whether the Al-Assad regime will grant
permission for United Nations convoys to move.
We keep hearing in this Chamber about mine
clearance in Raqqa. Removing unexploded ordnance is
one of our top priorities when it comes to stabilizing
the area: so far we have cleared almost 3,000 explosive
remnants of war; we have cleared almost 300 critical
infrastructure sites; provided mine risk education for
40,000 people and trained over 120 Syrians to conduct
demining operations. This task is not easy, thanks
to the quantity of munitions ISIS left behind, but we
recognize this work is vital to ensure Syrians can return
home safely.
On top of mine clearance in Raqqa, we have
provided more than $50 million in food and non-food
items to the most vulnerable. For example, we have
given close to 300,000 pounds of food and 151 million
litres of water to more than 195,000 people. I could go
on and talk about the schools and medical clinics we
have supported or our efforts to restore electricity. We
would be happy to brief our fellow Council members at
any time on those details.
The issue is that we are not here to educate ourselves
about the work of the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS

18-111537/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

in Raqqa and our continued efforts to facilitate crossline delivery into Rukban. Russia has called us here as
part of a messaging campaign to try to distract from the
atrocities committed by the Al-Assad regime. In order
to do that, Russia has asked the Security Council to
focus its attention on the one part of Syria where the
Al-Assad regime is not pummelling civilians to death
with barrel bombs or banned chemical weapons.
Consider what has taken place since the Security
Council demanded a ceasefire in resolution 2401
(2018). On 24 February, the Council demanded a halt
to the fighting in Syria. Instead, the same day the
resolution was adopted, the Al-Assad regime flagrantly
disregarded it. The Al-Assad regime and its backers
ignored the Council and launched an all-out campaign to
seize eastern Ghouta. The campaign culminated in the
use of chemical weapons against innocent men, women
and children. Over 151,000 civilians were displaced.
Now fighting is escalating in north-western
Syria. Between 2 and 17 April, Syrian and Russian
air strikes damaged four medical facilities in that
part of the country — a disturbing repeat of previous
circumstances. Between mid-March and early April,
air strikes reportedly killed another 188 civilians
and injured 120 others. In addition to a ceasefire, the
Council has also called again and again for unhindered
humanitarian access in Syria. However, since the
beginning of 2018, the Syrian authorities have only
allowed six cross-line interagency convoys to deliver
humanitarian aid — six. That is just five per cent of the
cross-line assistance requested by the United Nations.
More than ever, we need to focus on ensuring that
the Council’s demand for a ceasefire and for unhindered
humanitarian access actually gets implemented on the
ground, but that would require the Al-Assad regime to
stop its brutal campaign against the Syrian people, and
the countries with influence over Al-Assad to join us in
demanding that the Al-Assad regime stop is senseless
slaughter of the Syrian people.
The United States will not stop focusing on the
ways to achieve that goal, no matter how many times
our Russian colleagues convene these cynical, thinly
disguised diversions.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
for his briefing, and once again commend his tireless
efforts, as well as those of his teams, in responding
8/19

17/04/2018

to the urgency and gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Syria. I would also like to thank Russia
for requesting this briefing, which enables us to take
stock of the humanitarian situation in both Raqqa
and Rukban, a month and a half after the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018).
I will say a few words on the humanitarian situation
in Syria as a whole before addressing the specific cases
of Raqqa and Rukban, and then finally reiterate our
call for true assistance to their people by guaranteeing
rapid and secure humanitarian access. That constitutes
an key element of our draft resolution on Syria, which
is still under negotiation among members of the
Security Council.
Despite the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) and
our repeated appeals, the urgency of the humanitarian
situation in Syria is flagrant. The situation on the
ground in Syria is a nightmare that sees no relief. As we
have had the opportunity to highlight during each of the
Council’s meetings on the subject, the land offensives,
sieges, indiscriminate bombings — including on
schools and hospitals — and the use of chemical
weapons against the people of Douma on 7 April have
razed Syria to the ground, with complete disregard
for international law. Resorting to terror as a tactic of
war has led, as we all know, to horrific consequences.
Moreover, since 18 February, at least 1,800 people have
been killed and thousands are suffering from often
irremediable wounds.
As Mr. Lowcock has just stated, the humanitarian
tragedy in Syria remains a daily scandal and a
permanent insult to the global conscience. Since
9 March, approximately 151,000 Syrians have been
forced to flee eastern Ghouta. Between 90,000 and
100,000 of them were compelled to join the camps
around Damascus, which have restricted access to
basic services. To date, only 45,000 people have
been authorized to leave the camps, where reception
capacities are saturated. Despite the urgent situation,
access to the camps is complicated due to the regime’s
intensified administrative procedures for humanitarian
actors. Humanitarian access for people remaining in
eastern Ghouta faces similar obstructions, especially
in Douma. These are all tragedies and blatant violations
of international humanitarian law.
In Idlib, the arrival of tens of thousands of people
evacuated from eastern Ghouta has further exacerbated
the humanitarian situation in the province, which
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

now hosts more than 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. That means that we must be both active and
vigilant when it comes to Idlib: active, in view of the
very difficult situation that prevails there today, but
also especially vigilant with regard to the risks of
further outbursts of violence in the region. If we are not
careful, the worst is yet to come in Idlib.
With regard to the situation in Raqqa, as
Mr. Lowcock described in his briefing, the city is
faced with the challenge posed by the return of 90,000
people. The challenge is certainly a considerable one.
However, we must note some positive developments,
such as the reopening of schools and three functioning
clinics, as well as the distribution of schoolbooks, to
mention but a few examples. It is henceforth necessary
to allow humanitarian actors to channel water, food
and other responses to meet the basic needs of the
population. Given the situation left behind by Da’esh
in the city, humanitarian demining also presents a
crucial issue that all else depends on and where efforts
already undertaken must absolutely be continued and
augmented. That is an effort in which France is fully
participating. We set aside €10 million at the end of 2017
and financed a dozen projects for displaced persons and
those wishing to resettle in Raqqa in particular, as well
as emergency aid, restoration of basic services, health
care and mine clearance.
In Rukban, discussions with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent must lead to allowing the channelling and
unloading of cargo by the United Nations, all while
ensuring the safety of humanitarian personnel. As
resolution 2401 (2018) has not been implemented, I wish
to reiterate here, on behalf of France, our urgent appeal
to guarantee rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access throughout Syrian territory. That is indeed the
key, along with the cessation of hostilities, to a real
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Specifically, that means that the Syrian regime must
issue the necessary visas and letters of authorization
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian actors,
with three immediate operational objectives in mind.
First, a sufficient number of humanitarian convoys
must reach areas that are difficult to access or besieged,
and the safety of humanitarian personnel must be
guaranteed. Secondly, civilians that remain in eastern
Ghouta must receive urgent humanitarian assistance
and protection. Thirdly, assistance must be provided
to displaced persons, including in the camps and host

S/PV. 8236

communities around Damascus, in the Idlib province
and in the Euphrates region. The regime’s recovery of
eastern Ghouta, in the terrible conditions we know of,
does not change those imperatives, which fall under
international humanitarian law and resolution 2401
(2018), adopted unanimously by the Council.
It is precisely those objectives that we strongly
support in the context of the draft resolution submitted
by France, the United Kingdom and the United States
to members of the Security Council on Saturday and
which was discussed at its first reading yesterday. Our
draft resolution aims to achieve essential progress in
humanitarian terms, fully consistent with the priorities
expressed today. Given the catastrophic situation of
the population, France has launched an emergency
humanitarian programme of €50 million. The draft
resolution also aims to recreate a mechanism for the
attribution of responsibility with regard to the use of
chemical weapons and to put a definitive end to the
Syrian chemical programme. Finally, it requests that
conclusive political negotiations be held under the
auspices of the United Nations and with the support of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2018).
Finally, beyond the silo approach — which has
led to so many impasses — the initiative France has
taken with this draft resolution, alongside our British
and American partners, articulates, for the first time,
humanitarian, political and chemical aspects of the
Syrian equation. Through this comprehensive and
integrated approach, the draft resolution seeks to
recreate a space for negotiation, establish potential areas
of convergence and therefore — we hope — create the
conditions for a truly diplomatic dynamic on the Syrian
dossier. We all know how difficult the task is, but we
hope that this approach will help us to break free of the
impasse and open up the way to genuine negotiations.
Given the interest sparked by our draft resolution
and by the first constructive discussions it has led to,
this new approach is, in any case, broadly supported
and involves committing on this basis to deepened
negotiations that require good faith in the goal to reach
a conclusion, even though we are all aware of how
challenging that will be. We owe it to the Syrian people
who, in their diversity, await us in despair.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start, if I
may make a request of the Secretariat — it would be
very helpful, I think, for the Council to have either a

18-111539/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

briefing or a brief account of where the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding
Mission and the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security currently are and what their forward plans
are. Furthermore, it would be useful to know whether
there has been any delay in their getting into Douma
and an account of what has caused that delay. If it were
possible to have that within the next 24 hours, I would
be very grateful.
Turning to the issue before us in this meeting,
I would like to join others in thanking the UnderSecretary-General for his briefing. It is a pity that some
speakers have used today’s account of the humanitarian
situation to make political points. I recall the English
philosopher Edmund Burke, who said that it is a general
popular error to imagine the loudest complainers for
the public to be the most anxious for its welfare. I think
that might apply rather too much today.
We are talking about resolution 2401 (2018). I do not
have the full compendium of the British Government’s
activities on the humanitarian side in Syria, but I can say
that in 2017 we gave $160 million to the United Nations
appeal and in 2018 we are giving $138 million dollars.
That compares to $5.5 million in 2017 and, as far as
I know, zero in 2018 from Russia. We are one of the
top three donors to the Syrian humanitarian response
plan, and we are the second largest bilateral donor to
the humanitarian response in Syria since 2011. To date,
we have committed $3.5 billion in response to the Syria
crisis, and that is the United Kingdom’s largest-ever
response to a single humanitarian crisis. We encourage
all of us to do what we can to support United Nations
appeals and we, too, will be playing an active role in the
Brussels conference, which is to come.
Turning to Raqqa, we welcomed the first United
Nations assessment mission. The United Kingdom
continues to provide humanitarian support to Raqqa
and surrounding areas. Last October, we stepped up our
support to north-east Syria by restocking hospitals and
mobile surgical units and providing 145,000 medical
consultations and 31,000 relief kits, which included
cooking equipment and blankets. We helped improve
access to clean water for 15,000 people. We are also
contributing to the clearance of mines and explosives in
Raqqa, and we are looking at ways to provide additional
support to mine-clearance across Syria.
Turning to Rukban, I would like to take the
opportunity to commend the Government of Jordan
10/19

17/04/2018

for providing humanitarian access to the population,
including the distribution of essential aid in January
2018. Further, we commend the efforts of United Nations
humanitarian agencies that have been negotiating
access from Damascus. I would like to emphasize the
right of displaced civilians in Rukban in the so-called
berm to protection and sustained humanitarian services
and distributions, whether they are cross-line or crossborder, in accordance with humanitarian principles and
international humanitarian law.
We urge the regime and its backers to facilitate
access for the United Nations and humanitarian
partners to deliver desperately needed assistance to the
estimated 70,000 to 80,000 people in Douma and all
those remaining in eastern Ghouta. Like other speakers,
we too are concerned about the poor conditions in
camps and sites where people from eastern Ghouta have
fled. We look forward to a position where they can have
freedom of movement and where they can be allowed to
return home. In the meantime, they must be protected
against regime reprisals, and we have, in consultations
at an earlier stage, asked for more attention to be
given by the United Nations, but also by the Syrian
Government, to giving visas to United Nations staff
who can go in and help perform a protection function.
I had intended to speak about the political resolution
and next steps, but the French Ambassador has laid this
out very clearly, and I have nothing to add to that but
that I wholeheartedly support what he said. We call on
all members of the Council to rally to the notion that
we should use what has happened as an opportunity to
get the political process back on track. We want to have
a very good discussion of possible ways to do so at our
retreat in Sweden where we will have the benefit of the
presence of the Secretary-General as well.
In closing, I would like to end with one of Edmund
Burke’s more famous pleas: “All that is needed for the
triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing.” We
can all do something and I hope we will use the next
days wisely.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the delegation
of the Russian Federation for initiating today’s open
briefing on the very critical humanitarian situation in
Syria, and we thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his comprehensive and very informative
briefing. Like others, we express our serious concern
about the continuing severe and devastating nature of
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8236

Turning to the main topic of our briefing today, we
welcome the assessment mission to Raqqa that had been
conducted by our humanitarian colleagues from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on
1 April. It is indeed worrisome that despite a high level
of unexploded ordnance on the ground, an estimated
100,000 people have reportedly returned to Raqqa. The
team has reported, through facts obtained by the local
council, on the extremely high level of destruction, with
nearly 70 per cent of buildings either having been razed
to the ground or damaged, and many services, such as
water, electricity, and health care, lacking or severely
limited. Some schools have resumed but are without
school materials and other supplies. It is commendable
that the United Nations and local non-governmental
partners are providing assistance to those in need in the
city, and also responding to gaps and priority needs in
the areas of essential aid and basic services.

that cannot be provided there. Kazakhstan supports all
the relevant Security Council resolutions so as to ensure
principled, sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance to Syria in 2018.

We are also worried about the fate of the Rukban
and Hadalat refugee camps, located on the way to the
Jordanian border in the 55-kilometre-radius protected
zone. According to our information, in both camps,
about 85,000 refugees are living in tents. Many are
ill and suffering from hunger and a lack of attention,
owing to a shortage of doctors and medical supplies.
We consider the camp to have the dangerous potential
of turning into a place where anything goes — where
foreign mercenaries, instructors and recruiters to
the ranks of radical organizations operate without
constraints. We are also alarmed at reports that armed
groups do not allow humanitarian convoys of the United
Nations and the Syrian Government into the security
zone. We call for the World Health Organization and
other United Nations humanitarian partners to be
permitted entry into the camps.

Lastly, we must focus on Syrian national unity,
which is critical, particularly after the defeat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. After the prolonged
war, the question of boundaries and territories must
be addressed in accordance with the Constitution in
order to prevent a re-emergence of extremist groups.
The issues before us are the legal and political future
of Raqqa and must take into account the interests
and rights of the various ethnic and tribal groups that
compose the local population.

We support the proposal of the Russian Federation
to establish humanitarian corridors for the withdrawal
of refugees from the area of Al-Tanf and the Rukban
camp, using as an example of corridors created by
Russian and Syrian military during the crisis in
Aleppo, when thousands of civilians left the city. We
also commend the authorities in Jordan who, earlier this
year, have allowed a one-off delivery of United Nations
humanitarian aid by crane-lift to tens of thousands of
displaced persons from Syria.
Kazakhstan calls on all parties for an immediate
suspension of all war activities in Syria, allowing
humanitarian aid to reach all those in need, as well as
evacuation of all patients requiring urgent treatment

In the light of the prevailing circumstances, the
need for all Council members to implement the recently
adopted resolution 2401 (2018) is most critical. We look
forward to ongoing frequent and periodic reporting
to the Council on the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) through the regular Syria briefings and
the Secretary-General’s reports, as stipulated in the
resolution. In this context, we support the results of
the second trilateral meeting of the Heads of States
guarantors of the Astana process — the Presidents of
Russia, Turkey and Iran — that took place on 4 April in
Ankara. We believe that this summit of the troika is an
important step towards the settlement of the Syrian war.

Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his comprehensive briefing.
Once again, Poland would like to strongly emphasize
the utmost importance of providing sustained and
uninterrupted access for all humanitarian actors in the
whole of Syria. We call upon all parties to the conflict
to implement the ceasefire and ensure humanitarian
access and medical evacuations as unanimously agreed
in resolution 2401 (2018).
We remain deeply concerned about the situations
in Idlib governorate, which is struggling with the
influx of new internally displaced persons, and in
Aleppo province. In this context, we believe that
military operations in north-western Syria have
further complicated the situation and led to significant
displacement of the local population, which is another
source of our grave concern.
We would like to reiterate our strong call on all
parties affecting the situation on the ground, especially

18-1115311/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

17/04/2018

the Russian Federation and Iran, to take all actions
necessary to arrive at the full cessation of hostilities
across the entire territory of Syria. We insist that
all parties in Syria comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Some small
positive steps involving some eight convoys were
taken in mid-March, which shows that it is possible
to make progress even though much more is needed.
Unfortunately, we have not yet seen any significant
changes in that area. In that connection, we call on
Russia, Iran and Turkey to fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities as Astana guarantors.

2015, clashes in Raqqa have led many Syrian families to
move to the Rukban camp on Jordan’s northern borders,
while Syrian opposition forces and Shia militias have
been fighting at the Al-Tanf border crossing and
the triangular border territory between Jordan, Iraq
and Syria.

Like many others, we would like to underline
the importance of the upcoming second Brussels
conference. It will address the tragic humanitarian
situation in Syria and reiterate the international
community’s support to those in need in Syria, as well
as in neighbouring countries.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
deep concern about the devastating humanitarian
situation in Syria, and in the case before us, in Raqqa
and in the Rukban camp. We commend the efforts and
work of the World Health Organization, which has been
providing thousands of people in Raqqa with medicine
and supplies. However, Raqqqa residents remain
deprived of humanitarian assistance since there are no
international humanitarian organizations in the region
and local authorities cannot improve the situation.

We would like also to take this opportunity to
reiterate our opinion that there can be no military
solution to the Syrian conflict. We have always
supported efforts to end the war in Syria.
In conclusion, let me once again underline that a
political agreement remains the only way to achieve
a sustainable solution to this conflict, including the
lasting eradication of violent extremism. That requires
a genuine political transition in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) negotiated by the Syrian
parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process.
In that regard, Poland commends the tireless efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
to facilitate the implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to thank the Russian Federation for convening
this meeting and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his illustrative
and detailed description of the humanitarian situation
in the city of Raqqa and the Rukban refugee camp.
Four months ago, in December last year, when
Security Council members adopted resolution 2393
(2017), they noted the high numbers of displaced persons
and refugees who had fled Syria to neighbouring
countries as a result of the escalation of violence and
the serious humanitarian crisis (see S/PV.8141). Since
12/19

It should be recalled that Raqqa was the main
Syrian stronghold of the Islamic State. The situation
in Raqqa is particularly difficult, given that military
offensives have led to the destruction of large swaths of
civilian infrastructure and housing.

Moreover, the situation of civilians returning to
Raqqa, where they face ongoing danger owing to the
high number of landmines and improvised explosive
devices, as well as to the epidemiological situation
in the city, with thousands of bodies still under the
rubble of destroyed buildings, demands the utmost
attention of the international community and the
Security Council so that urgent action can be taken.
In that regard, my delegation continues to encourage
those countries with the capacity to influence the
parties to the conflict to seek a way to achieve
significant progress in implementing the provisions
of resolution 2401 (2018) and in providing regular and
sustained access to the people of Raqqa and the Rukban
camp to international humanitarian organizations and
United Nations convoys in order to care for the sick and
wounded and to meet the urgent needs that cannot be
met by sporadic deliveries.
We conclude our statement by recalling the desire
and will of the peoples of Africa, as expressed in the
communiqué of the African Union Commission of
15 April, which stresses that:
“The Syrian people have suffered far too long. In the
face of this dire situation, the only sensible course of
action is the intensification of international efforts
to find a lasting political solution based solely on
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8236

the interests of the Syrian people and respecting
the territorial integrity of Syria.”

support demining activities and raise awareness of the
dangers posed by improvised explosive devices.

Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Russian Federation for
taking the initiative to organize this briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Raqqa and Rukban. We
also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for his enlightening
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria, and in
particular on those two localities in the framework of
the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).

With regard to the Rukban IDP camp, my
delegation remains concerned about the extremely
precarious living conditions of the local population,
which are mainly related to the lack of access to the
camp, which is regularly subject to sandstorms and
rising water salinity. In addition, the location of that
remote camp, with no road access, makes it difficult to
provide medicine, food and drinking water to residents.
My delegation urges the parties to the conflict to
authorize humanitarian agencies to conduct missions to
those areas to assess the needs of the populations and
provide them with adequate humanitarian assistance, in
accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).

Despite the recent relative lull, my delegation
remains concerned about the precariousness of the
humanitarian situation on the ground. Indeed, over two
months after its unanimous adoption, my delegation
notes with regret that resolution 2401 (2018) has
not been implemented. It should be recalled that the
resolution requires a long-term humanitarian pause
to allow for the safe and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance and related services, as well as
the medical evacuation of the seriously ill and wounded,
in accordance with applicable international law.
My delegation reiterates its call for the full
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) throughout
the country — from eastern Ghouta to Douma and
Afrin, where humanitarian needs are just as urgent — as
well as in Raqqa and in the Rukban internally displaced
persons (IDPs) camp, which is in the grip of a
humanitarian disaster.
While terrorist groups have been defeated and
driven out of the city of Raqqa, the return of people
to their areas of origin remains problematic owing to
the lack of infrastructure, including health and social
infrastructure, as well as the lack of many services,
such as water supplies and electricity. Furthermore,
the presence of unexploded ordinance poses a serious
danger for the population. According to the World
Health Organization and UNICEF, between 20 October
2017 and 23 February 2018, at least 658 people were
reportedly wounded and over 130 others killed by
mines, booby-traps and unexploded ordnance in the
city, where there were an average of six blast incidents
per day. Limited access to care also aggravates the
danger for people wounded by those explosions. In
that respect, my delegation calls for the mobilization of
the international community to provide the necessary
assistance for the recovery of the wounded and to

Côte d’Ivoire believes that the international
community’s action, with a view to providing an
adequate humanitarian response to the needs of the
Syrian people, must be part of our overall collective
efforts to seek a political solution to the crisis in Syria.
We therefore reiterate our principled position in favour
of a negotiated settlement of the Syrian conflict in the
framework of an inclusive political dialogue among
the different actors on the basis of the Geneva process,
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Lowcock for his
informative briefing.
We welcome the opportunity to address the
humanitarian situation in Syria and again call for the
immediate implementation of resolution 2401 (2018)
throughout the country.
The dire humanitarian needs of those inside Syria
should be the focus of our attention, irrespective of the
location of those in need. Humanitarian access and the
protection of civilians remain our main priorities. As
many have mentioned, the European Union and the
United Nations will co-chair the second Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, which
will take place in Brussels on 24 and 25 April. It is
hoped that it will help raise funds to address urgent
humanitarian needs in Syria, as well as garner political
support for the United Nations-led peace process.
Both are urgently needed. As the Syrian war enters its
eighth year, we hope for the continued solidarity of the
international community with the more than 13 million
Syrians now in need of humanitarian assistance.

18-1115313/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

17/04/2018

In my statement I will focus on three areas: the
situation in Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin, the situation in
Raqqa and the situation in Rukban.

that are already overwhelmed. We call on all parties to
allow for humanitarian access and for the freedom of
movement of the internally displaced.

First, with regard to Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin, the
military offensive by the regime in eastern Ghouta
has led to an additional 150,000 internally displaced
civilians. After fleeing the violence, they are now
hosted in Idlib and immediate surroundings in rural
Damascus. Urgent shelter, food and medical care are
needed for those who were forced out of their homes
in Ghouta.

Secondly, the liberation of Raqqa from Da’esh
has been a positive and decisive step in the fight
against Da’esh in Syria. It is now important to
contribute to the stabilization of Raqqa and to
promote inclusive governance. The protection of
civilians and of humanitarian organizations and other
non-governmental organizations must be respected at
all times. We welcome the fact that OCHA has been
able to conduct a humanitarian needs assessment
mission. On that basis, a coordinated humanitarian
response can be deployed. The clearance of improvised
explosive devices is a priority. Demining is essential
so that internally displaced persons can safely return
home. The Kingdom of the Netherlands contributes to
demining activities in and around Raqqa and calls on
other Council members to do the same.

Reports of sexual violence against women are
cause for great concern. Women, girls and others
voicing concerns about gender-based violence should
be heard and helped. At the beginning of the year, we
held frequent discussions about the growing list of
medical evacuees. There were 1,000 people on the list.
We were appalled to learn that many of the severely sick
and injured were on evacuation buses to Idlib for many
hours. Such a trip is medically irresponsible. Those
are not the kind of medical evacuations that resolution
2401 (2018) called for. Furthermore, those who remain
in Douma need aid.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about
the fact that no facilitation letters have been provided
by the regime for aid convoys into Douma. I recall
resolution 2401 (2018), which demands unimpeded and
sustained delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need.
Access for that aid, as well as access to Douma for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic,
is urgently needed. We call for the independent
monitoring of the collective shelters for internally
displaced persons in rural Damascus. Families should
not be torn apart by separating men from their wives
and children. Where that has happened, the process of
family reunification is needed.
The urgent needs of internally displaced persons
throughout Syria call for a humanitarian surge. To
that end, the United Nations requests entry into the
country to help the Syrian population. We call on the
Syrian regime to provide the additional staff from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with visas as soon as possible. We also call
the attention of the Council to the plight of more than
180,000 people who have been displaced by hostilities
in Afrin district. The massive influx of internally
displaced persons puts a strain on host communities
14/19

My third point relates to Rukban, the so-called
berm. The situation in Rukban, where more than
50,000 displaced people remain, is worrisome. The
last food distribution took place in January. Apart
from food, medical aid is also a necessity and should
be made available to all those trapped in that area. It
is important that aid reach those people through the
fastest and easiest route.
Finally, let me conclude by again stressing the
importance of the immediate implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) throughout Syria. Humanitarian
access, as well as the protection of civilians, remains
a necessity, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative taken by Russia to convene
today’s public meeting.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
his briefing and commend the United Nations on its
efforts to ease the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The Syrian conflict has lasted more than seven
years, inflicting endless suffering on the Syrian people.
It is our strong hope that all parties in Syria can resolve
their issues through dialogue and consultations. It is
imperative that the international community play a
constructive role to immediately ease the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. As always, China will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to Syria.
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

More than a month ago, through the concerted
efforts of all parties concerned, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2401 (2018), reflecting
its solidarity and consensus on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. China calls on all parties in Syria
to comply with the resolution in order to achieve
an immediate cessation of hostilities, provide
humanitarian assistance and actively coordinate with
United Nations humanitarian assistance efforts. The
United Nations and the international community must
implement resolution 2401 (2018), pay equal attention
to the humanitarian situation in all regions in Syria,
provide assistance to all areas in need of humanitarian
assistance, and help displaced persons return home as
soon as possible.
I reiterate that China has always promoted the
peaceful settlement of disputes and objects to the use
of force in international relations. We choose to respect
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of all countries. Any action taken by the
parties concerned must be in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
All action must be taken within the framework of
international law. Any unilateral military action that
circumvents the Council contravenes the purposes and
principles of the Charter and violates the basic norms of
international law and international relations, and will
compound efforts to settle the crisis in Syria. China
urges the parties concerned to refrain from any act that
could lead to an escalation of the situation, return to the
norms of international law and resolve issues through
dialogue and consultation.
A political settlement is the only way to resolve
the situation in Syria. China is committed to working
with the international community to facilitate peace
talks, encourage the cessation of hostilities, violence
and terrorism, and advance the process for a political
settlement, including through the Geneva peace talks.
Given the current situation, it is imperative for the
international community to enhance cooperation and
support the United Nations as the primary mediator
to restore peace, stability and calm in Syria and the
Middle East as soon as possible.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, for his briefing. We commend the efforts of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and all the humanitarian agencies that have managed to

S/PV. 8236

deliver the humanitarian aid so needed by the people.
We hope that those efforts can be duplicated in the
besieged and difficult-to-access areas in order to reach
as many civilians in need as possible. Bolivia believes
that it is important to take all the measures necessary to
ensure the reconstruction of Raqqa and other cities in
Syria. We call on the relevant parties to spare no effort
to ensure the safe and dignified return of the families
that were forced to leave their homes for humanitarian
and security reasons.
According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/243), since October 2017, 86,000
civilians returned to the city of Raqqa, 20,600 of whom
returned in February alone. We regret that 130 civilians
died and 658 were seriously injured in accidents caused
by remnants of anti-personnel mines and explosive
remnants of war. We reiterate the urgency of demining
efforts, beginning with the clearance of explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices, as
a fundamental step for the safe return of the civilian
population. Furthermore, such work is essential for the
restoration of basic infrastructure and services to meet
immediate humanitarian needs and facilitate long-term
reconstruction. In that regard, we believe that the efforts
of the United Nations Mine Action Service are key.
We regret that violence continues in the main
cities of Syria, but it is even more reprehensible that
as a result of those clashes civilian infrastructure,
such as hospitals, schools and residential areas, has
been affected. We also regret that obstacles remain to
the full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), and
we call on all parties involved to make every effort to
achieve its effective implementation throughout the
Syrian territory, in order to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian aid and services in a safe, sustained and
unhindered manner, in addition to the realization of
medical evacuations of seriously ill and injured persons.
We remind the parties to the conflict once again
that they must allow unconditional access for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, and guarantee
and safeguard its security and integrity, especially in
besieged and difficult-to-access areas. We reiterate once
more our highest recognition of the work undertaken
by humanitarian agencies, and we call for respect for
international law and international humanitarian law in
the discharge of their dangerous duties on the ground.
at

In
conclusion,
we
reject
any
attempt
fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria,

18-1115315/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

and we believe that the Syrian people must freely
decide its future and political leadership within the
framework of its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We reiterate that the only way to resolve the conflict is
through a political process that is inclusive, negotiated,
coordinated and led by and for the Syrian people, which
will enable the achievement of sustainable peace in
their territory, without pressure or interference.

17/04/2018

issued by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the situation in Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the Russian
Federation for calling for this meeting. We are once
again very grateful to Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his briefing. We reiterate our appreciation
to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
for continuing to provide assistance to millions of
Syrians in difficult circumstances. We welcome the
fact that the United Nations was able to conduct its
first humanitarian assessment mission in Raqqa on
1 April, after the defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.

We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his important
briefing. We have taken note with deep concern of the
information provided on the humanitarian situation in
Raqqa and Rukban, the populations of which — like
those of eastern Ghouta, Idlib, Afrin and many other
locations in the Syrian territory — face the devastating
consequences of the conflict in that country on a daily
basis. We must condemn the indiscriminate planting of
anti-personnel mines and improvised explosive devices
by Da’esh. Those heinous crimes are contrary to
international humanitarian law, and have unfortunately
resulted in a large number of wounded and dead
in Raqqa.

As mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General, the
destruction of infrastructure, in addition to very limited
public services, such as electricity and the sewage
system, continue to be the major challenging features
of the city. Moreover, the prevalence of land mines and
explosives, which have continued to cause the deaths
and injuries of civilians, poses a significant concern.
That makes a safe return to the city a major challenge,
although civilians continue to return. Demining efforts
should be further strengthened and restoring normal
life in the city should be the priority.

We welcome the efforts being made by various
countries and organizations to clear those death
traps, and stress the sense of duty displayed by
the humanitarian demining professionals. We also
welcome the deployment of a mission of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
delivered the first analysis of the current state of the
humanitarian situation in Raqqa and recommendations
for action to facilitate the safe return of its inhabitants
over the medium term.

In that regard, we are encouraged that the United
Nations is now preparing to deliver aid, and we hope
that the returnees will receive humanitarian assistance
in complement to the aid programmes. It is also
imperative to deliver aid to all parts of the country. As
the humanitarian crisis in Syria remains a source of
deep concern, we reiterate that it is vital to ensure safe,
unhindered and regular humanitarian access to allow
the United Nations and its partners to reach those in
need of life-saving assistance throughout Syria.

The humanitarian situation in Rukban is also a
source of deep concern for Peru, given the difficult
living conditions to which thousands of people, mostly
women and children, are exposed. Peru recognizes the
legitimate right of every State to protect its borders.
However, we believe that the gravity of the situation
in that area requires an enormous effort to provide
unfettered access, as reflected in the adoption of actions
aimed at facilitating access to deliver the required
assistance, in line with international humanitarian law.

In that regard, we underscorethe importance of the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), which
the Council adopted unanimously. We believe that to
contribute to the alleviation of the ongoing suffering of
the people of Syria, the Council should restore its unity
through genuine and productive dialogue.

It is important that all humanitarian needs in Syria
be addressed consistently, wherever they arise, without
discrimination on the basis of political or military
interests. The politicization of humanitarian assistance
is unacceptable and blatantly contrary to resolution
2401 (2018), the provisions of which, we recall, must
be fully implemented throughout the Syrian territory. I
now resume my functions as President of the Council.

Finally, we fully endorse what the Ambassador of
Equatorial Guinea stated with regard to the statement
16/19

18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is said that the Greek philosopher Diogenes
used to walk around the city carrying a lantern in
daytime. His followers asked him why he carried a
lantern in broad daylight. His response always was: “I
carry a lantern in daylight because it is very difficult to
see the truth in daytime.”
That quotation from Diogenes reminds me of some
of our colleagues in the Chamber. It is as though they
are carrying a microscope and trying to find a speck
of dust anywhere, while disregarding the elephant that
should be the focus of this and other previous meetings
The elephant, of course, is the aggression initiated by
permanent members of the Council against my country,
the occupation of a third of my country’s territory
by the three countries that launched the attack, and
another occupation that I will mention later. We truly
need Diogenes in the Chamber.
My colleague the Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States boasted that her country’s forces
were able to destroy 3,000 mines in Raqqa. Her
country’s forces, which continue to occupy Raqqa,
helped 4,000 Da’esh terrorists relocate from Raqqa
first to Deir Al-Zour and then to Al-Shaddadah in the
north. I believe that it would have been better for the
forces of her country to call on Da’esh to surrender
its maps, revelaing the location of tens of thousands
of mines, instead of boasting that they had eliminated
3,000 mines from the city after expelling Da’esh from
it a year and a half ago. They said they had been able to
destroy 3,000 mines.
Allow me to address the fact that my colleague
the Deputy Ambassador of Sweden referred to the
Syrian Government 16 times in his statement. He
called on the Syrian Government 16 times to various
ends. However, not once did he call for an end to the
American occupation of part of our territories. I will
hold that against him. Not once did he call for an end
to the Turkish and Israeli occupation of our territories.
That is also something that I will hold against him.
Not once did he call for condemnation of this week’s
aggression directed against my country. That is also
something that I will hold against him. Not once did he
mention anything concerning the terrorism prevalent in

S/PV. 8236

Syria, sponsored by the countries that I just mentioned,
and the oil-producing countries of our region. And that
is another point that I will hold against him.
As for my French colleague, he referred to a great
deal of information that seems to have received from
Doctors Without Borders, an organization similar to
the White Helmets, which was invented by British
intelligence service. Doctors Without Borders is also
a French invention. Apparently, that organization is
present in Raqqa. It is there without the approval of the
Syrian Government. Just like Da’esh, it entered Syria
without the Government’s approval. Doctors Without
Borders can be compared to smugglers without borders,
criminals without borders, opposition without borders,
foreign agents without borders, aggressors without
borders and terrorists without borders. It would please
our French and other colleague for the intervention in the
internal affairs of Syria to be without borders forever.
I have listened to the false allegations, lies and
deceitful statements propagated by certain delegations
regarding the visit to Douma of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. I will share with
the Council the following information. Of course, I am
providing that information to please my colleague the
British Ambassador because she requested a briefing
within 24 hours. I shall now voluntarily provide such
a briefing for her so that she will not have to wait
24 hours.
I have informed the Council before that the Syrian
Government has taken all measures necessary to
facilitate the arrival of the Fact-finding Mission to
Syria. Today, the United Nations security team entered
Douma at 3 p.m. Damascus time — 8 a.m. New York
time — in order to assess the security situation on the
ground. If the United Nations security team decides that
the situation is safe in Douma, then the Fact-finding
Mission will begin its work in Douma tomorrow. The
decision to send the Fact-finding Mission to Douma was
solely that of the United Nations and the OPCW. The
Syrian Government has done all it could to facilitate
the work of the Mission.
Furthermore, the Mission began its work upon its
arrival in Damascus. Yesterday, its members listened to
statements from witnesses about the alleged incident.
As the Mission began its work, all these lies and
rumours surfaced. They are false conclusions to distort

18-1115317/19

S/PV.8236

The situation in the Middle East

the Fact-finding Mission’s outcome and ensure that
people forget about the aggression.
Today’s meeting is being held on my country’s
Independence Day commemorating our expulsion of the
French colonial Power from Syria on this date in 1946.
Unfortunately, some countries, including France and
those that launched the cowardly attack on my country
on 14 March, have failed to understand that the people’s
desire for liberty and independence is a reality, and that
the days of hegemony are long past. Attempts to return
to that time will not succeed regardless of the size of
military fleets or the number of aeroplanes and the nice
and new smart bombs. Despite the threat of force and
the ongoing support for terrorism and armed groups
under any pretext, the world’s peoples have grown tired
of the fact that influential countries continue to ignore
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
They have grown tired of the fact that those countries
completely disregard the principles of international law
with impunity.
My delegation thanks the Russian Federation
delegation for requesting this meeting to discuss the
situation in Raqqa — that martyred city that was
completely destroyed by United States forces and
their alleged coalition under the pretext of combating
terrorism. I will not discuss the Syrian Arab Republic’s
assessment of the catastrophic conditions in the city.
I will only share with the Council the outcome of the
United Nations assessment mission to Raqqa, submitted
to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates in
Damascus and contained in an official note from the
United Nations Resident Coordinator on 4 April:
“Raqqa is facing a dire situation that requires
a complete rebuilding and restructuring of public
services and administration from the ground up.”
That is a quotation from the United Nations,
and not from Doctors Without Borders — or Clowns
Without Borders.
Allow me to mention some of the conclusions of
the mission.
First:
“The mission witnessed the extensive destruction
of the city. Every building was either partially or
completely destroyed.”
It does not say 70 per cent or 80 per cent. The city is
completely destroyed.
18/19

17/04/2018

Secondly:
“The city, whose residents were estimated at about
300,000 people before the crisis, is now home to
around 7,000 people at the end of the offensive by
the coalition.”
They managed to help 4,000 Da’esh terrorists leave the
city, but that also led to an exodus of 300,000 of the
city’s population.
Thirdly:
“There is a complete lack of public services: no
water, no electricity, no cell phone coverage and no
basic services.
Fourthly:
“Hospitals and clinics were destroyed. Currently
there is no hospital in the city, except for Doctors
Without Borders.”
What happened in the city of Raqqa is one example
of the crimes of the so-called coalition led by the
United States against Da’esh. The coalition never
meant to combat terrorism, but rather to undermine the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of my country
and to weaken the Syrian Arab Army and its allies in
the fight against terrorist groups. The coalition’s real
achievement was to kill thousands of innocent civilians
with the worst and most destructive weapons, including
incendiary weapons. They have destroyed Syrian
infrastructure, including dams, bridges, hospitals,
schools, development facilities and institutions of the
Syrian people, as well as their economic resources
necessary for reconstruction, notably oil and gas wells,
facilities and workers.
I would also like to remind the Council, for
example, of the massacres against civilians in the towns
of Al-Mayadin and Al-Bukamal in mid-May 2017; in
Al-Sour, Al-Dablan, Al-Mayadin city, and Thibyan
village in rural deir ez-Zor, towards the end of June
2017; in Tel Al-Shayer on 19 June 2017; in Al-Zayanat
village on 4 July 2017; in Al-Kashkash village on
12 July 2017; in southern rural Al-Sahaka; in Al-Shaf’a
village and Thahrat Alouni on 25 February 2018; and in
Al-Bahra village on 20 February 2018.
The illegitimate coalition never meant to combat
terrorism, but to place obstacles in the way of the Syrian
Arab Army and its allies as they sought to combat
Da’esh, the terrorist organization — for instance, the
air strikes launched by coalition war planes against the
18-11153

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian Arab Army in the Al-Tharda Mountain in deir
ez-Zor on 17 September 2016. Members will recall what
happened back then, as follows.
The coalition — United States — war planes were
trying to provide safe passage to Da’esh terrorists
between Syria and Iraq. Furthermore, on 8 February
2018, United States war planes targeted Popular Forces
on the eastern bank of the Euphrates River. Those forces
were fighting against armed Da’esh terrorists. The war
planes killed dozens of these reserve Popular Forces.
The coalition has not only launched an aggression
against the Syrian Arab Army, but it also gave support
and protection to residuals of Da’esh forces by providing
safe passage to its elements from Raqqa and deir ezZor, most of them foreign terrorist fighters. They gave
them instructions to attack the forces of the Syrian
Arab Army and their allies in deir ez-Zor. That is how
the United States forces saved the remaining Da’esh
terrorists from certain death at the hands of the Syrian
Arab Army so that they could wreak havoc along the
border between Syria and Iraq.
The United States, France and Britain culminated
their support to armed terrorist fighters through the
tripartite aggression on 14 April, with the participation
of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Israel, as an act of revenge
against the Syrian Arab Army following the defeat
of the terrorist proxies of those Governments in
eastern Ghoutta.
When we talk about the catastrophic humanitarian
situation caused by this illegitimate coalition in the
city of Raqqa, we must talk about the situation in
the Al-Rukban camp. I underscore that the Syrian
Government approved the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the camp in cooperation with International

S/PV. 8236

Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent. However, the United States forces present in
the camp prevented the delivery of that assistance and
put impossible conditions for its delivery. The United
States is responsible for the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the camp. We stress that the main reason
for this American position is that they are using the
camp to train Da’esh terrorist and other terrorist groups
so that they can be used in other battles against Syria,
Iraq, Libya, Yemen and other countries in the region
and the world.
In conclusion, I am talking here about the elephant
that I mentioned at the beginning of my statement. The
political situation in Syria is clear and does not need
draft resolutions, mechanisms or semi-daily meetings
under different agenda items. The situation needs the
Security Council to carry out its mandate under the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations by
standing against the American, Turkish and Israeli
occupation of parts of my country, Syria, and standing
against countries supporting terrorists groups. The
Security Council also must stand against countries
imposing coercive measures against the Syrian people,
so that millions of Syrian people are not made refugees
and internally displaced persons, as some colleagues
have said. The Council must not bend to the will of the
Governments of the United States, Britain and France.
This is a United Nations Organization. Do not turn
it into an organization that is not united. They only
unite in order to violate the provisions of the Charter,
invade countries, interfere in their internal affairs,
try to change their Governments by force, launch one
aggression after the other and destroy peoples and
their civilizations.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

18-1115319/19
