TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 9 SEPTEMBER 1969

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1507) . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the preceding Presidents . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the
Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and23 ., .,...................................
.. ......

1

Slav. 15 07

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Senttity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTH

Held in New York on Tuesday, 9 September
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

MEETING
1969, at 3 p.m.

stan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and 2)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

3. The PRESIDENT [Panskated from Russi~nl: I should
like to inform th,e members of the Security Council that the
Permanent Representatives of three States Members of the
United Nations, which 1 name in the order of receipt of
their letters-Israel, the United Arab Republic and Indonesia-have asked to be invited to participate in the
Council’s discussion of the item on the agenda we have just
adopted.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l507)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, ‘Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421
and Add.1 and 2).

4. If there are no objections, I shall invite the representatives of these countries, in accordance with the established
practice and relevant rules of procedure, to take places at
the Council table and participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel),
Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic} and Mr. H. R.
Abdulgani (Indonesia) took places at the Council table.

L Expression of thanks to the preceding Presidents
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): Before
taking up the adoption of the agenda, allow me, on behalf
of the members of the Security Council and on my own
behalf, to express appreciation to my two predecessorsin
the Presidency of the Council, who had to work very hard
during the hot summer period when many of us were
enjoying our vacation. Under their skilful leadership the
Security Council took important decisions on a number of
major questions of great significance for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

5. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian]: The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item
just placed on the agenda. The first speaker on my list for
today’s meeting is the representative of Pakistan, on whom
I now call.
6. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, I am confident
that there is no risk of your misunderstanding me if I
reserve for a later meeting the full expression of my
delegation’s high esteem and profound respect for you and
your most distinguished predecessor. I am obliged to defer
these agreeable courtesies because of the solemnity of the
present occasion. This is indeed a unique moment for the
Security Council, Never before in its history has the
Security Countil been confronted with a single event which
has caused such anguish to hundreds of millions of human
beings all around the globe. Never before has the Council
considered an issue which so transcends the conflict of
national interests and the satisfaction of national egos.
Never before has the Council been witness to an occurrence
which marks such a set-back for civilization itself.

2. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (translated porn Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your kind comments
regarding my occupancy of the post of President of the
Council during the month of August, For my part, I also
want to wish you every success and, at the same time, to
say that in the performance of your duties you can count
on the continuing co-operation of my delegation.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wasadopted.
The situation in the Middle East

7. If the Council sympathetically approaches the issue
placed before it today, as I am sure it will, it cannot but
view it in the perspective of civilization. International peace
and security, which is the prime concern of the Security

Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghani1

Council, presupposes and is built upon a substratum of
civilization. If civilization disintegrates, there will not even
be quicksand to support the frail fabric of peace.

many leadership groups in Israel have openly proclaimed
the objective of rebuilding a temple on the site of
Haram-Ash-Sharif, the Noble Sanctuary on which stands
the Holy Al Aqsa and the Dome of the Rock,

8. We all know that in our stormy age peace is exposed to
constant dangers. Until now the twentieth century has
reaped a whirlwind of strife. It has witnessed the most
sanguinary conflicts in human history. It has provided the
setting for the birth of weapons and technologies which
threaten to depopulate the earth. All our knowledge and
science have not yet taught us how to choose equality and
flee greed. Colonialism is still entrenched in Africa. The
great Powers ‘have not even yet evolved a stable mode of
coexistence and co-operation. The smaller States, especially
those in Asia, Africa and Latin America, have still to regain
their full inheritance. Poverty is still rampant. Tyranny has
not been abolished everywhere. Many a people is still
denied its sovereign right to independence. Hundreds of
human beings are killed every day only because they seek
their national freedom.

13. The expression of regret in the official statements; of
Israeli authorities cannot possibly detract from the truth
that an act of this nature, even without the direct
complicity of the Israeli Government, is a by-product of
Israel’s military occupation of Jerusalem. But for the
annexation of Jerusalem by Israel, carried out in total
defiance of the unanimous resolutions of both the Security
Council and the General Assembly, it is inconceivable that
conditions would have prevailed in Jerusalem which per.
mitted an individual or a group to seek-earlier by word and
now by deed-the destruction of one of the most resplendent shrines of the Islamic faith.
14. The Security Council has considered the situation in
Jerusalem before. Therefore, it is not necessary for me to
reiterate the importance of the Holy City for the enltire
Islamic world. Since, however, inaccurate accounts coontinue to appear in the press, let me point out that ,the
sanctity of Jerusalem in Moslem eyes derives from the fact
that it is the unique symbol of the confluence of Islam with
the sacred traditions of Abraham, Moses and Jesus, all of
them prophets held in the highest reverence by Moslems.
The Holy City symbolizes the ecumenicity which is
inherent in Islam. That is why it was the first Q&lo of
Islam and remains to this day the third Holy City of peaa
and pilgrimage to the followers of that faith. The historic
fact that the site of the Noble Sanctuary was encumbered
with rubble, that the work of clearance was started in
638 A.D. by the second Caliph and Companion of the Holy
Prophet Omar ibn Al Khattab, by his own hands, and that
the sacred precinct was thus reconsecrated by Islam, has
made Jerusalem a most hallowed part of the Islamic legacy.
Except for one relatively brief interregnum from the First
to just before the Third Crusades, Jerusalem has been a
Moslem city for 1,300 years, a period far longer than those
during which it was either Jewish or Christian. During that
time the peoples of Islam, who held Jerusalem as a sacred
trust, begrudged neither their lives nor their tears in the
defence and love of the Holy City. Their philosophers and
scholars, their divines and mystics, came to Jerusalem in
quest of the ultimate experience of the beatific vision with
which the sacred precinct of the Al Aqsa became ind~is,
solubly associated by the tradition of the ascension of the
Holy Prophet.

9. Yet, despite the persistence of all these problems, there
was one thing in the historic evolution of human culture of
which mankind could well be proud. This was the steady
development of a certain tolerance, the strengthening of
certain restraints, which guaranteed an immunity from
attack for the monuments of the human spirit. It was a
basic confidence of our times that, whatever be our
passions and our prejudices, we could never bear that evil
hands should touch those objects which draw the love and
devotion of millions of human beings. War apart, vandalism
against one people by another had become unthinkable.
10. This confidence was shattered on 21 August 1969,
when, under the military occupation of Israel, the holy Al
Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem wasdamaged by arson. That day
will be recorded as a day of shock and shame for the whole
human family. That day we witnessed an abrupt regression
to barbarity. For the infinite sorrow caused by this grave
event, for the collapse of the serenity which is the
birthright and should be the unique gift of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, we have to thank the military occupation of the
City by Israel.
11. In saying this, let me make it clear that it is not my
intention to prejudge the issue of criminal responsibility
i-aised by the event. III approaching the Security Council we
do not allege the actual complicity of Israeli authorities in
the act which was committed on 21 August. The event
certainly merits careful, impartial investigation, but such an
investigation cannot be predicated on conditions of military
occupation. Yet, beyond the facts which are ascertainable
by inquiry, it would be futile to deny that the environment
produced by the military occupation by Israel of the Holy
City provided an element of encouragement to the individual or group that actually committed or abetted the
committing of the most incredible and abominable act.

15. The famous status quo, as defined and regulated [by
the firman or decree issued by the Ottoman Sultan Abdnl
Hamid I in 1757 and as confirmed in the Edict cI
Toleration promulgated by Sultan Abdul Magid in 1865,
demonstrated how in Moslem hands the rights of other
faiths to the Holy Places in Jerusalem were scrupuIous;lY
respected and securely guaranteed.

12. It may be, I must say in fairness, that some Israeli
authorities were genuinely shocked by the crime. I grant
that there must be men of goodwill in Israel who to some
degree shared the outrage felt not only by Moslems but also
by Christians and non-believers throughout the world. Yet,
in the face of this universal reaction, can we forget that

16. It was this status quo which settled the disputes
between the different Christian rites concerning their
privileges in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jeiusaletn
and in the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem. It minutely
fixed every detail relating to the use of each part of the
2

altars and of the chapels with a view to the avoidanie of
any sort of dispute between the various rights. This status
quo was given international recognition in the peace
settIements following the Crimean War in 185.5 and the
Russo-Turkish War in 1878. The universal vocation of
Jerusalem was thus fully honoured under Islamic guardian.
ship.

territory

containing

the sites of the Holy Places in

Jerusalem,Hebron and Nazareth, should be regarded as

intolerable. A distinguished Jewish intellectual, Professor
George Steiner of Cambridge, remarked last week: “To
believe that there can be normal relations, let alone real
peace, between Israel and the Arab States so long as the
whole of Jerusalem remains incorporated in Israel is an
illusion,”

17. Though Jerusalem’s misfortunes began when Palestine
.fell a prey to colonialism, the Commander-in-Chief of the
Allied Army in the Middle East, on his official entry into
Jerusalem on 11 December 1917, issued a proclamation
which stated, in part:

21. I would only add that it is not only the Arab States
that are involved here, but all States as well whose
populations are predominantly Moslem. This is the issue
which causes the gravest concern to my delegation and, I
would venture to say, also to the other delegations that
have requested this meeting of the Security Council. Our
joint request in this respect is but a very limited expression
of the trauma that is being experienced by all the Islamic
peoples in all continents at the burning of the holy Al Aqsa
Mosque. While it is only the delegations bf Islamic countries
that have requested the Security Council to consider the
grievous situation caused by the event of 21 August, let us
not forget that there are large Moslem communities in other
lands that are no less affected. We have been moved by
their demonstrations. WC are grateful to the Governments
of those countries for their sympathy, for their expression
of serious concern and for their responsible affirmation that
the situation in Jerusalem cannot be,ameliorated except by
,
Jerusalem’s release from Israeli occupation.

“Since your city is regarded with affeCtion by the
adherents of three of the great religions of mankind, and
its soil has been consecrated by the prayers a!?d pilgrimages of multitudes of devout peoples of these three
religions for many centuries, therefore do I make known
to you that every sacred building, monument, holy spot,
shrine, traditional site, endowment, pious bequest or
‘customary place of prayer, of whatsoever form, of the
three religions will be maintained and protected according
to the existing customs and beliefs of those to whose
faiths they are sacred.”
18. I may parenthetically mention here an important fact
which brings out the historic involvement of the people of
Pakistan in the fate of Jerusalem, General Allenby’s
proclamation was a response to an insistent demand of the
Indian-Moslem community, the same community which
established the sovereign State of Pakistan. One of the great
leaders of this community, Maulana Mohammad Ali, lies
buried within the sacred precinct.

22. We have no doubt in our minds that the withdratil of
Israeli control from the Old City is an imperative if the
conflict in the Middle East is not to be allowed to become
uncontrollable. As a conflict involving the self-determination of the people of Palestine and the territorial integrity
of the Arab States, it is already grave enough. But as a
conflict involving the cherished sensibilities of vast populations even outside the area of hostilities, it can become
limitless in its repercussionsand implacable in its nature.

19. Later, when the Council of the League of Nations
entrusted the Mandate to the British Government on 24
July 1922, article 13 of the Mandate Agreement made it
the responsibility of the Mandatory Power not only to
preserve existing rights in the Holy Places and religious
buildings or sites in Palestine, but also “. . . ensuring the
requirements of public order and decorum”. The article
further stated: “. . , nothing in this Mandate shall be
construed as conferring upon the mandatory authority to
interfere with the fabric or management of purely Moslem
sacred shrines, the immunities of which are guaranteed.“’

23. In his statement of 31 August, His Holiness Pope Paul
showed a deep awarenessof the ominous implications of
the situation in Jerusalem. After strongly deploring the fire
in the Holy Mosque, he said that the Moslems were “shaken
by the damage to a place dear to the constant and. jealous
veneration of millions of men”, He added that he understood their bitterness, He then expressedthe hope that “the
situation would not degenerate into more fierce hatreds
which would prejudice even more the higher and impelling
cause of justice and peace”.

20. I turn now to the situation confronting US.What the
Security Council has to consider, behind the most horrifying crime of 21 August, is a series of occurrences which
threaten to destroy the peace and religious tolerance
maintained for more than a thousand years. The Charter of
the United Nations, as the Security Council has emph*
sized, does not countenance the acquisition of territory bY
force. If this principle can be invoked in the case of anY
territory, is it not much more applicable to Jerusalem, a
territory like no other, beloved and sacred to hundreds of
millions of men in all continents? Again, if this principle
can be invoked against any State, is it not much more
applicable against Israel, whose very establishment is
founded on a United Nations resolution? Little wonder
that Israel’s claim to sovereignty by conquest over the

24. Is there anyone here who wou!d not echo the call of

that great religious leader.7 We all dread these fierce hatreds
to which the Pope has referred. Our endeavour here at the
United Nations should be not to let them be awakened by
such acts as the one we are considering today.
25. The signatories of the’ communications to the SeCUfitY
Council contained in documents S/9407 dated 25 August
1969 and S/9421 dated 29 August 1969 are confident that
&is grave aspect of the issue is fully realized by the
Security Council. It has already been established in the
previous debates of the General Assembly and the Security
Council that the fate of Jerusalem goes beyond the matters
in dispute between the parties to the Middle East conflict.

1 Officid Records of the General Assembly, Second Sessions
Supplement No. 11, vol. Ii, Annex 20.
3

two resolutions of the Security Council on Jerusalemnamely, resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968 and
resolution 267 (1969) of 3 July 1969-are unequivocal.
They confirm that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel designed to alter the
status of Jerusalem are invalid. The Council has censured
such measures in the strongest terms and has urgentIy called
upon Israel to rescind them forthwith.

The issue of Jerusalem is recognized as an issue of the
universal conscience. Therefore, as I said at a previous
meeting of the Security Council, it is one of transcendental
importance. If is indisputable that it vitally affects the
interests of many countries which are not involved in the
hostilities in the Middle East.
26. Members of the Security Council will doubtless note
that the signatories of the two letters cover a wide range of
nations and peoples. The list includes those Moslem
countries that do not recognize Israel, as well as those that
do and maintain relations with it. It is but natural that the
different geographical locations and historical backgrounds
of these countries should cause them to pursue different
foreign policies and have different external orientations.
But if they are united on the proposition that Jerusalem
shall not be annexed by Israel, it is because they sincerely
believe that this is a question of fundamental principlesthat of the inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by
military conquest-and that under Israeli occupation there
cannot be any preservation of the sacred character of the
Holy Places or any assurance of their safety and of free
accessto them.

30.. To our mind, therefore, no ground exists for any
reluctance against taking the further action which was
envisaged in operative paragraph 7 of resolution
267 (1969). If, however, it is felt that that stage has not yet
been reached, the very minimum required at the moment is
to reinforce the call embodied in previous resolutions.
31. I now return to where I began. The grave event of :!l
August is unparalleled both in our age and in the history of
Jerusalem for centuries prior to the disaster which befell it
in 1967. It is not, I must stress, a matter of religious beli’ef
only. It is just as much a matter of fundamental human
values and basic decencies. The outrage of 21 August
caused a revulsion among believers and non-believers alike.
Some lamented the partial destruction of a noble work of
Islamic architecture, rich with history and consecrated by
pilgrimages lasting for more than a millennium;
others
bewailed the total loss of a priceless masterpiece of religious
art: the pulpit installed in the Holy Mosque by the peerless
Salahuddin. Still others expressed their abhorrence of the
act and the atmosphere which permitted it, because it
disrupted the ecumenical spirit which is probably the mo:st
beneficent promise of the modern age. Yet others weire
indignant at the event because it waslikely to unleash dark
forces of anger and hate. The Islamic communities were the
most aggrieved because it affected something which they
value beyond life itself.

27. I feel free to confess that we, the signatories of the
two communications addressed to the President of the
Security Council, hesitated long before we asked for this
meeting. Our hesitation was not due in the slightest to any
doubt in our minds or to any anticipation of doubt in the
minds of the members of the Security Council that the
issue of the preservation of the Holy Places of Islam in
Jerusalem, in all their sanctity, impinges directly on
international peace and security. If we hesitated, we did so
not only because of the immensity of our grief but also
because, on an issue which arouses such deep emotions
among our peoples, we did not wish to be precipitate in our
actions. We held exhaustive debates on what measures
would be feasible to remedy this grievous situation. We
considered various alternatives. We sought realistically to
measure the consequences of different types of action, In
the end, we were driven to the conclusion that, while
certain interim measures are conceivable, they will not
assuage the sorrow of our peoples nor give them real
assurance of the safety of their Holy Places as long as the
Holy City remains under Israeli occupation.

.

32. The Security Council’s response to the event has to be
based on this whole range of reactions, all having one
element: the consciousness that the event demands urgent
measures to prevent any chance of its recurrence, Such
measures, I must stress, cannot in their very nature re1al.e
only to the Holy Places, because these Holy Places cannot
be isolated from their physical environment and the social
and political order imposed on it, The Holy Places are
organically related to the City itself. Their sacred character
cannot be preserved for any length of time if the City
continues to suffer military occupation. Behind the wound
inflicted on the Noble Sanctuary, it is Jerusalem itsellf
which is bleeding.

28. My colleagaes around this table will have doubtless
noted that some interim measures were suggested in the
telegraphic communication of 22 August 1969 from the
representatives of twenty-five countries [S/9407]. For
these measures to have any ameliorative effect on the
situation in the City, they presuppose the cessation of any
activity by Israel in the Old City which goes beyond its
functions as a temporary occupying Power. Since the
Security Council is now taking cognizance of the situation, it
must concern itself with the roots of the problem, They lie
in the measures of annexation carried out by Israel in
excess of the rights of an occupying Power and in acts
contrary to fundamental human rights. As a result, an
atmosphere prevails in the Holy City which is offensive to
the public order and decorum necessary for preserving the
sacred character of the holy shrines.

33. In conclusion, I shall only say that the cause of many
a people and many a land has not always been well served
at the United Nations. We hope that the cause of Jerusalem
will strike a more sympathetic chord, A famous Psalm asks
all to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for peace within her
walls. While millions offer this prayer, the action that has to
accompany it can be taken only by the Security Council.
That action should be such as to release Jerusalem fromits
present agony.
34. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the United Arab
Republic, on whom I now call.

29. In expecting the Council to discharge its responsibility
in
this matter, we are not seeking any new departures. The
.’
4

35. Mr. EL-ERIAN (United Arab Republic): Mr. President, I wish to thank you and, through you, the members
of the Security Council for allowing me this opportunity to
express the views of the delegation of the United Arab
Republic on the question before the Council.

Ambassador El-Farra, when he referred to the measures
taken by the Israeli authorities against buildings in Jerusalem which included a mosque, a religious court and a
Moslem school, on the ground of their being threats to
public security because of cracks in their foundations, and
so on. Ambassador El-Farra posed the question of whether
it was not surprising that houses that had been standing for
centuries-some of them since the thirteenth centuryshould suddenly, after two years of Israeli occupation,
develop large cracks and be declared a threat to public
safety. He followed the question with his warning that

36. The Council is convened upon the request of the
representatives of twenty-five Member States to consider
the serious situation resulting from the crime of arson
committed on 21 August 1969 against the holy Al Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem under the military occupatipn of
Israel. That crime perpetrated by the Israeli occupying
authorities has caused and continues to cause shock and
dismay, grief and outrage, among the peoples in the world
who venerate the Al Aqsa Mosque as one of the most sacred
shrines of Islam and, as such, a precious part of the spiritual
and cultural heritage of humanity.

“It is the same with the digging which is at present
going on near the Al Aqsa Mosque. What will happen,
may I ask, when cracks are discovered there too-as
doubtless, if permitted, they wiI1 be? Will this unique
Mosque, Al Aqsa, the third holiest in all Islam, be
condemned . . . as well? Where will the line be drawn?
Or will Israel be left to continue unhampered its
‘excavations’, its looting and wanton destruction, its
desecration of holy places and its gross disregard for the
rights of others? ” [Ibid., para. 33.1

37. We have just heard the representative of Pakistan,
Ambassador Agha Shahi, who has eloquently and lucidly
demonstrated the eminent and venerated place the Al Aqsa
Mosque holds among the momiments of the human spirit.
He has placed the crime in its right context, the context of
civilization and universal culture and he has underlined the
character of the crime committed against the Al Aqsa
Mosque; it is a case of regression to barbarity,

841. Israel must be held responsible for the crime of the
destruction and profanation of the Al Aqsa Mosque; its
responsibility is original and vicarious, direct and indirect.
That responsibility extends in time to long before 21
August 1969 when fire was set to the Mosque; for, through
its policy and its attitude to Arab Jerusalem and its Holy
Shrines, Israel has laid down the setting for the crime and
activated the motivation.

38. In their communication dated 22 August 1969,
addressed to the President of the Security Council, the
representatives of twenty-five Member States stated that:
“Since the sacred precincts in Jerusalem proclaim the
spiritual brotherhood of man in God, any damage or
desecration of the hallowed rites of one faith cannot but
cause anguish to the devoted adherents of another ”
[S/9407, para. 21.

42. For a long time Israel has carried on a systematic and
carefully planned wave of destruction of Arab houses of
long-standing religious learning and education, such as those
in the Magharba quarter. It has demolished Moslem shrines
adjacent to the western wall of the Al Aqsa Mosque.
Moreover, holy, venerated places which, according to the
tenets of the MosIem religion, should be regarded with
reverential respect have been treated as mere touristic sites,
open to flocks of curious visitors with complete disregard
of the minimum of decent behaviour and decorum, thus
affronting the time-honoured Moslem traditions. The representative of Jordan, Ambassador El-Farra, has apprised the
Security Council, in several letters addressed to the President of the Council, of the occurrence of those acts, the
veracity of which the world press has reported and
confirmed. I would cite one of such reports which appeared
in The New York Times of 22 June 1969, according to
which the sacred compound of Haram-Ash-Sharif has been
turned into a picnicking area. The correspondent of that
newspaper reported that

They expressed the confidence that the sorrow of their
Governments and peoples “will be shared by all Governments and peoples who cherish the abiding values of the
human spirit and hold the Holy City in the highest
reverence”. [Ibid.] They further pointed out that “Events
of this nature have had no parallel in the history of
Jerusalem for centuries prior to Israeli military occupation.” (Ibid., para. 4.1
39. Underlying the symptomatic significance of the crime
committed against the Al Aqsa Mosque, the representatives
stated in that communication that they wished to impress
upon the Security Council and the General Assembly that
such events add a vast dimension of human indignation to
the situation in Jerusalem, and thus further aggravate the
threat to peace which that situation constitutes.

“The Moslems regard the entire compound as in effect a
mosque, because for more than 1,300 years prayer
platforms have been scattered throughout. During holidays’, tens of thousands of pilgrims gath,er there and form
prayer lines even on the pavement, To them, the
Israelis’ . . , conduct in such a place” is “offensive”.

40. The sacrilege and destruction inflicted upon the Al
Aqsa Mosque come as a grim reminder of the duplicity of
Israeli pronouncements. The Council will recall that when it
considered the question of Jerusalem at its 1482nd meeting
on 30 June 1969, the representative of Israel had the
audacity to inform the Council of “plans and projects for
the preservation of the city’s historical monuments and
religious shrines”. f1482nd meeting, para. 47.1 It comes
also as a sobering reminder to the Council of the pertinence
-. of the warning voiced by the representative of Jordan,

43. The carefully planned designs of Israel have not been
confined to the propagation of a climate of disrespect and
lack of reverence for the holy shrines. Parallel with it went
a campaign of officiai and unofficial pronouncements
5

was followed by the continuation of Israeli military
occupation of Arab territories with the avowed objective of
annexation in contravention of the established principle cf.
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war,a
principle which was reaffirmed unanimously by the Secu.
rity Council in resolution 242 (1967).

whose avowed purpose wasthe preparation of a Climate for
the clearance of the site of the Al Aqsa Mosque in order to
give way to the restoration of the Temple.
44. I shall not cite the official and unofficial declarations
by Israeli leaders such as “Israel is meaningless without
Jerusalem, and Jerusalem is meaningless without the Temple”.

52. The annexation of Arab territories has now become an
official policy. It has been reflected in a number of
declarations by Israeli ,leaders. One of the most recent of
those declarations was made by the Israeli Defence Mirth.
ter, who stated:

45. I shall not cite the declaration by a member of the
Israeli Cabinet after the aggression of June 1967 to the
effect that the site of the Haram-Ash-Sharif belongs to the
Jews by the’right of occupation.

“Golan should no longer be included among such termls
as new areas or occupied areas, and should be viewed as
one of the districts of Israel. The Golan will never be
returned to Syria.”

46. I shall not cite the declaration by another member of
the Cabinet of Israel that the right of ownership of the site
of Haram-Ash-Sharif was acquired by Israel’s forebears
2,000 years ago, Nor shall I cite evidence like the
establishment of a fund to collect money all over the world
for the purpose of the reconstruction of the Temple.

He added:
“Israel will hold on to Sharm Esh Sheikh and the
approaches to the Gulf of Eilat . . . Jerusalem will never
be divided again . . . Israel is willing to return the Wes,t
Bank of Jordan within the framework of the Allon Plan.“’

47. I should, however, like to cite a report by Menahem
Borsh from Jerusalem, published in the Zionist paper,
Yadihote Ahronote, in the issue of 18 August 1969, page
35, three days before the fire was set to the Holy Al Aqsa
Mosque:

53. It should be noted that the Allon Plan is the once
which aims at ensuring Israel’s continued occupation of thle
Jordan West Bank. A statement of policy on the annexation
of occupied Arab territories was included in the platform of
the ruling party in Israel.

“A group of Bitar members that arrived from Europe
for a tour here made a pilgrimage yesterday to the
Temple Mount. They made a ceremonial parade against
the doors of Al Aqsa Mosque; after a mass prayer they
proceeded to the Temple Mount through Bab Al Magharba. They rushed quickly to the steps leading to the
Mosque and conducted the parade. They were addressed
by their instructor who explained to the trainees that
their feet stood on the most sacred spot of the Jewish
people, a spot that strangers tried to seize, but in the
future it would become the nation’s centre on which the
Temple would be built anew.”

541 Moreover, the Israeli policy of annexation is by no
means confined to verbal declarations or electoral plat.
forms. Plans have already been drawn and put into effect
towards that ultimate goal, as reported by Reutersfrom Tel
Aviv on 27 August 1969:
“The Israeli Government has authorized the establish.
ment of six new settlements in Israeli-occupied areas,thr:
Minister of Agriculture, Haim Gvati, said at a newI
conference here today,

48. Those are the irrefutable facts which establish the role
of Israel in and its responsibility for the crime against Al
Aqsa Mosque-a responsibility of which Israel cannot
absolve itself by first relating the cause of the fire to an
electric short-circuit or by later presenting an individual
whom it calls a religious fanatic.

“Plans for the settlements include two in the Golan
Heights, captured from Syria in the six-day war of June
1967, two in the Jordan Valley in occupied Jordan
territory and two in northern Sinai.

49. 3y committing this offence against the spiritual and
cultural heritage of mankind Israel has added one more
offence to its series of o~ffencesagainst peace and humanity.

“The Minister said that since the 1967 war ten
settlements had been established on the Golan Heights,
four in the Jordan Valley, two in the Etzion block near
Hebron and two in Sinai.”

50. The first offence was the denial of the inalienable
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, in violation of the
principle of self-determination, and Israel’s continued resort
to force as an instrument of its racist ideology and
expansionist policy, which culminated in 1948 in its driving
the Arab people of Palestine by force and terror from their
homeland; in 1956 in its launching of its aggression against
my country; and in 1967 in the extension of the scope of
aggression to comprise this time, three Member States of
the United Nations.

55. Israel has also committed and continues to commit
gross violations of the principles and rules of the 1949
Geneva Convention relative to Protection of Civilian Per.
sons in Time of Ware. Its oppressive measures include the
arrest, detention, torture, dispossession and expulsion of
Arab civilians from their homes and the deportation 01
their leaders, religious and secular, Moslem and Christian.
56. I should like to turn to Israeli offences with specific
reference to Jerusalem. That Holy City of peace and

51. That violation of the basic norm of the prohibition of
the use of force against the territorial integrity of States

2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.

6

brotherhood for all time has had under Israeli occupation
its sad and tragic share of suffering, oppression and
sacrifice. Immediately following the 1967 aggression came
the Israeli attempt to annex it, described at that time as
administrative measures. The General Assembly and the
Security Council have censured Israel in the strongest terms
for those measures, considered them invalid and repeatedly
called on Israel to rescind forthwith all measures likely to
change or alter the status of Jerusalem.

of the United Nations can in no way contribute to the
aChieVemt?nt
of peace in the Middle East. Any military or
economic assistance provided to the aggressor is nothing
but support for his aggression and an act against the victims
of that aggression. As pertinently put by the representative
of Lebanon, Mr. Ghorra, at the 1498th meeting of the
Council, on 13 August 1969:
“Israel may receive Phantom aircraft and may seek
more Phantoms, but the phantom of the injustice it has
committed against the Arab world . . , will haunt it.”
[1498th meeting, para. 37.1

57. Israel’s response to the will of the international
community as expressed in those resolutions was persistent
disregard and defiance. The burning of Al Aqsa Mosque was
but a manifestation of that policy and it cannot be viewed
in the abstract or out of its context; it is not an individual
incident or an isolated event. It is intrinsically related and
inherently linked to the continued Israeli occupation of
Jerusalem, to the Israelis’ avowed expansionist designs and
to their refusal to carry out the various General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. It has a symptomatic
significance, and the remedy should be addressed not to the
symptom but to the source of the evil; not to the effects
but to the cause. For the Holy Places in Jerusalem, as we
were pertinently reminded by the representative of Pakistan, there will be no safety as long as the Israeli occupation
of Jerusalem continues.

61. Israel, by refusing to implement the United Nations
resolutions, by adopting an aggressive policy of persistent
denial of the rights of the Arab people of Palestine and
continued occupation of the Arab territories, by foiling all
efforts to reach a peaceful settlement of the problem, and
by its declared policy of annexing the Arab occupied
territories, is creating a serious situation fraught with grave
dangers ’ for international peace and security. Israel has
adopted an obstructive attitude to all the efforts exerted to
reach a peaceful settlement in accordance with Security
Council resolution 242 (1967): the efforts carried out by
Ambassador Jarring as well as those undertaken by the four
Powers to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Middle East
situation. By such an attitude Israel is seeking to impose its
own terms and to realize its expansionist aims, in utter
disregard of the dangers that threaten peace in the area.

58. As amply described by the representatives of twentyfive Member States in their communication to the President
of the Council, this crime adds a vast dimension of human
indignation to the situation in Jerusalem and thus further
aggravates the threat to peace which that situation constitutes.

62. The latest but certainly not the last of Israel’s
aggressions occurred south of Suez this morning-on the
very day the Council was scheduled to convene. It is but
another confirmation of Israel’s persistence in continuing
its policy of complete disregard and defiance of the Charter
and the injunctions of the Security Council.

59. The primary purpose of the United Nations is to
maintain international peace and security and to that end
to take effective collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression of
acts of aggression. Member States have a collective responsibility in this endeavour, for aggression against one State is
aggression against the international order, and repelling the
aggressor and bringing him back within the realm of
international authority is the collective responsibility of all
the members of the international community.

63. How long will Israel continue its denial of the rights of
the Arab people of Palestine, its occupation of Arab
territories, its oppression and repression of the inhabitants
of the occupied territories? The reply to that question has
been provided by Israel. It is as long as Israel is allowed to
do so. How long should Israel be allowed to violate the
basic norms of the Charter, to challenge the authority of
the United Nations, to defy the will of the international
community, to pursue its expansionist policy and reckless
adventures? The reply to that question is for the Security
Council, the highest authority vested with the responsibilities for repelling aggression and maintaining peace. The
reply is the prompt and effective implementation of the
United Nations resolutions, the restoration of the rights of
the Arab people of Palestine, and the prompt and complete
termination of Israeli aggression and military occupation.

60. It is in the light of such considerations that any
assistance, military or economic, to Israel should be viewed.
The recent news of the beginning of the delivery of
Phantom aircraft to Israel cannot but cause deep regret and
grave concern. The implications of such an act are all the
more serious when one considers that it is taking place at a
time when Israel is persisting in its aggression against the
Arab countries and in its defiance of the United Nations. It
is taking place at a time following a number of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council during the past few
months, in which the Council condemned Israel for its
premeditated armed attacks on villages and populated areas
in Arab countries; it is taking place at a time when further
action and more effective steps-warning
of which was
given by the Council in a number of its resolutions-should
be taken against Israel. This is the time for the application
of sanctions against Israel as the Charter envisaged against
an aggressor. The provision of weapons and aircraft to Israel
while Israel occupies the territories of three Member States

64, The PRESIDENT [translated from Russian]: 1 now
call on the representative of Indonesia.
6.5. Mr. ABDULGANI (Indonesia): Mr. President, I should
like to take this opportunity to express to you and to the
other members of the Security Council the gratitude of the
Indonesian delegation for granting us the privilege of
participating in this meeting of the Security Council.
66. men the shocking news of the fire at the Al Aqsa
Mosque reached my country, the Indonesian delegation,
7

73. It has also been announced that the Indonesian
Government has donated one million rupiahs for the
restoration of the Mosque. In addition, further sums have
been voluntarily contributed by citizens to joint funds with
other Moslem countries for reconstruction, and more will
be forthcoming. These voluntary donations, however small
they may be, are a reflection of the outpouring of genuine
concern among Moslems everywhere. This should afso be
seen as symbolic of their feeling of solidarity for the cause
of the Palestinian Moslems in the Holy Land, who still live
in the shadow of continued war and misery.

upon the instructions of my Government, joined with the
other Moslem countries Members of the United Nations in
sending by cable a telegraphic communication, dated 22
August, to the Secretary-General and to the President of
the Security Council, requesting that suitable action be
taken regarding the act of arson.
67. In our cable we envisaged as suitable action an
impartial investigation, the prevention of the recurrence of
such acts, and the enabling of representatives of the
Governments of Islamic countries to assess the damage and
to prepare plans for the repair of the Mosque. The
Secretary-General, in replying to our cable, expressed his
shock and sadness at the tragic fire which had severely
damaged that historic shrine.

74. Although about 90 per cent of our 115 million people
are Moslems let me make it clear that the Republic of
Indonesia is definitely not an Islamic State, At the same
time, however, it is not entirely a secular State. Although
no express mention is made in our Constitution to make
Islam the State religion, Islamic tenets are one of the
corner-stones of Moslem life in Indonesia. The State is also
committed to the protection of all the religions that exist in
the country, and provides for each equal opportunity to
practise its beliefs. This fact is reflected in the creation of a
Ministry of Religious Affairs which, from the beginning of
our independence, has been entrusted with this task,

68. On 29 August, Indonesia again joined with the other
Moslem countries in requesting an urgent meeting of the
Security Council. The basis of our request was the grievous
situation resulting from the extensive damage caused by
arson to the Holy Al Aqsa. This situation arises from a set
of conditions which are part of the larger Middle East
dispute. Therefore, it is broader in scope than the immediate incident and involves the whole Middle East.

75. In a statement on 27 August, the Minister of Religious
Affairs elaborated on further efforts which Indonesian
Moslems might make to contribute to the efforts of their
Moslem brothers in all countries to restore the Holy
Mosque. He also laid stress on the need for concerted action
to prevent the recurrence of similar acts of profanation of
the Holy Places in Jerusalem.

69. The occasion which has prompted our delegation to
join in calling for a meeting of the Security Council is
indeed a sad one, not only for Moslems but for all mankind.
It is an occasion of special anguish to the millions of
Moslems around the world, for whom the Al Aqsa Mosque
is the first Quibh and the third most sacred Mosque of
Islam. All Indonesians share the horror and shock of their
Moslem brothers everywhere at this act of arson during the
time that Jerusalem is under military occupation.

76. We in Indonesia, of course, are aware that this latest
tragic event did not occur in a vacuum. It cannot be
separated from the military occupation of Jerusalem, which
has been deplored and condemned time and again by this
Council, most recently by resolutions 252 (1968) and
267 (1969). We must recognize that the total environment
in which this outrage took place is one of illegality and
defiance, not only of recommendations and resolutions of
the General Assembly, but of explicit decisions of the
Security Council.

70. Since 22 August, the leaders of all Indonesian Moslem
organizations have stated that the Israeli occupying authorities cannot be absolved of responsibility for this event, and
that recurrence of such acts under Zionist rule should be
prevented in the future.
71. Most Indonesian Islamic leaders wonder if this might
not be part of a deliberate attempt to rebuild a temple
structure symbolic of the Hebrew past. It is felt, therefore,
that this may be a test and a challenge to Moslem
determination to retain their Holy Places in Jerusalem. In
that case, the Indonesian people would surely rise to this
challenge, for what is at stake here is not just a mosque,
hoIy as it is: what is at stake is the freedom of worship and
the assurance that the Holy Places will be respected and
recognized by everyone, including the military occupying
force.

77. Furthermore, since the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem, this Council has heard repeated charges against Israel
for its wanton acts of demolition and changes of character
of historic and religious buildings in Jerusalem and in other
occupied areas. These changes and the extent of the
desecration have not been able to be adequately determined
since the Israeli authorities have consistently refused to
allow the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
into the area to make an impartial survey of the situation.
Accordingly, the Secretary-General has been unable to
discharge his responsiibilities under resolution 252 (1968) to
report to the Council regarding measures taken by the
occupying Power to change the legal status of Jerusalem.

72. The Indonesian Government, through our Foreign
Minister, declared immediately after the arson that it
denounced strongly the burning of the Masdjid Al Aqsa in
Jerusalem. It considered the arson an indefensible act, the
circumstances of which should not remain obscure, and an ( 78. In light of these facts it has become the overriding
act which should not go unpunished. It is the considered
responsibility of the Security Council to implement the
view of my Government that the Israeli occupying authorimany resolutions pertaining to the City of Jerusalem Which
ties cannot be absolved from responsibility. Furthermore,
have already been discussed and adopted.
my Government is ready to take an active part in joint
efforts by the whole MosIem world to rebuild and save this I 79. The principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition
sacred Mosque.
1 of territory by armed force cannot be repeatecl too onen.
8

At the Fifth Emergency Special Session of the General
Assembly in 1967 (1534th meeting], the Indonesian
delegation strongly denounced the aggressive actions of
Israel against the Arab States, and joined with other nations
in efforts to effect an immediate cease-fire. We expressed
our concern agdn in the Special Political Committee last
yeate in the debate on the plight of the Palestine refugees.
Again in the Third Committee last year4 we stated our
continued interest in the respect for human rights in the
occupied territories in the Middle East. We also participated
in the debate in the Security Council on the status of
Jerusalem in July of this year, scarcely two months ago.
Today we cannot fail to recall that the universally accepted
principles of international law require that an occupying
Power respect and safeguard religious institutions and
practices. These principles have been repeatedly and consistently violated. Resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council have been defied with impunity. The
tragic consequences of these failures to require compliance
are only too clear as a result of this latest destruction.

86. This debate concerns a shrine which is sacred to
millions of Moslems in the world. My Government and
people profoundly
respect the Islamic faith and the
religious sentiments of its adherents. We share their sense of
shock and sorrow at the damage caused to the Al Aqsa
Mosque by the.fire on 21 August, A part of the universal
human legacy has been injured and its swift repair should
be carried out as soon as possible.
87. At the same time, all decent opinion has been revolted
at the false accounts of this tragic occurrence that have
been deliberately spread and the hatred that has been
whipped up in an effort to exploit religious feelings for
political and even warlike purposes. It would be regrettable
if ahe present debate were perverted to serve these
unworthy purposes.
88. The United Nations should represent the ecumenical
spirit and set its face firmly against religious prejudice.
89. My delegation at any rate proposes to address the
Council in a spirit of mutual tolerance and goodwill among
all the faiths represented around this table. We believe that
a number of the Moslem Member States which have joined
in requesting the Council meeting have done so only out of
genuine concern for a Moslem Holy Place and without any
desire to increase ill-will and tension.

80. In recalling these past injustices which have contributed to the present tragedy, we have made.every attempt to
keep political considerations and our strong religious
concern separate, and it is not our intention to make this
issue one which will further aggravate an already precarious
situation.

90. The sanctity of the place under discussion demands
that the Security Council and all its members should
approach this question without attempting to politicize it
and that our only thought should be to reassure sincere
Moslem opinion concerning the safety of the Mosque and
the need to ensure its repair.

81. The sacred task of rebuilding this shrine is a religious
obligation upon Moslems everywhere. Already many head5
of Moslem States and other world religious leaders have
offered to help in this work. It is clear, and it must be
conceded by all, that the actual work required must be
undertaken by Moslems, directed by Moslems and must not
be hindered by anyone for whatever reason.

91. It is in awe that man faces nature’s storms, the
catastrophes of famine and epidemic, of flood and of fire,
and the ravages and sorrow they bring with them. In such
hours of anxiety man’s daily preoccupations, his animosities and conflicts merge in a feeling of common concern
and action to overcome the havoc, to repair the damage
wrought and to restore life. No matter how strong the
belligerency between opponents, no matter how bitter the
quarrel between neighbours, the inherent understanding of
human beings for each other’s distress comes to the fore
and prevails, That has been so in the past. That should
always be so.

82. The task of the Security Council now is to facilitate
this undertaking so that it can be completed as speedily as
possible. This can be done only if the previous Security
Council
resolutions are implemented. To fail to do so now
will only diminish the authority of the Council.
83. In summarizing our point of view, let me repeat from
my statement of two months ago in this Council in which I
said that our deep concern is twofold: first, the religious
and spiritual attachment to Jerusalem and to the Holy
Mosque Al Aqsa by the people of Indonesia as the largest
Moslem country in South-East Asia, where the teaching of
Islam is not only religious, but is also a way of life and one
of the roots of our culture and civilization. Our second
concern is that the crisis of confidence in the United
Nations will be further aggravated unless a firm stand is
made.

92. Despite the differences arising from the Middle East
conflict, despite attempts eagerly made by some to exploit
the disaster for inflaming passions, there were elements of
precisely such understanding in face of the fire on 21
August 1969 in the Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem.

85. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, I should like to
express to you my deep respect and good wishes in your
high office. I join also in paying a tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of Spain.

93. Within a few minutes Arab members of the Bre
brigade in East Jerusalem were on the scene and they were
soon joined by their Jewish colIeaaues. As the flames were
being- mastered, fire-fighting equipment and Jewish crews
arrived from Bet Shemesh, Ramat Gan and Bnai Braq and
Arab firemen from Bethlehem, Hebron and Nablus. Jews
and Arabs strove side by side to overcome the fire and after
an hour succeeded in extinguishing it.

3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, Special Political Committee, 619th meeting.
4 Ibid., Third Committee, 1626th meeting.

94. This joint Arab-Jewish effort to localize the fire and to
extinguish it within a short time was not an isolated

84, The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call on
the representative of Israel.

9

“As soon as the news of the fire became known, this
morning, the Prime Minister published a statement
expressing deep sorrow.

instance that brought Arab and Jew together in common
endeavour. It was with the assistance of the Moslem guards
at the Al Aqsa Mosque, and with evidence which they
furnished, that the person believed to be responsible for
setting fire to the Mosque was arrested. Likewise, the
official inquiry into the circumstances of the tire is being
conducted by a Commission of Inquiry composed of Arab
as well as Jewish personalities, and Arab and Jewish
witnesses are appearing before it in a common endeavour to
arrive at the truth.

“This afternoon, the Cabinet decided to establish a
commission of inquiry to inquire into the circumstances
of the outbreak of the fire. The findings of the
Commission will be published.
“The President of the Supreme Court has been requested by the Government to appoint the presiding
judge and the members of the Commission.

95. Let us recall the essential features of the unhappy
events of that day.

“The Government commends the action of the tire
brigade workers and those who helped tham, both Jews
and Arabs, whose devoted work enabled the fire to be
localized and extinguished with the result that the
Mosque building was saved.

96. The fire broke out early in the morning at approximately 7.20 a.m. At that time the area of the Mosque is
generally quiet and almost deserted. No one except Moslem
worshippers is allowed to be in it, Jewish and other
non-Moslem visitors may enter the Mosque only from
8 o’clock onwards, and even then they are barred during
the hours of prayer. Nevertheless, a non-Moslem succeeded
in purchasing an entrance ticket from the Wakf guard at the
Bani Ghanim (Ghawanima) Gate and entered the compound before 7 a.m. When the fire was noticed, the guards
saw the man hurriedly leaving the Mosque. The blaze
started in the south-western wing, which is largely made of
wood, Nine tenths of the shrine, including the dome,
remained untouched by the fire. The Nur ad Din Minbar
pulpit, however, was almost totally destroyed. So was the
wooden roof over the southern wing. The original wooden
boards decorating the ceiling of Al Aqsa had been taken
down several years ago and they are carefully preserved in
the Moslem Museum which adjoins the Mosque. The
existing boards, damage to which was slight, date from the
present century, Except for that damage, the Mosque
remained unharmed. Normal prayers in it were resumed on
the following day, a Friday, with the participation of some
2,000 worshippers. Services in the Mosque have continued
since, without interruption.

“It has thus become possible to hold prayers in the
Mosque.
“The police immediately opened a vigorous investigation which is still proceeding.
“The Government of Israel is ready to give all aid and
co-operation necessary for the repair and restoration of
those parts of the building which were damaged.It will in
this connexion make available the assistance of engineers,
as well as Moslem experts from abroad,
“The Government expresses deep sorrow at the eutbreak of the fire in this revered Moslem shrine.

97. As soon as the outbreak of fire became known, the
Prime Minister, Mrs. Golda Meir, issued a statement declaring, inter alia:

“At various times in the past, fires have broken out in
holy places . . . This, however, is the first occasion on
which an attempt has been made to inflame passion and
incite hatred. The Government expresses revulsion at the
efforts now being made by official quarters in certain
Arab States falsely to attribute to Israel culpability for
causing the fire. This vicious libel, which is designed to
exploit the fire for purposes of political and religious
incitement, merits the unqualified condemnation of all
enlightened mankind,”

“I have heard with shock and regret that this morning
at 7.20 a fire broke out at the Al Aqsa’Mosque. The fire
brigades that were called in immediately are making every
effort to extinguish the fire.

99. In accordance with the decision taken, the President
of the Supreme Court of Israel, acting by virtue of the
powers conferred upon him by law, appointed on 22
August 1969 the following Commission of Inquiry:

“As soon as the fire became known, the members of the
Cabinet convened in session.

Chairman: Dr. Yoel Zussman, Justice of the Supreme
Court ;

“In the name of the Government of Israel I express
deep regret at the outbreak of fire in a site holy to
Islam.”

Members: Mr. Muhamad al-Hawari, Judge of the District
Court, Nazareth; Professor Michael Ardon, Professor of
Chemistry at the Hebrew University, Jerusalem; Professor
Arnold Winokur, Professor of Construction at the Technion, Haifa; Mr. Musa Ktily, Mayor of Nazareth.

98. In the afternoon, a special meeting of the Cabinet was
convened, and at its conclusion the following communique
was issued:

100. On the day of the fire, 21 August, the Presiderrt of
the Moslem Council, Sheikh Helmi el-Muhtasib, held a Press
conference at which he declared that preliminary mvestigstions by Arab engineers definitely indicated arson.

“The Cabinet met in special session this afternoon to
consider the fire which broke out only this morning in a
part of the Al Aqsa Mosque.
10

101. The correspondent of the Christian Science Monitor
who was present at the press conference reported Sheikh
el-Muhtasib’s statement as follows:
“He claimed that a man of a well-known description
had entered the Mosque on Thursday morning and was
seen leaving just before the fire broke out. When some of
the Mosque gate-keepers gave chase, the man fled.
“Although the Sheikh refused to identify the man’s
nationality pending an investigation by the Moslem
Committee, he insisted the man was not a Palestinian. He
said the man was young, fair, dressed in khaki and
bare-headed, and had spoken to the gate-keeper in
English. He said the gate-keeper could identify the man.”
102. On the following day, a man, a visitor from Australia,
was arrested by the Israel police on the basis of evidence
submitted by the Moslem guards of the Mosque. According
to additional information now available that same person
had tried to set fire to the Mosque ten days earlier, on 11
August, at 2330 hours, but had failed. Traces of that
attempt remained and had been noticed by the guards. The
latter, however, did not report this to the authorities till
after the fire on 21 August. In the meantime Michael
Rohan, the accused, has re-enacted his deeds for the police,
formal charges have been filed and preparations for his trial
are continuing.
103. The Commission of Inquiry has also commenced its
hearings. The hearings, like the trial of the accused person,
will remain open to all irrespective of nationality or
religion.
104. Those are the facts. The Israeli reaction was summed
on 24 August by Israel’s Foreign Minister as follows:

up

“The Mosque Al Aqsa is the possession of Islam but the
respect for its beauty, its antiquity and the associations
which flow from it is a part of the universal culture. A
civilized man is by definition one whose only reaction to
the fire is one of shock and concern, undiluted by any
other sentiment or motive of prejudice, of rancour or of
political advantage, and indeed all civilized mankind, and,
by virtue of proximity, Israel first of all, reacted in unity
of spirit, A part of the human legacy has been injured.
Happily the vigilance and toil of the firemen and workers,
Jewish and Arab, have saved it from destruction. It is
intact.
“Everything must now be set on foot to restore it as far
as possible to its full splendour and of course justice must
take its course.”
105. It is in that spirit that the matter before the Security
Council must be considered, It would be regrettable if an
event which unites us all in sorrow should become a cause
for further division and hostility.
106. Truth and reality must not be allowed to become
overshadowed by emotion and acrimony. Facts should not
be simply relegated to oblivion.
107. Thus, for instance, it is a fact that fires have occurred
in Moslem and Christian Holy Places also in the past when

east Jerusalem was under Jordanian rule. In 1949 a fire
broke out in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, It took
over twenty-four hours-not one hour as in the case of Al
Aqsa-for
the authorities to extinguish the fire. In 1964
there was a fire in the Mosque compound itself, in the
Dome of the Rock adjacent to Al Aqsa.
108. Similarly, it is a fact that nine tenths of the Mosque
was untouched by the fire on 21 August, that normal
religious services have continued in it and that repairs of the
damage have already started.
109. It is also a fact that in the period of Jerusalem’s
division Jewry’s Holy Shrine of the Western Wall was
desecrated; all synagogues in the Old City were razed to the
ground; tombstones of the Jewish people’s most ancient
and revered cemetery on the Mount of Olives were
uprooted to serve as building material in Jordanian army
camps.
110. Israel’s attitude to the Holy Places was stated as far
back as 7 June 1967 by the Prime Minister, the late
Mr. Levi Eshkol. Speaking to the heads of religious communities in Jerusalem, he stated the Government’s policy
regarding the Holy Places to include the following:
“The arrangements concerning the Holy Places of Islam
will be determined by the Moslem Council, The arrangements in the places holy to Christendom will be made by
a Christian Council.”
111. On 27 June 19.57 he reiterated this policy before a
meeting with religious dignitaries and declared:
“I want to point out our intention to place the internal
administration of the Holy Places and their arrangements
in the hands of the religious leaders of the communities
which hold them sacred.”
The Protection of Holy Places Law 5727-1967 provides:
“1. The Holy Places shall be protected from desecration and any other violation and from anything likely to
violate the freedom of access of the members of the
various religions to the places sacred to them or their
feelings with regard to those places.
“2. (a) Whoever desecrates or otherwise violates a holy
place shall be liable to imprisonment for a term of seven
years.
“(b) Whoever does anything that is likely to violate the
freedom of access of the members of the various religions
to the places sacred to them or their feelings with regard
to those places shall be liable to imprisonment for a term
of five years,”
112. All Moslem Holy Places, including the Al Aqsa
Mosque, have since 1967 been controlled, administered and
guarded by the Wakf, the appropriate Moslem religious
authority, No change has taken place in that respect as
compared with conditions prevailing prior to 1967. Some
two years ago the Ministry of Religious Affairs offered to
provide guards at its expense, but the offer was_ n-0”

issued to the effect that the arrest of the man suspected of
arson explodes the rumours spread by the Arab countries,

accepted, and the Ministry respected the wishes of the
Moslem authorities. Since the recent Al AqsafIre, those
authorities have themselves taken steps to review and
improve the internal security arrangements in the Haram
Ash-Sharif compound and the two mosques it holds. That is
a matter clearly within their own prerogative. The Israel
authorities limit their security functions to safeguarding the
access to Holy Places, maintaining public order in their
vicinity, and assisting with security within the premises
only if invited to do so by the responsible religious
authorities. At the hl:arings of the Commission of Inquiry,
official Moslem witnesses confirmed that this understanding
reflects no change from that which prevailed under the
Jordanian occupation and is satisfactory to them.

119. On 28 August the Jerusalem Moslem Council estab.,
lished an Al Aqsa Repairs Committee. Its Chairman is;
Sheikh Helmi el-Muhtasib, the President of the Moslem
Council. The Committee has announced the creation of s
special fund to which contributions for repair work will be
accepted. An office has been opened in the Mosque Quarter
to supervise the repairs. The office will be headed by
Mr, Anwar el-Khatib. The repairs are understood to require
several weeks at the utmost.
120. The Moslem Council has also addressed itself to the
question of security arrangements in the Mosque Quarter
where Al Aqsa is situated. Realizing that the circumstances,
of the suspected arsonist’s entry into the Mosque corn.
pound before it opens to visitors leave a number of
questions unanswered,
the Moslem Council invited
Mr. Hazen el-Khaldi, a former senior officer in the Syrian
Army, to survey the security arrangements. Mr. Khaldi is
expected to present his findings within a few days. He will
also make recommendations for possible improvements in
the security precautions at the Al Aqsa Mosque.

113. World reaction to the attempt to exploit the fire on
21 August in order to invite religious hatred and aggravate
the Israel-Arab conflict has been one of shock and general
condemnation. In North and South America, in Africa,
Europe and Asia, disapproval, dissociation and protest have
been voiced, Christians and Jews, as well as Moslems,
statesmen, spiritual leaders and laymen, the press and public
bodies and organizations have unequivocally denounced
such incitement.

121. The Israel Government has already declared its
readiness to make available all assistance required, including
the admission of experts from abroad. As I have also
indicated, the hearings of the Commission of Inquiry as
well as the trial of the suspected arsonist, will be public and
open to all irrespective of nationality or faith.

114. The reaction of the Arab population in Jerusalem is
of particular interest. It was natural that the news of the
outbreak of the fire in the Holy Place should arouse
,emotions among the local Moslem population, Yet, despite
the attempt by some unruly fringe groups, whipped up by
foreign radio and television broadcasts, to give violent
expression to their feelings, the community as a whole
remained calm.

122. Thus, grievous as the case of the fire at the Al Aqsa
Mosque may have been, understandable as the emotions
generated by it are, it is clear that all necessary measures
have already been taken to ascertain the circumstances, to
mete out justice and to restore the building.

115. Jerusalem’s Moslem leaders and notables have expressed their satisfaction at the measures taken by the Israel
authorities. When the Israeli Minister of Police, meeting on
22 August with representatives of the Moslem Council,
conveyed to them the news about the arrest of the
suspected arsonist, they declared their gratification and
appreciation at the fact that such rapid progress was made
in the investigation of the fire.

123. The Government of Israel will remain steadfast in its
declared policy of. maintaining and respecting the control,
administration and protection of all Holy Places by the
religious communities which hold them sacred. The Govemment of Israel remains willing to continue consultations
with the world’s religious bodies to give further expression
to the universal religious character of the Holy Places.

116. The New York Times correspondent spoke to
Mr. Anwar Nuseibeh, a member of the Moslem Council, and
reported on 23 August:

124. Respect for religion and for the faith of others is
deeply imbedded in Jewish consciousness. The torment and
bloodshed inflicted upon us on account of our religion are
ever present in our minds. We understand and indeed share
the pain of those hurt in their feelings of faith. We are
confident that everything possible is being done to clarify
the facts and repair the damage, and that the Mosque of Al
Aqsa will continue in its beauty and glory to be an
inspiration to those who hold it sacred and to all mankind.

“Anwar Nuseibeh, a former Defence Minister of Jordan
and now an Arab community leader in Jerusalem, said
that the arrest of Mr. Rohan was a ‘good thing’ and that
he hoped it would clarify other aspects of the fire.”
117. According to other press reports, Anwar el-Khatib,
also a member of the Moslem Council and the former
Governor of the East Jerusalem District, declared:
“If that is in fact the man who set fire to the Mosque
and if his motives are as published, this will bring about a
considerable improvement in the situation obtaining
today in the Arab world as a whole and in particular in
Jerusalem.”

125. All attempts, however, whether in the areaitself or’in
the Security Council, to seize on the fire as a weapon for
intensifying belligerency towards Israel and assailing Israel’s
rights and standing are unworthy and unacceptable.

118, On 23 August, leaders of the Moslem communities in
Israel held a meeting, following which a statement was

126. The Middle East war is by now the longest armed
conflict of this century. The points of friction between the
Governments involved in it are numerous. The differences
12

which can be seized upon in order to deepen hostility even
further are manifold.‘ Surely this is not -what responsible
Governments would seek. After two decades of warfare,
those concerned with the happiness of their peoples can
have only one goal: to end the war, not to inflame it; to
solve the conflict, not to aggravate it. It is not what
separates us that Israel and the Arab States must search for,
but that which unites us. No matter how complex the
political controversy, no matter how grave the military
confrontation, there is kinship between Jew and Arab in
their civilization. If it is the vision of ultimate peace that
guides us, we must nurture it with care and reverence.

occurrence on that Mount, Arabs and Israelis will remember
the truth our common ancestor Abraham bequeathed to us,
that the lives of our sons are sacred?
128. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Russian): The list
of speakers who expressed a wish to make statements at
today’s meeting of the Security Council in the discussion
on the item before it is exhausted. If no more representatives wish to speak, we shall conclude today’s meeting of
the Security Council.
129. With regard to the next meeting of the Security
Council on this question, following consultations with the
representatives of the countries which submitted this item
for the consideration of the Council and with all the
members of the Council, it has been agreed that the second
meeting of ,the Council to continue the discussion of this
item will take place tomorrow, 10 September, at 3 p.m.

127. The Mount on which Al Aqsa stands is the Temple
Mount, whose holiness to the Jewish people is such that the
devout amongst us would not even tread on it, This is
Mount Moriah, where Abraham was minded to offer up his
son Isaac in sacrifice, but at the last moment came to
understand that human life is all too sacred for that. Is it
too much to hope that, as our thoughts are on another

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
d6positoires
du monde

Notions
entier.

Unies
sont
Informer-vous

Nations

Unies,

des venter,

New

HAK

IlOJlY’iMTb

Section

M3AAHMFI

Oprann:~as~nn

Il:l~am~rl

CONSEGUlR

JIllpI.
a~[)Ccy:
Il.lIl

PUBLICACIONES

en vente
dons
ler librairies
oupr&s
de votre
libroirie
ov

in United

Nations,

New York

06bEAMHEHHblX

IIar~rrk

x0x110

I;yurlTa

HAl@lfl

n IillllXlll~lS

hlO~llTC

CllpLlRliII
06 ll:1~klllIlllX
Opraimar~w
06zegrl11e1111lds
~fCCllCLlLl.

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicaciones
de los Nacioner
Unidor
ert6n
en todor
porter
del mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero
Ventoc,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

et 18s agences
adressez-vow
b:

ou Gen&ve.

OPrAHM3AuMM

OGzcp~~lc~~~~las

IlWIITI'Tll21S
110 llWS
pL\ilOllnX
Hal-XIIIIIC
ILlI IllllUllTC
II0
lIpO,WiC
Il:l,VlllIlil,
IIblO-nOl)li

COMO

York

UNIES

en venta
o dirijora

Price $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

31aramax

II

n Ilr7lllCY
IilllliiilloY
IIal~rril.
CcKiissH

U0

y cosos dirtribuidoros
Unidos,
Seccibn

de

UNIDAS
en librerior
a: Nociones

in other

currencies)

82220-December

1972-2#50
