S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8706th meeting

Wednesday, 22 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dinh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Baleci
Mr. Cheng Lie
Ms. Lorenzo
Ms. Lõuk
Ms. Michel
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kirpichenko
Ms. Porter
Ms. Goolab
Mr. Baati
Ms. Gray
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-01666 (E)
*2001666*

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 10.10 a.m. on Wednesday,
22 January.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
If delegations have longer statements, they are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a summarized version when speaking in the Chamber. I
wish to inform all concerned that we will suspend this
open debate at 1 p.m.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): Mr. President, I would like
to join others in thanking the briefers and commend
you for convening this open debate.
Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
Barely more than a week ago, the Security Council
debated on the importance of upholding the Charter
of the United Nations (see S/PV.8699, S/PV.8699
(Resumption 1) and S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)). It
is fitting then that we are having this debate now, as
the question of Palestine is intrinsically linked to
respecting the principles of international law and the
United Nations Charter.
As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, it is regrettable that the question of
Palestine remains unresolved. Although another decade
has passed, the Palestinians continue to live under a
brutal occupation and a repressive blockade. On a daily
basis, they face discriminatory treatment and violations
of their basic human rights. They are dispossessed of
their homes and lands, deprived of natural resources
and economic development, and restricted in their
movements. Such enormous hardship and suffering
continue to be inflicted on the Palestinians with
impunity while the international community stands by,
unable to alleviate the ongoing suffering caused by the
occupying Power.
Time and again we witness Israel’s repressive
policies and practices, which blatantly violate
numerous United Nations resolutions and international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Malaysia joins the
2/37

22/01/2020

international community in condemning Israel’s illegal
settlements and its unlawful occupation of Jerusalem.
Malaysia will continue to extend its support for
the Palestinian people in their quest for basic rights,
particularly their inalienable right to self-determination,
as well as their right to sustainable development. In that
regard, Malaysia will open its Embassy accredited to
Palestine in Amman and is working with the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan to achieve that objective. Malaysia
will also continue to extend its support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as it is the responsibility of
the international community to protect and promote the
dignity and human rights of the Palestinian people.
Malaysia believes that a legitimate political process
is the only way forward to end the illegal occupation
of Palestine and address all final-status issues in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Serious efforts are
needed for ending the illegal Israeli occupation and
establishing an independent State of Palestine. The
stalled Middle East peace process has served only to
exacerbate the current situation in Palestine. Therefore,
credible conditions must be created to revive the peace
process as soon as possible.
We continue to believe that it is the responsibility
of the Security Council to strive towards a two-State
solution, whereby the Palestinians and the Israelis
can live side by side in peace, based on the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
The international community, particularly the Security
Council, has the moral and legal responsibility to
immediately end the inhumane acts and injustice
perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this quarterly open debate
on the Middle East.
As the situation in the Middle East continues to
unfold, we should always bear in mind that long-term
political stability and economic prosperity are mutually
reinforcing. We encourage the international community
to work as one towards strategies that create economic
opportunities that translate into tangible improvements
in people’s lives in the region. Only then, will lasting
stability be achieved.
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Brazil is following with great concern the
developments in Iraq. We join others in calling on all
parties involved to work towards achieving a peaceful
solution to the situation. Further escalation must
be avoided at all costs, for it could have potentially
devastating consequences, in particular for the most
vulnerable populations in the region.
Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Brazil
wishes to reiterate its support for the negotiation of
a peaceful and creative solution to the conflict, with
Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace
and security. Brazil encourages all parties to seek
a constructive political environment conducive to a
return to meaningful negotiations. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains extremely fragile and serves
to highlight the need for a fair, just and mutually
agreeable political solution to the conflict. In this spirit,
Brazil encourages all parties involved to engage in new
diplomatic efforts with an open mind in order to reach
a just and comprehensive settlement.
Brazil points out that the constantly changing
dynamics of the reality on the ground in the region calls
for a clear response by the international community
under the aegis of international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil remains
concerned about the escalation of violence throughout
the northern part of the country. We reiterate the
obligation of all parties to comply with humanitarian
law and strongly condemn any attack impacting
civilians, including those on medical facilities and
workers, who must be protected at all times. We urge
the parties concerned to ensure safe and unimpeded
access to humanitarian aid in the region. In that regard,
we acknowledge the extension of the authorization
for the cross-border aid delivery mechanism by the
Security Council, while regretting that two of the
border crossings were not renewed, which might
hamper humanitarian activities in the country.
Brazil once again underscores its support for the
work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and encourages
the members of the Constitutional Committee to bridge
their differences in order to maintain progress on the
political track. We remain convinced that only a Syrianowned and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated
political process with due regard for the preservation
of Syria’s territorial integrity will bring about lasting

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

peace and allow for the relief of the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrian population.
Brazil remains deeply concerned about the
worsening of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen,
currently regarded as the gravest in the world. We call
on the parties to refrain from any action that might
lead to a further increase in hostilities and to take the
necessary steps towards the full implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. We also encourage the Yemeni
Government and the Southern Transitional Council to
find common ground and implement the terms of the
Riyadh agreement.
Furthermore, we urge the parties to continue to
work with Special Envoy Martin Griffiths with regard
to reaching a comprehensive political solution to the
conflict and the provision of continued and unimpeded
humanitarian assistance. Confidence-building measures,
such as the release of prisoners announced at the end of
2019, are also welcome initiatives, as they contribute
to fostering dialogue. Brazil welcomes the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement, for which we have agreed
to deploy Brazilian military and police officers, and
reiterates the importance of maintaining adequate
conditions for the fulfilment of its mandate.
Finally, Brazil strongly condemns the recent
military escalation in Libya, including the 4 January
attack against the Hadaba Military College, as well
as the indiscriminate shelling of civilians and civilian
buildings in Tripoli. We call on all parties to the conflict
to protect civilians and comply with the provisions
spelled out in the Geneva Conventions. We are also
following with concern the rising prospect of further
foreign intervention in the country. Brazil reiterates that
there is no military solution to address Libya’s pressing
political, security and humanitarian challenges.
We encourage all the relevant parties to comply
with the ceasefire agreement announced on 12 January
and welcome the peace efforts recently carried out
through the convening of the Berlin conference. We
support the work undertaken by Special Representative
Ghassan Salamé towards a comprehensive political
solution to the conflict, based on the implementation of
the Libyan Political Agreement signed in Skhirat and
the relevant United Nations resolutions. We maintain
our hope that the Libyan national conference will be
held at the earliest possible opportunity.

20-016663/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The Middle East
is experiencing dangerous levels of escalation that must
be of immediate concern to the Security Council. The
rising tensions between the United States and Iran
and the related military actions are a source of grave
concern. We hope that all parties directly and indirectly
involved will exercise maximum restraint and recommit
to diplomacy in order to reduce tensions.
The Charter of the United Nations sets out clear
benchmarks with respect to the use of force, in
particular with regard to very restricted and welldefined cases in which it is legal to use force against
another Member State. The recent developments
undermine the fundamental provisions of international
law, upon which our collective security depends and
which the Security Council is mandated to protect on
behalf of all of us.
There is an alarming trend of asserting the right
to self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter as the legal basis for preventive
military action without appropriate justification.
Such justification would include at the very least
evidence of the imminence of an armed attack, as
well as of the necessity and the proportionality of
measures taken in response. Excessively expansive and
unchecked interpretations of Article 51 undermine the
international rules-based order and are an obstacle to
the United Nations mandate to maintain international
peace and security. We attach the utmost importance to
preserving the integrity and authority of the Charter of
the United Nations in that respect.
Liechtenstein is concerned at the precarious state
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
a milestone achievement of multilateral diplomacy
that has yielded concrete results in terms of nuclear
non-proliferation. We recognize the decision by the
European signatories to trigger the dispute-settlement
mechanism as an effort to preserve the security gains
associated with the JCPOA. In addition, we recall that
resolution 2231 (2015) continues to be binding on all
States, with a special responsibility for all members of
the Security Council.
Recent discussions on Syria in the Security
Council have demonstrated once again that the Council
still cannot muster the political will to prioritize the
protection of the Syrian people. We thank those
4/37

22/01/2020

members of the Security Council who put their
collective weight behind achieving at least a minimal
solution for the continued cross-border delivery of
aid. They acted responsibly against strong political
opposition, in keeping with their role as accountable
members of the Council who serve on behalf of the
United Nations membership. The same membership has
expressed itself repeatedly and clearly on the need to
ensure accountability for the worst crimes committed
in Syria. While the Council continues to ignore
those views, in particular the call for a referral to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), the International
Impartial and Independent Mechanism (IIIM) has now
been established as a full-fledged subsidiary organ of
the General Assembly, including in budgetary terms.
The IIIM is a constant reminder of the essential role of
criminal accountability for the future of Syria. Peace
and justice cannot be separated in a political process
aimed at sustainable and lasting peace.
Liechtenstein continues to support a two-State
solution based on applicable international law as
the only pathway to a sustainable solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Developments on the
ground, including renewed settlement activities, risk
undermining the very prospect of such a solution and
are in violation of international law and relevant Council
resolutions. We follow with interest the activities
of the ICC Prosecutor and note in particular that her
preliminary examination into the situation in Palestine
concluded with the determination that all the statutory
criteria under the Rome Statute for the opening of an
investigation have been met. Such proceedings by a
standing and authoritative international court are the
expression of an effective international rules-based
order as advocated consistently by large parts of the
United Nations membership. We will continue our
support for the ICC in providing justice undeterred and
with the confidence of its broadly supported mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we emphasize our support for the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of the Sudan,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, Bangladesh,
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
and Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for their
valuable briefings (see S/PV.8706), which reminded us
of the gravity of the situation on the ground.
Regrettably, today’s meeting is convened because
of the delicate and dangerous circumstances as a result
of continued aggression and repeated violations against
the Palestinian people by Israel, the occupying Power.
Over the past two years and as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, we felt the deep concern of
the United Nations about the illegal Israeli policies that
have threatened to cause total collapse and undermine
any prospects for a two-State solution, as noted by the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, here in the Chamber on
many occasions.
Israel has adopted countless aggressive practices
and policies during the years of occupation, but it is
unacceptable that the Israeli occupying authorities
continue those violations with impunity. The Security
Council has been unable to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable for failing to implement the
Council’s resolutions, in particular for showing
disregard and contempt as the occupying Power for
the resolutions aimed at protecting the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, and for engaging in
illegal practices against Palestinians, their property,
holy sites and fundamental rights, in violation of
resolutions of international legitimacy and international
humanitarian law. It is also unacceptable that 25 years
have passed since the Oslo Accords without progress on
a comprehensive and just peace regarding this question,
which is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Continuous Israeli acts of aggression aim to entrench
occupation and undermine any prospects for genuine
peace. In 2019, the occupying Power continued to conduct
arbitrary arrests and demolish and seize Palestinian
homes, for instance in July when it raided the village
of Sur Baher, destroying homes and displacing scores
of Palestinian families. It continues unprecedentedly
to build many settlements and thousands of settlement
units in the West Bank, while expanding settlements
in occupied East Jerusalem and forcibly displacing
Palestinian civilians, in flagrant violation of resolution
2334 (2016). Settlers are increasingly committing
crimes against unarmed Palestinians and their places of
worship, which are protected by the occupying Power,

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

which we hold totally responsible for the crimes and
aggressions that are flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The occupying Power has also tightened the
blockade against Gaza for more than 12 years and
continues to shoot live ammunition at Palestinian
civilians, claiming, since the start of the Great March
of Return, the lives of hundreds of martyrs, including
dozens of children, and tens of thousands wounded.
The occupying Power is also undermining the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). It
continues to attack Muslim and Christian holy sites
and persists in altering the legal status of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and dividing it in space and time. It insists on
taking illegal unilateral decisions, such as to withhold
part of the Palestinian tax revenues and to not renew
the mandate of the Temporary International Presence in
Hebron, not to mention changing the historic character
and demographic composition of Jerusalem and trying
to impose a fait accompli while entrenching its control
over the land that it occupies.
I raise one simple question. Has the time not come
for the Security Council to act decisively to stop Israeli
attacks and crimes? If it does not, we will witness
another year of tragedies and lack of hope for us and
the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, we reiterate the Arab position that
we are committed to achieving peace as a strategic
option and to resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict in
accordance with relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy, international law and all the elements of the
Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. That Initiative provides
for comprehensive peace with Israel preceded by ending
the occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories
occupied since 1964, including Jerusalem, with the
aim of realizing all the legitimate political rights of the
Palestinian people and establishing a Palestinian State
on their territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
welcomes this opportunity to discuss the situation in
the Middle East. We listened carefully to the briefings
by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller (see S/PV.8706).

20-016665/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation in the Middle East poses a grave
threat to international peace and security. Even as old
conflicts fester, new threats have emerged. Strategic
rivalry in the region has assumed a sectarian hue.
Competing and overlapping interests of regional and
external Powers threatened to erode the foundations of
peace and stability in the region and beyond. Civilian
populations, including women and children, have
become the principal victims of protracted violence
and instability.
As recent developments in the Gulf region have
demonstrated, the threat of dangerous escalation in the
region is never far off. The region cannot afford another
conflict. In the wake of the recent tensions between Iran
and the United States, Pakistan has sought to defuse
those tensions. On the personal initiative of Prime
Minister Imran Khan, our foreign minister visited
Tehran, Riyadh and Washington in the past few days.
We underscored the need for mutual restraint, including
non-use of force and the recourse to dialogue for the
settlement of all disputes. The positive reaction from
all sides is encouraging and could serve as a first step
towards broad-based regional engagement. Pakistan
will continue to be a partner for peace in the region.
There have also been diplomatic gains in other
parts of the Middle East. Last week, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2505 (2019), renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement for another six months. That
was a clear signal of the international community’s
commitment to a peaceful solution to the Yemen crisis.
The full implementation of the Agreement will provide
the requisite momentum towards peace in that country.
In Syria, the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee has rekindled hopes for an inclusive
political settlement. We echo calls by the Special Envoy
for Syria that the Committee needs to be nurtured and
genuinely supported by the Syrian parties and the
international stakeholders.
The Berlin Conference on Libya must be followed
by the fulfilment of the pledge by international powers
to allow and enable space for a political reconciliation
among the various factions within Libya.
The tragedy of Palestine, which is at the heart of
much of the turmoil in the Middle East, however, shows
no signs of ending. As illegal Israeli settlements expand
into the occupied Palestinian territory, the vision of a
two-State solution is being systematically reduced into
6/37

22/01/2020

a one-State reality. Unilateral actions on the status of
Jerusalem and Israeli settlements have further dimmed
the prospect for peace.
The United Nations, including the Security
Council, have a central role in responding to those
challenges. The elements of a comprehensive settlement
are well-known — the principle of land for peace and
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference
and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. The international
community must continue to promote the aim of
creating a viable, democratic, sovereign and contiguous
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on the situation in the Middle East.
The current situation is characterized by the fact
that the occupying Israeli authorities continue to try
to impose a fait accompli. Israel has announced its
intention to construct many new settlements and to
annex wide areas of occupied Palestinian territory in
the West Bank, which prevents any settlement of the
situation. It continues its intransigence by violating
international law and relevant agreements to end the
conflict, which is the main reason for the crises that
afflict the region. Israel continues to adopt legislation
and anti-Palestinian policies in order to legitimize its
settlement policy and deprive the Palestinian people of
their rights.
We therefore once again call on the international
community to compel Israel to respect the relevant
international resolutions, failing which the region will
continue to suffer the effects of this protracted conflict.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its
steadfast position — that the Palestinian question is
our country’s central issue. We will continue to defend
it and champion the rights of the Palestinian people
until they enjoy their inalienable rights and establish
their independent State within the June 1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, in line with the
binding Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
It is also essential for Israel to put an end to its
occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan and of Lebanese
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

territory. My country categorically rejects all statements
intended to legalize the settlements in the West Bank
and all claims that they do not contravene international
law. Israel’s settlements violate international resolutions
and international law and prevent the achievement of
peace and security in the Middle East and the twoState solution.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also rejects foreign
interference in Libyan affairs, which has led to the
presence of extremist fighters on Libyan territory. This
is a violation of relevant Council resolutions and has
exacerbated military confrontations, leading to greater
suffering for the brotherly Libyan people.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its position
of support for the Libyan people and respect for their
will. We recognize all the Libyan parties equally and
call upon them to exercise restraint and prioritize the
national interest while upholding the unity, integrity
and sovereignty of Libya, which must be protected from
foreign interference. We also support the efforts of the
United Nations to put an end to the conflict and resolve
the crisis through dialogue and political solutions.
My country’s Government condemns the recent
escalation by the Syrian authorities in their assault
on civilians in Idlib. We call for calm and dialogue
through the Constitutional Committee, which for
the Syrian people provides a glimmer of hope that
the long-standing conflict may be coming to an end.
Recent years have made it abundantly clear that a
military solution — against the wishes of the people
and in violation of their sovereignty — would mean
nothing. We must save Syria through political dialogue
and solutions, not foreign interference. We call for the
withdrawal of all foreign armed militias from Syrian
territory in order to safeguard the territorial integrity
of Syria, as well as its security and stability.
My country has always called for maximum
restraint, calm and dialogue in the face of any conflict.
The current levels of tension in our region can only be
reduced through dialogue. Recent attacks in brotherly
Iraq and the violation of its sovereignty are a very
serious escalation that will, no doubt, have negative
consequences. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns
those attacks and violations of Iraqi sovereignty and we
once again call for all parties to exercise restraint. We
must prevent escalation if security and stability are to
have a chance of succeeding in Iraq and more broadly
in the Arab Gulf region.

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

It is also essential for the international community
to shoulder its responsibility to guarantee the security,
safety and stability of the vital region of the Middle
East for the entire world. The provocations and sabotage
operations continuously undertaken by Iran in that
region must be deterred.
My country has shown maximum restraint in
response to the terrorist attacks on our Aramco oil
facilities in Abqaiq and Khurais on 14 September
2019. The Houthi militias in Yemen have claimed
responsibility for those attacks; however, the United
Nations and international investigations have made it
clear that the attacks were not launched from Yemeni
territory but rather from the north.
Yemen has witnessed consecutive efforts at the
regional and international levels to reduce tension
and promote trust, leading to an improvement in the
military, political and humanitarian situation during
the recent period. The Riyadh agreement signed
between the Government of Yemen and the Southern
Transitional Council, which seeks to pave the way for
the establishment of security, peace and development in
Yemen, has now entered its second phase.
Regrettably, we see the Houthi militias, supported
by Iran, pursuing their practices, which are at odds with
the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). The most recent
violation was the terrorist attack by the Houthi militias
on a mosque in Ma’rib governorate. Dozens of people
were killed and dozens more injured. We condemn that
terrorist attack, which targeted a place of worship and
led to the shedding of Yemeni blood. We reiterate the
support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its sisterly
States of the coalition for the people and territory of
Yemen. Those abhorrent terrorist attacks are deliberate
acts to undermine the quest for a political solution.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls
on the international community, and the Council in
particular, to enhance its main role in maintaining
international peace and security. We also call for
de-escalation in the region so as to prevent international
disasters. De-escalation, dialogue and maximum
restraint are the main solution that will strengthen
preventive diplomacy and prevent the outbreak
of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

20-016667/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): The situation across the
Middle East continues to be a source of grave concern.
Terrorism, violence and humanitarian crises have
escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people in
the region. In the face of those developments, we must
maintain our focus on the urgent need to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Despite the continuous calls of the international
community, Israeli violations of international law in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem, have been increasing at an alarming rate.
Settlement activities are particularly worrisome.
Resolution 2334 (2016) is clear on the destructive
effects of illegal settlement activities. Its provisions
must be implemented.
Israel should immediately cease all settlement
activities, as well as house demolitions, land confiscation
and other policies denying the Palestinians’ right to
development. Attempts to deny the historical and legal
rights of the Palestinian people violate international law.
Those rights, including the right to return, cannot be
withheld. The continuation of such practices will only
deepen the sense of injustice and breed desperation.
That is in no one’s interest. The situation on the Gaza
Strip is also deeply worrying. Gazans, who are under
blockade, continue to live in tremendous despair and
insecurity. Humanitarian organizations on the ground
face immense challenges in the treatment of people
suffering severe bone infections. The international
community should be able to assist the wounded in the
long and uncertain period of recovery.
The tragedy is compounded by the worst financial
crisis in the history of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). At a time when the region is witnessing
conflict and significant volatility, the impact of a
potential disruption in UNRWA services would be
gruesome. By extending the mandate of UNRWA, the
General Assembly showed its overwhelming support for
the Agency. We should also maintain efforts to put the
financial situation of the Agency on a more predictable
and sustainable footing. The operationalization of the
Waqf Fund of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
has been a significant step forward in that regard.
The latest developments again remind us of the
urgency of revitalizing the peace process. A two-State
solution, with the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine within the 1967 borders, with
8/37

22/01/2020

East Jerusalem as its capital, remains the only way
to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. Any
peace plan or initiative should be based along those
established parameters.
I would also like to briefly touch upon the
developments in Syria. In Idlib, the systematic targeting
of civilians and civilian infrastructure by the regime
continues to cause massive waves of displacement.
Millions of people are faced with ongoing cycles of
violence. Since December 2019 alone, almost 350,000
people have been displaced in Idlib, 80 per cent of
whom are women and children. Many left their homes
in a rush to stay alive and were unable to bring any
belongings vital to their survival.
Given the winter conditions, civilians have
become even more vulnerable in Idlib. Their lives
are threatened both by military attacks and by harsh
weather conditions. The current crisis is compounding
an already dire humanitarian situation in northwestern Syria. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians
under the pretext of fighting terrorism cannot be
accepted. Respect for international humanitarian
law is indispensable. Sustained, unimpeded and safe
humanitarian access, including through the United
Nations cross-border humanitarian mechanism, is vital.
Turkey will maintain efforts to preserve the status quo
in the Idlib de-escalation area.
Following the first two rounds, it is regrettable that
the Constitutional Committee has stalled. It should be
ensured that the Committee can function without any
hindrance. The members of the international community
should work together in order to help advance the
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). We should all support the efforts of Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen to that end. As the conflict in
Syria enters its tenth year, there is an alarming need
for a genuine political process that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, let me
briefly address wider regional issues. We have serious
concerns about the recent heightened tensions in the
region. The eruption of a new conflict, especially in
the Gulf, could have disastrous consequences. We must
continue to encourage all concerned to find a solution
through negotiations. Japan urges all concerned to
make maximum diplomatic efforts in order to a avoid
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

further escalation of the situation. Prime Minister Abe
has just returned from his visit to the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the Sultanate of
Oman. Japan will continue its diplomatic efforts to ease
tensions and achieve peace and stability in the region.
Even at this juncture, the Middle East peace process
remains a top priority for the international community.
Without finding a solution to the issue, lasting peace
and stability in the region cannot be realized. Yesterday,
we again heard of continued settlement activities, as
well as the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures.
Japan deeply deplores those activities and again
strongly urges the Government of Israel to completely
cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including the implementation of
construction plans that undermine the viability of a
two-State solution.
We are also deeply concerned about continued
violence. We strongly condemn terrorism and attacks
against innocent civilians, including by rocket, and call
upon the parties to take immediate steps to prevent all
acts of violence, provocations and incitement.
Japan remains committed to supporting a twoState solution. The final status of Jerusalem should
be resolved through negotiations based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions and known parameters.
Japan will remain engaged with both sides and will
continue to promote confidence-building measures. As
a humble step and building on many years of efforts,
later this month Japan will invite 10 young people from
both Israel and Palestine to support building confidence
among them. The point here is to demonstrate that
young people can shed light on the pathway to peace
and security by offering hope to future generations.
Every three months, we repeat similar depressing
statements in the Chamber. We sincerely hope that
positive steps will be taken in the coming months,
including the holding of general elections in Palestine.
Japan will remain actively engaged, both politically
and economically, in supporting progress in the peace
process, in cooperation with international partners.
The President: I now give the floor the Vice-Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mrs. Raz: At the outset, on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, I would like to congratulate

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

the delegation of Viet Nam on its able conduct of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I also
wish to thank Viet Nam, as a brotherly observer State
of the Committee, for its long-standing support of the
just Palestinian cause. The Committee would also like
to congratulate Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and
Grenadines and Tunisia on taking up their seats on the
Council and to wish them every success in upholding
their important responsibilities.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Let me also thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for her
comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian situation
(see S/PV.8706).
As we gather in the Council in this new year and
decade to consider the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, the heightened
geopolitical tensions and turmoil in the region remind
all of us that peace must never be taken for granted and
that it must be preserved and nourished. We must uphold
and fulfil the values enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, which remain our shared framework
for preventing and resolving conflict and injustice.
Recent developments underscore the need, now
more than ever, for today’s debate on the Palestinian
question lest it be sidelined or forgotten in the face
of the current turmoil. May I remind representatives
that, in the context of the stalled peace process and the
evolving dangerous realities on the ground, leaving this
question unresolved constitutes a serious negligence of
our collective duties under the Charter and a threat to
the peace and security of the region and beyond.
In particular, in the current volatile environment, the
ongoing illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory
and the worsening situation on the ground cannot be
ignored as “business as usual”. The year 2019 saw a
45 per cent increase in demolitions and confiscations
of Palestinian homes in the West Rank, including
East Jerusalem, as compared to 2018, according to
figures released by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. Moreover, at the beginning
of this month, Israel approved the construction of an
additional 1,936 new settler units in illegal settlements
across the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.

20-016669/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Allow me to reiterate in the strongest terms that
Israeli settlements in occupied areas are illegal under
international law, as affirmed, inter alia, in resolution
2334 (2016). Claims that settlements are not illegal
and may even advance Israeli-Palestinian peace are
totally unfounded and offensive. Israel must halt
settlement construction and expansion immediately
and completely. The reports of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) should
include reports by Member States on how they comply
with operative paragraph 5, which calls on Member
States to distinguish, in their dealings, between Israel
and the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as well as with regard to settlement activities.
Similarly, tensions triggered by attacks by the Israeli
occupying forces on worshippers inside the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound threaten further destabilization,
which must be averted. The Islamic Jerusalem Waqf is
the sole institution responsible for administrating the
affairs of the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, including
the maintenance of its interior and exterior walls. The
Committee urges Israel, the occupying Power, to abide
by all its obligations under international law and avoid
actions that undermine an already fragile status quo.
In a positive development, on 13 December 2019,
the General Assembly voted to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
until 2023 (General Assembly resolution 74/85). The
overwhelming vote in favour of the extension is an
indication of the unwavering support of the international
community for the Agency’s mandate and necessary
work in support of 5.5 million Palestine refugees. The
Committee reiterates its call to all Member States to
provide UNRWA with the reliable and sustainable
funding necessary to deliver critical humanitarian
services to the Palestine refugees, thereby contributing
to the stability of the region.
Moreover, in December, the General Assembly
adopted with an overwhelming majority all the
resolutions on the question of Palestine, including
those on this Committee’s mandate (General Assembly
resolution 74/10) and on the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, including the right to
their independent State (General Assembly resolution
74/11), which gained the support of almost 90 per cent
of the United Nations membership. That is once again a
testament that such resolutions are firmly rooted in the
United Nations Charter, international law and human
10/37

22/01/2020

rights law and confirm the support of most of the world.
That international consensus must be upheld and serve
as the focal point for all of our collective efforts to
promote a just, lasting and peaceful solution.
On 20 December 2019, the Chief Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, based on a referral
from the State of Palestine and following a thorough,
independent and objective assessment of all reliable
information available to her Office, decided to
proceed with the investigation into alleged war crimes
committed in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and the Gaza Strip. The Committee welcomes the
announcement by the Chief Prosecutor and trusts that
such an investigation will serve the interests of justice
and peace.
The humanitarian and economic situation of the
2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip continues to
deteriorate and has reached the critical juncture of
which the United Nations country team warned in its
report “Gaza 2020: A liveable place?”, necessitating
urgent humanitarian and political action. We reiterate
our strongest calls for the lifting of the 12-year Israeli
blockade of Gaza.
Allow me also to reiterate the support of the
Committee for the reconciliation process led by Egypt
and others, which are sparing no efforts in that regard.
The Committee also expresses its full support for the
holding of general elections in the State of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, with a view to reuniting
the Palestinian people under a single, legitimate and
democratic Palestinian national Government.
In these uncertain times, when the Middle East
faces unprecedented levels of tension, we call on the
Council, as the guarantor of international peace and
security, to take up its responsibilities, to implement
its relevant resolutions and to take overdue action on
the Palestinian question for the sake of generations
of Palestinians and Israelis who seek to live side by
side in peace and security, along the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of the independent
Palestinian State.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January, and to express my appreciation
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for your efforts. I would also like to align Egypt
with the statements of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the Group of Arab States and the Islamic
Group. I express my thanks and appreciation to the
United Nations briefers for their briefings at the
beginning of this debate. I would also like to welcome
the new members who joined the Security Council at
the beginning of this year.
The Middle East has started a new year and a new
decade amid grave challenges and crises that loom
over the region, undermining its security and stability,
especially given that over the past few years the region
has witnessed revolutions and radical changes that
led to the collapse of some countries and the spread
of terrorism. Such developments have increased the
suffering that the Middle East has endured for decades
as a result of protracted crises, most notably the lack
of a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question.
The Security Council has adopted numerous
resolutions on the Palestinian question, the most recent
of which was resolution 2334 (2016). Those resolutions
provide the foundations for a just solution to that
question, as do other terms of reference within the peace
process, especially the Arab Peace Initiative and the
principle of land for peace. Nevertheless, the Palestinian
question remains unresolved, while the prospects of a
just and fair solution for the Palestinian people have
diminished amid the continuous deterioration due to
the practices of the Israeli occupation authorities.
Last year, the occupied Palestinian territories
witnessed further deterioration of the conditions on the
ground as the Israeli occupation authorities continued
to confiscate more land, expel Palestinian citizens from
their homes, demolish property and build settlement
units in the West Bank — all of which runs counter to
international agreements and all efforts to revive peace
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli parties.
This meeting of the Security Council is one of
tens — or even hundreds — of meetings held by the
Council on the Palestinian question, but the Palestinian
people are still struggling as they seek to achieve their
legitimate rights. How long will the current situation
continue and how long will the Palestinian people have
to suffer without a solution? It is no longer any use
to hold monthly Council meetings on the Palestinian
question to review the situation without any clear or
concrete steps towards achieving a solution.

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

Egypt reaffirms that the Palestinian question
is the core issue in terms of stability in the Middle
East. There will be no stability in the region until the
Palestinian people are granted their rights and all Arab
lands occupied in 1967, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, are liberated.
The many crises that plague the Middle East should
not divert our attention from the reality of which we
are all aware. Certain regional actors are interfering
in the affairs of countries of the region, undermining
their security and stability in order to pursue their own
national interests, in blatant disregard of commitments
or rights under international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. The region has witnessed a grave rise
in violence and tension, including in the Gulf, while
a number of regional and international actors have
resorted to the use of force and the cross-targeting of
interests, including repeated attacks on civilian targets.
Such actions clearly indicate the need to take immediate
measures, including by the Security Council, to prevent
any further escalation.
We urge all parties to fully comply with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and international law, particularly by refraining from
the use of force, respecting the sovereignty of States
and ceasing to interfere in their internal affairs under
any pretext, as well as refraining immediately from
supporting terrorist groups and illegitimate militias.
Egypt underscores the importance of intensifying
preventive diplomacy and confidence-building efforts
in the Middle East in order to defuse tensions and spare
the region the devastating consequences of further
destructive military confrontations.
In that context, Egypt expresses its deep concern
regarding the deteriorating situation in sisterly Libya,
including flagrant violations of the arms embargo
and destructive external interference, rendering the
achievement of peace and stability in Libya even more
difficult. Such circumstances serve only the interests
of armed militias, terrorist organizations and organized
crime networks, including human traffickers, who seek
to take advantage of the situation in the country. They
exacerbate the suffering of the Libyan people, lead to
further violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, and threaten stability in neighbouring
countries, particularly in the African Sahel region,
where the situation poses a grave threat to international
peace and security.

20-0166611/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Egypt welcomes the outcome of the recent Berlin
conference on Libya, in which Egypt was an active
participant. We reiterate our full support for all efforts
aimed at creating the conditions necessary for the
resumption of the Libyan political process on the basis
of the Libyan Political Agreement signed in Skhirat in
2015. We believe that there is no military solution to
the crisis in Libya; rather, the solution must be Libyanled and Libyan-owned. Egypt calls on all countries
and stakeholders that participated in the recent Berlin
conference to commit to implementing its outcomes,
especially with regard to upholding the arms embargo
and sincerely cooperating within the framework of the
international follow-up committee established at the
conference, in order to achieve the desired peace and
stop the bloodshed of the fraternal Libyan people.
In conclusion, Egypt hopes that the New Year
will bring a glimmer of hope for the resolution of the
Palestinian question, while the Palestinian people
are granted their legitimate right to establish their
independent State along the borders of 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We also hope to achieve
security, stability and development throughout the
Middle East as we work towards a better future for the
peoples of the region and for the generations to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Poland, Romania, Spain, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden,
the United Kingdom and my own country, Portugal.
Those 27 countries are all members of the European
Union (EU).
Peace and stability in the Middle East remain
imperative for the peoples of the region and are in the
fundamental and strategic interests of the European
Union. The European Union’s position remains
unchanged and centred on our firm commitment to
a just and comprehensive resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict through a negotiated two-State
solution. In particular, our goal is to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of both parties, including Israeli and
Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations
to statehood and sovereignty, end the occupation
that began in 1967 and resolve all final status issues
12/37

22/01/2020

on the basis of international law, the internationally
agreed parameters and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Ultimately, we want to see the State of Israel
and a sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace
and security. Such an outcome is also in the interests of
the parties themselves and would provide the basis for
a democratic and prosperous future for Palestine and
Israel alike.
The Middle East peace process remains at a
stalemate amid continuing political uncertainty in
both Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory. At
the same time, the situation on the ground continues to
deteriorate, threatening the very viability of the twoState solution and prospects for a sustainable peace.
One area of concern is that of continuous
Israeli settlement planning and construction. At the
beginning of January, the Israeli authorities approved
the advancement of almost 2,000 additional units,
including the retroactive approval of already existing
constructions, some of which were built on private
Palestinian land. That decision follows other settlementrelated developments in recent months, including,
in particular, sensitive places such as East Jerusalem
and Hebron. The EU position on settlement policy is
clear — Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal under international
law, an obstacle to peace and a development that
threatens to make a two-State solution impossible. The
EU has also made clear that it will not recognize any
changes to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties.
We expect both parties, including any future Israeli
or Palestinian Government, to act in accordance with
international law. The Israeli authorities should fully
meet their obligations as an occupying Power under
international humanitarian law and cease the policy of
settlement construction and expansion. Moreover, there
have been recent calls made for annexation, which
would constitute a serious violation of international law.
The EU is also closely following the continuing
demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned structures
across the occupied West Bank. Recent months have
seen a significant increase in such demolitions, notably
in East Jerusalem and a significant number of those
demolitions include humanitarian projects funded
by the EU and its member States. For its part, the
EU remains strongly opposed to such demolitions,
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

confiscations and forced transfers and evictions, as
well as other actions taken in the context of Israel’s
settlement policy.
Building strong, inclusive, accountable and
functioning democratic Palestinian institutions, based
on respect for the rule of law and human rights, is
vital for the two-State solution. A strong, accountable,
inclusive and functioning Palestinian Government,
based on respect for the rule of law and human rights, is
also vital for the two-State solution. In that context and
taking note of the announcement made by President
Abbas last September, the EU reiterates its call for a
date to be set for the holding of elections in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza.
Such elections could represent an important
building block for the reunification of the West Bank and
Gaza, as well as a positive step in terms of democratic
legitimacy and accountability. The EU once again calls
upon all Palestinian factions to unequivocally commit
to democratic principles prior to such elections.
A further area of significant concern is the ongoing
threat of violence, terrorist attacks against civilians
and incitement to violence and hatred on both sides.
We are concerned at reports of an increased number
of attacks by settlers. The EU calls on Israel to fulfil
its obligations, in line with its responsibilities as an
occupying Power, to protect Palestinian civilians and to
ensure accountability for any human rights violations.
In Gaza, a serious escalation occurred in November
2019, when over 450 rockets were fired indiscriminately
at Israel and 34 Palestinians, including 8 children, were
reported to have been killed as a result of strikes by the
Israeli military. More broadly, the political and security
situation in Gaza remains highly volatile, while the
humanitarian situation and the suffering of ordinary
people are also of deep concern. Last November’s
upsurge in violence reminds us that restoring a political
horizon for peace remains as essential as ever.
The EU reiterates its condemnation of the firing of
rockets from Gaza into Israel and the indiscriminate
targeting of civilians. The EU also continues to oppose
and condemn all forms of terror and firmly rejects
any incitement to violence and hatred, which are
fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful
two-State solution.
We once again call upon all parties to take urgent
steps, in line with resolution 2334 (2016), towards a

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

fundamental change in the humanitarian, political,
security and economic situation in Gaza, including
through an end to the closure policy, full opening of the
crossing points and unimpeded access for humanitarian
actors, while addressing Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. Such steps would also contribute to the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and increase
the chances for a two-State solution.
One of the fundamental parameters for peace in the
Middle East is a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution
to the Palestinian refugee issue, in accordance with
international law. Until such a solution is reached, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains crucial
for providing the necessary protection and essential
services for Palestinian refugees and we will continue to
support UNRWA in all its fields of operations, including
in East Jerusalem. It is of the utmost importance that
UNRWA can continue to provide Palestinian refugees
with the necessary protection and essential services.
The work of UNRWA is also important for the stability
of the region.
Progress towards a solution to that conflict, based
on an end to the occupation and a two-State solution,
can also have a positive impact on efforts to resolve
other crises in the region. In the absence of a renewed
effort, the situation is likely to deteriorate further in
the period ahead. We reiterate our readiness to work
with both parties and our partners in the region and
the international community towards the resumption
of meaningful negotiations to resolve all final status
issues and achieve a just and lasting peace.
Please allow me to now turn to the situation in Syria.
The conflict is now in its ninth year and has led to the
death of half a million Syrians and the displacement of
half of the Syrian population. It has also had profound
repercussions on the overall stability of the Middle East
and has provided fertile ground for the rise of the socalled Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh. The
situation in Syria remains highly volatile.
The EU remains greatly concerned by the
continued escalation of violence in north-west Syria
and its devastating impact on civilians. The ongoing
regime offensive has led to over 1,400 civilian deaths
and has caused yet another wave of displacement,
affecting more than 1 million Syrians. Only days after
the announcement of the latest ceasefire, we have seen
renewed attacks by the Syrian regime, including aerial

20-0166613/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

strikes on Idlib, leading to numerous civilian casualties.
The presence of United Nations-listed terrorist groups
in the area is a common threat that has to be addressed.
However, fighting those groups, as authorized
by the United Nations, does not permit violations of
international humanitarian law, such as the targeting
of civilians. The EU continues to call upon the
Syrian regime and its allies to permanently cease
indiscriminate air strikes and shelling of civilians and
to respect international humanitarian law.
In north-east Syria, volatility and insecurity persist,
following Turkey’s unilateral incursion in October 2019.
The EU has firmly condemned that military operation,
which has caused renewed civilian suffering and further
displacement, and has called for an immediate cessation
of hostilities and the withdrawal of Turkish forces. We
welcome the significant reduction in fighting.
The incursion has threatened the progress achieved
to date by the Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and risks having a negative
impact on the United Nations-facilitated political
process in Geneva. The EU has underlined on many
occasions that Turkey’s security concerns in north-east
Syria should be addressed by political and diplomatic
means and in full accordance with international law
and international humanitarian law.
Throughout last year, we witnessed persistent and
grave violations of international law and human rights
across Syria, a worsening of the humanitarian crisis and
a growing risk of Da’esh resurgence. For those reasons,
the EU remains convinced that only a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), can lead to sustainable peace and
stability in Syria.
In September 2019, the EU welcomed the
establishment of the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned
Constitutional Committee, under United Nations
auspices. Regrettably, the second round of meetings
of the drafting committee in November was unable
to agree on an agenda for the joint discussions and no
progress could be reached. Furthermore, no third round
has yet been convened, largely due to preconditions
requested by the delegation of the Syrian regime, which
are in clear violation of the Constitutional Committee’s
rules of procedure.
14/37

22/01/2020

While the Constitutional Committee could serve to
open the door to a broader political process, all elements
of resolution 2254 (2015) are vital to achieving an
inclusive political transition and must be implemented,
including the release of detainees, a nationwide
ceasefire and the establishment of a safe and neutral
environment in order for free and fair elections to be
held, under United Nations supervision.
As so many years of war have demonstrated, we
need to reiterate once again that there can be no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. Europe will continue to
maintain the Syrian crisis high on the agenda of the
international community by promoting dialogue and
mobilizing international humanitarian support for
the Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome the
decision by the Security Council on 10 January (see
S/PV.8700) to extend the authorization for cross-border
humanitarian assistance to people in need in Syria. In
the light of the huge humanitarian needs in northern
Syria, a failure by the Council to agree on an extension
would have had catastrophic consequences.
However, the EU regrets the exclusion of the
Al-Yarubiyah crossing point, between Iraq and northeast Syria, where unmet needs persist on a large
scale, and looks forward to the upcoming report of
the Secretary-General on alternative modalities in
order to ensure the delivery of critical medicine and
medical equipment to north-east Syria. Meeting acute
humanitarian needs requires sustained and predictable
access, and the Council must continue to act to safeguard
meeting the humanitarian needs of the people in need
in Syria. The EU will also continue to strongly support
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General’s efforts to
unblock the political process.
In accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), we will
continue to promote a genuine political transition to
pave the way for free and fair elections; support Syrian
civil society, with particular attention to women’s
equitable and meaningful engagement in the political
process; and identify confidence-building measures
among the parties to the conflict, including on the issue
of detainees and missing persons.
Promoting accountability and justice and
combating impunity remain a high priority for the EU,
as a fundamental part of any future process of national
reconciliation in Syria. For that reason, we reiterate
our support for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and
welcome that the Mechanism will from 2020 onwards
be financed in its entirety under the United Nations
regular budget.
Our position on returns has not changed. As
everywhere in the world, in Syria as well, we support
the right of refugees and internally displaced persons
to a safe, voluntary and dignified return. However, we
consider that the conditions necessary for their return,
as defined by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, are still not in place.
We also wish to reiterate our well-known position
on reconstruction. We will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, negotiated by
the Syrian parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué, is
firmly under way. The EU has also reiterated that it will
not provide stabilization or development assistance in
areas where the rights of local populations are ignored
or violated.
The President: I wish to remind everyone that
there are more than 20 speakers remaining on the list of
speakers. As we are running a little behind schedule, I
wish to remind speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in length.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to
deliver this statement at this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian Question, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The question of Palestine has historically been an
issue of concern and vital importance to the Movement,
and it is with deep regret that we witness the passing
of yet another year without a resolution to the conflict.
Constituting a matter of international peace and
security and also being the cornerstone for peace in the
Middle East region, the situation there remains critical
and unsustainable, and therefore continues to require
the immediate attention of the international community.
The statistics from 2019 are appalling. In the Gaza
Strip, 44 Palestinian, including nine children and three
women, were killed by Israeli security forces as a result

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

of air strikes during demonstrations, clashes, security
operations and other incidents. Two thousand nine
hundred and forty Palestinians were injured, including
approximately 400 Palestinians by live ammunition,
among them dozens of children. In the occupied West
Bank, four Palestinians were shot and killed, including
one woman, and 1,064 Palestinians were injured,
including 23 children.
In 2019, it was documented that the Israeli
occupying authorities seized or destroyed 617 homes
and structures in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, forcibly displacing 898 Palestinians. An
increased number of settler-related attacks, incitement
and harassment, particularly around the olive harvest
season in the Hebron area, are also deeply concerning.
In reflecting on this dismal reality, the Non-Aligned
Movement seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its abiding
solidarity with the Palestinian people, its unwavering
support for their inalienable rights, including to selfdetermination, and its commitment to the alleviation of
their plight, as well as to reaching a just, lasting and
peaceful solution to the question of Palestine in every
aspect. That solution is well-known and must be in
line with international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations
itself. The tools provided by multilateral diplomacy are
the way to achieve such a solution, which cannot be
unilaterally, forcibly or unfairly imposed.
The Security Council has been entrusted with
the clear responsibility to ensure the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, it
must uphold its Charter duties and act to ensure the
implementation of its own resolutions, which not only
comprise the foundation for a peaceful solution to the
conflict, but are, on top of that, legally binding for all
United Nations Member States.
We are deeply concerned that, for too long, this
organ has been unable to fulfil its mandate with regard
to this important question. At this critical moment,
this requires immediate action to hold Israel — the
occupying Power — accountable for its violations.
The absence of justice only fosters greater impunity
and further destabilizes the situation on the ground,
severely diminishing the prospects for peace.
The States members of the Movement deplore
ongoing Israeli intransigence, illegal policies and
measures that greatly undermine the realization of a
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

20-0166615/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Movement also reiterates its grave concerns about
the continued deterioration of the situation on the
ground in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem and in particular the Gaza Strip,
where the illegal and suffocating Israeli blockade has
imposed a dire humanitarian situation and deplorable
socioeconomic conditions.
The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe
that resolution 2334 (2016) provides the most viable path
towards peace, setting forth the essential requirements
and parameters for the achievement of the two-State
solution, based on the pre-1967 borders, in accordance
with the long-standing terms for reference of peace
endorsed by the international community, the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. Hence, we
call for its full and effective implementation.
Israel must be compelled to cease completely all
illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, the demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, the forced displacement
of Palestinian civilians, all acts of violence, provocations
and incitement against Palestinian civilians, and other
human rights violations, many of which may amount to
war crimes.
Israel must fully comply with its duties and
responsibilities under international law, including its
legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
as the occupying Power. It must immediately cease all
policies and measures aimed at the alteration of the
demography, character, identity and legal status of the
occupied territories. It must also respect the historic
status quo at the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem,
including at Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The Non-Aligned
Movement also reaffirms its support for Jordan in
preserving and administrating the Islamic and Christian
holy sites in Jerusalem, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
and for the Hashemite custodianship of the holy sites,
as exercised by His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein of Jordan.
The Non-Aligned Movement commends the
efforts of His Majesty King Mohammed VI as Chair
of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. The Movement welcomes the
call for Al-Quds/Jerusalem, signed in Rabat on
30 March 2019 by His Majesty King Mohammed VI
of Morocco and His Holiness Pope Francis, to stress
16/37

22/01/2020

the important role that Al-Quds/Jerusalem plays as a
city of tolerance and mutual respect among the people
of the three monotheistic religions and the need to
preserve its specificities and features as a city of
peaceful coexistence.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again
that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and that
it withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The members
of the Non-Aligned Movement condemn the statement
made by the President of the United States of America
on 21 March 2019, regarding the occupied Syrian
Golan, as well as the subsequent unilateral and arbitrary
proclamation on recognizing the Golan Heights as
part of Israel, and call upon the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility by clearly condemning that
provocative statement and proclamation.
In the absence of a solution, the States members
of the Movement reiterate their call for the continued
provision of the required humanitarian and
socioeconomic assistance to the Palestinian people,
including Palestine refugees. The Movement expresses
its deep appreciation for the invaluable work done and
the essential assistance provided by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East to the Palestine refugees and welcomes the
extension of its mandate until 30 June 2023.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms
its abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people, as
well as its unwavering support for their just cause, and
renews its commitment to further strengthening and
coordinating the international efforts to achieve a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine in all its aspects, including the
plight of Palestine refugees, on the basis of resolution
194 (III). We express our sincere hopes that this year
will witness tangible progress in the heroic quest of
the Palestinian people to attain justice and fulfil their
inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations,
including their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence in their sovereign and independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank the President
for convening today’s debate on this important topic.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings
(see S/PV.8706). Ireland aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Portugal on
behalf of 27 European Union member States.
Ireland, my country, remains committed to a
negotiated two-State solution that ends the occupation
that began in 1967, ending all claims and fulfilling
the aspirations of both parties, including Israeli and
Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations to
statehood and sovereignty, on the basis of international
law, internationally agreed parameters and relevant
Security Council resolutions. We know that such an
outcome will greatly benefit both the Palestinian and
the Israeli peoples and contribute significantly to
stability in the wider region. This accords with the
European Union’s firm position, as set out on numerous
occasions, and with General Assembly resolution 73/89
of 6 December 2018, on a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, which my country, Ireland,
was proud to introduce and which was overwhelmingly
endorsed by a majority of Member States.
Today’s debate comes at a critical time. Three
years have passed since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), but we have seen no progress, and the situation
on the ground continues to deteriorate. The acceleration
of settlement activity, the continued occupation of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the maintenance
of the Gaza blockade, as well as the constant threat
of violence, extremism, terrorism and incitement, are
eroding the very viability of the two-State solution
and the prospects for peace. In December, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, informed the Security Council
that over 22,000 settlement units had been advanced or
approved in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
in the past three years (see S/PV.8690). We are deeply
concerned by that acceleration in settlement activity
and by recent statements on the annexation of the
Jordan Valley. Annexation would constitute a very
serious violation of international law.
We must not forget the deadly toll that this conflict
continues to take. The past three years have seen the
loss of hundreds of civilian lives, thousands of injuries
to civilians and major damage to civilian objects,
including due to airstrikes and to the indiscriminate
firing of rockets into Israel. In Gaza, a shockingly high
proportion of casualties have been children.

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

Ireland’s Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Simon Coveney, again visited Israel
and the occupied Palestinian territory in December.
In his meetings with Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas, he reiterated Ireland’s readiness to
support efforts towards a two-State solution. He firmly
conveyed Ireland’s concerns about the impact of the
occupation, including settlements and the blockade
of Gaza, and met with communities both in Gaza and
in Israel that are affected by the continuing violence.
Minister Coveney reiterated Ireland’s strong support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. He welcomed
progress towards new Palestinian elections, which
deserve international support. Those elections will
constitute an important step towards intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, giving a voice to Palestinians throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza.
Minister Coveney’s regular visits to the region
reflect the high priority that the Irish people continue
to give to the Middle East peace process. Long though
this conflict has endured, we believe that we, the
international community, have a responsibility to
continue to hope and work for a solution. The Security
Council has a particularly important role and we, as an
aspiring member, will work to help ensure that it meets
its responsibilities.
Before concluding, I would briefly turn to the
situation in Syria. We remain deeply concerned about
the plight of the Syrian people, particularly in the northeast and north-west of the country. In the north-west,
the Government offensive has led to a large number of
civilian casualties and new displacement. We welcome
the decision of the Security Council to extend the
authorization for cross-border humanitarian assistance,
but are deeply disappointed that authorization was
not extended for all border crossings. Ireland strongly
condemns all violations of international law in Syria.
Those responsible for such violations must be held
accountable, and we reiterate our call for the situation
to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
We also reiterate our support for the Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We
welcome the recent decision of the General Assembly

20-0166617/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to provide funding for the Mechanism from the United
Nations regular budget.
As I conclude, I also wanted to say that, on Libya,
Ireland welcomes the outcome of the recent Berlin
conference and calls on all parties to rapidly agree to
a ceasefire and move forward towards a much-needed
political solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): The Holy See joins
other delegations in thanking Viet Nam for convening
this open debate.
In his recent address to the diplomatic corps
accredited to the Holy See, Pope Francis underlined
anew his concern for the Middle East, where, since the
start of this year, worrying news continues to arrive.
We are witnessing a deterioration of the situation in the
whole region, from the heightening of tensions between
Iran and the United States to the crises in Iraq and
Lebanon, setting the groundwork for a vaster conflict
that all of us would want to avert. It is of the utmost
importance that the support and the commitment of the
international community keep the flame of dialogue
alive and that these challenges be addressed with a
holistic approach.
In particular, the Holy Father has affirmed that
steadfast and effective engagement is needed to
counteract the pall of silence that risks falling over the
war that has devastated Syria over the course of the last
decade. Pope Francis has stressed that it is imperative
to devise suitable and far-sighted solutions capable
of enabling the beloved Syrian people, exhausted by
war, to regain peace and to begin the reconstruction
of their country. Moreover, silence and indifference, as
Pope Francis has warned, risk to worsen the conflict
in Yemen, which is suffering one of the most serious
humanitarian crises of recent history.
The Holy See and Pope Francis continue to focus
particular attention on the Holy City of Jerusalem and its
vocation as a city of peace, one called to be a symbolic
place of encounter and of peaceful coexistence, where
mutual respect and dialogue are cultivated. Indeed, the
appeal for maintaining the status quo of the holy sites
of Jerusalem — dear to Jews, Christians and Muslims
in virtue of their religion and important for the cultural
heritage of the whole human family — is one that
has also been repeatedly made by this Organization.
18/37

22/01/2020

Furthermore, the Pope used his traditional January
address to reiterate the urgent need for the entire
international community to reconfirm, with courage
and sincerity, and in respect for international law,
its commitment to supporting the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process. As the Secretary-General starkly points
out in his December 2019 report (S/2019/938), the sad
alternative is that the situation is destined to steadily
worsen, diminishing even further the viability of the
two-State solution based on the 1967 lines.
What Pope Francis recently stated with regard
to Israel and Palestine could apply to the wider
region and indeed across the world at the threshold
of the seventy-fifth anniversary celebrations of this
Organization, where so many people — struggling but
not discouraged — still await a time of peace, security
and prosperity.
In conclusion, allow me to assure the international
community of the Holy See’s steadfast commitment to
peace and its support for all initiatives that strive to
ensure the advancement of negotiated solutions. To this
end, the Holy See encourages all parties to promote
open and constructive dialogue based on the principles
upon which this Organization was built 75 years ago.
The President: I thank the observer of the Observer
State of the Holy See for keeping to the allotted time
limit when making his statement. There are 16 speakers
remaining on the list of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Bangladesh.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
This open debate takes place at a difficult juncture
characterized by daunting challenges and a marked
deterioration of the situation on the ground. Regrettably,
Israel’s illegal policy of settlement expansion and de
facto annexation of Palestinian lands, especially in and
around East Jerusalem, has intensified. This policy
includes repeated, hostile threats to annex parts or all
of the occupied West Bank outright, in contravention
of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
As many have stressed, such threats and violations
cannot go unchallenged. It is incumbent upon the
international community to take concrete actions
to compel Israel’s respect for and compliance with
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
2334 (2016). Israel must cease all illegal settlement and
annexation measures in the State of Palestine, including
East Jerusalem. In this regard, we reaffirm our rejection
of the most recent illegal Israeli decision to establish
so-called nature reserves in the West Bank. That must
be prevented, and the announcement condemned.
The OIC reiterates that the lack of accountability
for Israel’s ongoing violations has only encouraged
such impunity, which is undermining any possibility for
achieving a just peace based on the vision of a solution
of two States existing within the pre-1967 borders, in
accordance with the relevant Council resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative. In this regard, the OIC welcomes
the International Criminal Court’s decision to open an
investigation into Israel’s crimes against the Palestinian
people and hopes that it will be expeditiously pursued.
Moreover, the OIC reaffirms that the unilateral
measures and attempts to unlawfully alter the legal,
historical and political status of East Jerusalem
constitute a flagrant violation of international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions. The OIC
calls on all States to abide by their political, legal
and moral obligations to uphold international law and
ensure its respect, including under the Fourth Geneva
Convention. We urge all States to act with urgency
and contribute to international efforts aimed at ending
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.
Additionally, we call for Israel’s full withdrawal
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We further affirm the need for
all external parties to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria and reiterate our support
for a political solution of the Syrian crisis, consistent
with resolution 2254 (2015).
The OIC remains gravely concerned about the
deterioration of socioeconomic and humanitarian
conditions in the Palestinian territories, particularly
in the Gaza Strip. We must urgently alleviate the
humanitarian needs and suffering of the Palestinian
people, including the Palestinian refugees. We
encourage Member States to provide funds or to
increase their contributions to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), the United Nations Development
Programme and other United Nations entities that are

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

working diligently to provide the needed assistance to
the Palestinians. Additionally, the OIC condemns the
announced plans to integrate UNRWA-run schools in
East Jerusalem into Israel’s education system.
In conclusion, the OIC urges the international
community to uphold its obligations and engage
constructively in facilitating a just peace, including
by sponsoring a multilateral political peace process
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the internationally agreed terms of reference, including
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Allow me now to make a statement in my
national capacity.
Yet another turbulent year of despair has passed
for the people of Palestine. An overview of the year
shows that aggression by Israel, the occupying Power,
has become the new normal in the Palestinian territory.
The high number of Palestinian casualties, including
of children, flagrant violations of the human rights of
Palestinians, severe restrictions on their movements
and the closure of the Gaza Strip all speak to the dismal
situation on the ground and explain the mounting
pressure on already enormous humanitarian needs.
While the renewal of UNRWA’s mandate (General
Assembly resolution 74/83) is a welcome development,
we are still concerned about its budgetary shortfall.
The international community has to ensure enhanced,
predictable and sustainable funding for its operation.
The unabated expansion of Israeli settlements and
demolition of Palestinian homes in the occupied West
Bank are changing its demography. Israel’s intention
to extend the settlements and its recent pronouncement
on the annexation of Palestinian territories raise the
spectre of change even more.
All those actions by Israel constitute egregious
violations of international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations and the Fourth Geneva Convention,
and are in direct contravention of all relevant Security
Council resolutions. We join the international
community in condemning these acts and ask Israel
to refrain from such actions. We also ask for the
maintenance of the sanctity of Islamic and Christian
holy places at all costs, in particular the Al-Aqsa.
The international community has to turn the
culture of inaction around and compel Israel to end
its occupation of Palestinian territory. We look upon
the Security Council to fulfil its Charter obligations
and enforce its resolutions, in particular resolution

20-0166619/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2334 (2016). The implementation of the road map for
peace in the Middle East, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the efforts of the Quartet are crucial building
blocks. Ensuring accountability and justice for Israel’s
atrocities and human rights violations would serve to
end the entrenched culture of impunity. Developments
in the International Criminal Court are critical in
this regard.
Our own struggle for independence and the
painful experience of enduring the worst form of
genocide in 1971 inspire us to always advocate for the
oppressed people of the world. This has been the very
premise of Bangladesh’s unwavering support for the
Palestinian cause. We will continue to firmly stand by
our Palestinian brothers and sisters in their just and
rightful struggle for self-determination, until the State
of Palestine is established on the basis of the two-State
solution, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
As we move towards the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, the resolution of the Palestinian
crisis will remain a litmus test for retaining people’s
trust in multilateralism and in this body.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): At the start of 2020,
the Middle East is facing one of its worst crises — one
that could lead to a major military confrontation of
catastrophic consequences, in which international
Powers struggle with each other and with regional
Powers adjacent to our region to settle their affairs
on Arab territory. The ongoing crisis is compounded
by another crisis of international legitimacy, the
Palestinian question, which is deteriorating every
day, as underscored in the briefings made by UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller yesterday morning (see S/PV.8706).
Since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), which
affirms the illegality or illegitimacy of settlements,
there has been a relentless increase in the number of
Israeli settlements, right under the nose of the Security
Council, at a dire rate not seen since the conclusion of
the Oslo Accords in 1993. That was also confirmed by
the announcement of the construction of 2,000 new
settlement units from the beginning of this year and the
transformation of large portions of Area C into nature
reserves. There has also been an increase in the number
of demolitions and further displacement in order to
ensure geographical contiguity between settlements
20/37

22/01/2020

and East Jerusalem. Therefore, hopes for a return to
credible peace negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis on the five final status issues have waned
because the Palestinian side no longer views Israel as a
credible partner in the peace process and has given up
hope in the neutrality and integrity of those responsible
for the peace process.
The situation has been further exacerbated by the
illegitimate Israeli decisions that have been recognized
by the United States. Those decisions relentlessly seek
to eliminate the prospects for the two-State solution,
in contravention of all international parameters of
legitimacy, to recognize Al-Quds as the capital of
Israel and to eliminate the problem of refugees by
attacking the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. They also
seek to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over illegitimate
settlements and to impose that reality on the ground
by using heavy military force, in contravention of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Despite the obstacles to implementing the
international consensus to establish an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
along the 4 June 1967 borders, the Palestinian
Authority believes in a just and comprehensive peace
and continues to build the pillars of the Palestinian
State by preparing for the holding of Palestinian
presidential and legislative elections, including in East
Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip. With the assistance of
the League of Arab States, it has also stepped up its
efforts to increase international recognition of the State
of Palestine from States that have not yet recognized it
officially, and to gain international recognition of the
fact that the State of Palestine is eligible to fulfil the
obligations of full-fledged membership in the United
Nations, following its outstanding success chairing the
Group of 77 and China with great efficiency in 2019, as
acknowledged by all international and regional actors
at the United Nations.
The members of the League of Arab States demand
that the Council take a decisive position in order to
stop the flagrant violation of international legitimacy
and ensure respect for resolution 2334 (2016). We
call for an end to all settlement activities and related
confiscations, displacement and demolitions, which are
at variance with international law. We call on countries
that have yet to recognize the State of Palestine to
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

do so expeditiously in order to uphold international
legitimacy, which is under threat.
We call on the International Criminal Court (ICC)
to open investigations into violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The Prosecutor of the ICC has concluded that the
conditions have been met for launching an investigation
in order to promote the principles of accountability and
prosecution. Israel has always been the exception where
those principles are concerned because of pressure
from some international Powers.
Despite the success we achieved in eliminating
Da’esh and in restoring peace and stability in Iraq,
the Middle East has seen a wave of grave escalation
at the beginning of this year. More than ever before,
our region needs de-escalation and calm, which will
be brought about by ending foreign interference in the
internal affairs of Arab States, in particular by non-Arab
neighbouring countries. The League of Arab States has
condemned and cautioned at the highest level against
such intervention, which has negative repercussions on
Arab regional security.
The League of Arab States stresses the need to
respect the Charter of the United Nations, uphold its
well-established rules and implement them within the
multilateral framework, in accordance with presidential
statement S/PRST/2020/1, adopted at the highlevel debate convened by Viet Nam on 9 January, on
upholding the United Nations Charter (see S/PV.8699
et seq.). We thank Viet Nam for organizing that debate.
Regrettably, such interference was not limited to
foreign military action on Iraqi territory. It also included
increasing foreign interference in Libyan affairs. The
League of Arab States rejects foreign interference in
Libya’s affairs, including military intervention, and
affirms the need to prevent the transfer of foreign
fighters, mercenaries, terrorists and extremists to Libya.
We reiterate our full support for the political process
in Libya and we emphasize our ongoing readiness to
work with the United Nations, the African Union and
the European Union in order to peacefully resolve the
crisis, including by implementing the agreement made
recently at the Berlin conference.
At the same time, the League of Arab States
underlines its interest in Syria’s affairs and its
commitment to Syria’s unity and territorial integrity,
while seeking to overcome the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the country. We welcome

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

resolution 2504 (2020), on the renewal of the work of
the cross-border aid mechanism for Syria. The League
of Arab States reiterates its position rejecting the recent
military aggression in northern Syria. We demand that
the Security Council call for the withdrawal of the
aggressor forces from Syrian territories and the removal
of the illegal buffer zones that they have set up there.
In the same vein, the League of Arab States supports
international efforts to restore calm and stability in
Yemen. We are working with stakeholders to strengthen
the commitment to a political solution and to implement
the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements. We support the
leading role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its
efforts to achieve the desired political settlement.
The League of Arab States congratulates its
brothers in Algeria and the Sudan on the peaceful
transformations in response to the people’s will. It
reiterates its full solidarity with Lebanon and will
continue to provide political and economic support to
its Government and all its constitutional institutions.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States calls on
the United Nations, including the Security Council
and the Secretary-General, to make tireless efforts
to ease tensions in the Middle East. They should
encourage all parties to exercise the utmost restraint,
stop foreign interference in the affairs of Arab States,
including by neighbouring countries in the region,
and instead promote political action, not military
confrontation, in the context of good-neighbourliness,
peaceful coexistence, mutual respect and fruitful and
constructive cooperation with a view to achieving the
common goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Udida (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Viet Nam for organizing today’s open debate. Our
special appreciation goes to the briefers for sharing their
insightful perspectives on this very important subject.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Nigeria notes with grave concern the alarming
situation in many parts of the Middle East, particularly
Palestine. In that regard, it is pertinent for all parties
to make genuine and concerted efforts to find peaceful
solutions and to cooperate closely with the United
Nations and its agencies in order to achieve the shared

20-0166621/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

objective of a two-State solution, in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law.
As the international community continues to
seek avenues to advance the peaceful resolution
of the Palestinian question, international efforts
must remain focused on paving the way for Israel
and Palestine to return to meaningful negotiations.
We therefore highlight the cogency of multilateral
diplomacy and reiterate that there is no substitute to an
agreed multilateral approach in addressing the IsraeliPalestinian conundrum in a sustainable manner.
Nigeria believes that achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine
is imperative for the attainment of durable peace
and stability in the Middle East. For that reason, we
acknowledge the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution ES-10/19. on the status of Jerusalem, and once
again call on all parties to respect the relevant United
Nations resolutions on the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
We therefore encourage Israel to take concrete
measures to freeze all settlement-related activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory. For their part,
Palestinian leaders must also signal their readiness to
return to the negotiating table by, inter alia, making
enhanced efforts to forge unity and deal with militancy
and other internal security challenges. It is beyond
doubt that violence and unilateral actions will not
resolve the long-drawn-out conflict.
My delegation reaffirms its full support for the rights
of the Palestinian people, including the protection of
their fundamental human rights, particularly their right
to free movement and self-determination, as well as the
maintenance of the dignity of the individual Palestinian
person and their inalienable right to live without the
fear of persecution. In that regard, we restate our belief
that the Security Council must not fail in its duty and
responsibility to the Palestinian people.
In that context, it is our expectation that this debate
in the year 2020 will offer more suggestions as to how
best to address the prevailing challenges and gaps in
the implementation of all relevant United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Security Council, on
this subject matter.
In conclusion, Nigeria calls on States with influence
over the parties concerned to encourage them to
re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Quartet
22/37

22/01/2020

road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing
agreements. We reaffirm our unwavering support for
a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing
side by side.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement made by the representative
of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
It is regrettable that, in the recent period, no
measures have been taken to end the Israeli military
aggression and occupation of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution
2334 (2016), adopted by the Council, which remains
silent while Israel, with impunity, consolidates its
policy of expanding illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory and threatens to annex the
Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other
parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
We condemn the occupation of Palestinian
territory, the illegal settlement policies, practices and
measures, including the construction and expansion of
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
the punitive demolitions, the seizure of resources from
Palestinian institutions, the forced displacement of
hundreds of Palestinian civilians and the blockade of
the Gaza Strip. We reject acts of provocation, terror,
incitement and violence and the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force against Palestinian
civilians, in flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and international humanitarian law.
Due to the repeated obstruction of the United
States, this organ has not even been able to condemn
the escalating violence and the tragic events in the Gaza
Strip since 30 March 2018. We regret the precarious
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East as a result of the
withdrawal of United States financial support.
The Security Council must fulfil its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security and demand that Israel
put an immediate and complete end to the occupation
of the Palestinian territories and its aggressive policies
and settlement practices.
We express our unwavering solidarity with the
Government and people of Palestine and support for
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the admission of Palestine as a full Member of the
United Nations.
We reaffirm our unreserved support for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict that enables the Palestinian people
to exercise their right to self-determination and to have
an independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and that
ensures the right of return of refugees.
Washington’s aggressive, unilateral and unjustified
actions in the Middle East constitute a severe violation
of the legitimate interests of Arab and Islamic nations
and have led to a dangerous escalation in the region.
We reiterate our condemnation of the so-called deal
of the century, drawn up by the current United States
Government. It fails to provide for the establishment
of a Palestinian State, thereby scorning the two-State
solution, which has enjoyed the historical backing of
the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, among other
international actors.
The unilateral decision by the Government of the
United States to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel and establish its diplomatic representation in
that city, disrespecting its historical status, as well as
its decision to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the
Syrian Golan, all constitute flagrant violations of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We once again
call for the complete and unconditional withdrawal
of Israel from the Syrian Golan and all occupied
Arab territories.
We emphatically condemn the United States
bombing of Baghdad airport and the targeted
assassination it carried out using missiles, which
constitute a clear violation of international law and the
sovereignty of Iraq. Such aggressive, unilateral and
unjustified actions by the United States represent a
major escalation in the Middle East, where a large-scale
conflict with incalculable loss of human life and grave
consequences for global peace and stability is on the
brink of eruption. We reiterate our full support for the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and condemn the
United States withdrawal from the agreement, as well as
the reimposition of unilateral sanctions and the military
threats waged against the Islamic Republic of Iran.

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

Against that backdrop, it is the duty of all
States — and especially the members of the Security
Council — to defend multilateralism and the purposes
and principles of the Charter, in particular respect
for the sovereign equality of States and their political
independence, territorial unity and integrity, the
peaceful resolution of disputes and refraining from the
threat or use of force in international relations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important debate.
As we begin this year’s first quarterly discussion
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, we hope that the new decade will
bring about a new start, not only for Palestine but for
the region as a whole. Despite the growing number and
complexity of the issues facing our region, principally
the Palestinian question, the United Arab Emirates
believes that there is an opportunity to reverse the path
of negative trends and de-escalate the current situation
in order to resolve the crises in the region and achieve
regional and international stability. In order to do so,
my country underscores the need to take several steps.
First, there must be a commitment to implementing
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the Security Council’s resolutions. In that regard,
my country is concerned by Israel’s continuation of
its illegal practices against the brotherly Palestinian
people, including further settlement-building activities
that undermine the two-State solution and are in
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,
as well as the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Similarly, the demolition of Palestinian property,
the confiscation of land, attempts to desecrate holy sites
in the city of Jerusalem and the ongoing unjust blockade
on Gaza are all illegal practices that hinder peace
efforts and exacerbate the suffering of the Palestinian
people. On a broader scale, we believe that our region
now needs to see the strengthening of international
law, which is the basis for confidence-building between
the parties and for preventing the spread of chaos and
war, so as to achieve regional stability and security. In
that regard, we stress the need for States to respect the
principles of sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States.

20-0166623/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Secondly, it is critical that we work towards
de-escalation and calm by promoting political action
as a fundamental choice to address any tensions that
might arise in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, or in the entire region. The primary endeavour
of the international community must be to create an
environment conducive to peace efforts in any State
that suffers crisis in order to address any measures
that could have numerous grave security, military and
economic repercussions for the States concerned and
the region as a whole.
The Berlin conference on Libya held earlier this
week is an example of how international efforts can
be mobilized to address any negative trends that could
exacerbate crises. We commend Germany’s efforts as
the host of the conference, in which my country actively
participated. We hope that it will lead to a political
process under the auspices of the United Nations that
enjoys the full commitment of all stakeholders.
Thirdly, we must strengthen multilateral action to
break the current stalemate in the Middle East peace
process, as such action constitutes the best means to
urge the parties to reach lasting political solutions,
whether in Palestine or in other countries of the region,
such as Syria, Yemen and Libya. That must conform
to the agreed terms of reference for achieving peace
in a manner that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the peoples concerned. In that regard, we highlight
the important role of the United Nations and the
envoys of the Secretary-General in strengthening
mediation and preventive diplomacy efforts to resolve
the conflicts in the region by peaceful means. In line
with those efforts, regional organizations, including the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, should be encouraged to participate in
consultations related to regional issues, especially as
such organizations are qualified to develop effective
political solutions to crises. In that context, we call
on the international community to redouble its efforts
to implement the two-State solution and declare an
independent Palestinian State along the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant international resolutions,
the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Fourthly, and finally, we must bolster humanitarian
assistance to people affected by conflict, while
continuing to support development and reconstruction
efforts. We must help those nations and peoples in need
to achieve prosperity and implement the Sustainable
24/37

22/01/2020

Development Goals. It is also imperative that we
focus on addressing the deteriorating humanitarian
and economic conditions in the Palestinian territories
and support the vital sectors there, especially in the
Gaza Strip, where the humanitarian conditions are
appalling. For our part, my country will continue to
extend humanitarian and development aid to Palestine.
We are among the largest donors to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, having contributed more than $630 million
to finance various sectors in Palestine over the past
five years.
In conclusion, we underscore that the Palestinian
question will remain the central issue of the Arab and
Islamic nations. Restoring stability to the region will not
be possible without a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question. The United Arab
Emirates, which will celebrate the year 2020 under
the theme “Towards the Next 50”, is launching a major
national development strategy for the next 50 years
across all vital sectors. We will spare no effort to
achieve stability in the region and keep the wheel of
economic and technological progress turning in pursuit
of a better future for our country and for the countries
of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): I wish to thank Viet Nam for
organizing this important open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. Let
me also take this opportunity to congratulate the newly
elected members of the Security Council — Estonia,
the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia
and Viet Nam — who have assumed their membership
of the Council this month. We wish them well as they
take on this important responsibility.
We are beginning yet another year in somewhat the
same manner as previous ones — with deep concern for
the ongoing violations against the Palestinian people
and apprehensions about the possibility of achieving
peace in the region. The year 2019 ended with regrets
and deep political uncertainties for any peaceful
settlement of the conflict. Discriminatory policies
towards the Palestinian people, violations of their basic
human rights and severe restrictions on the movement
of people and goods in and out of Gaza continue. While
the challenges seem insurmountable, the Government
and the people of the Maldives remain steadfast in
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

our support and advocacy to find a lasting solution
for the many challenges facing the Middle East, and
especially to uphold the inalienable rights of the people
of Palestine.
We believe that the Security Council can and
must do more to address this prolonged conflict. The
Maldives has always believed that an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
established on the 1967 borders, living side by side in
peace and harmony with Israel, is the best and only
solution to this decades-long conflict.
We call upon Israel to fully implement the decisions
of the Council and respect the legal obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations. It is unacceptable
that the illegal occupation of Palestine continues to
this day, with demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned property, the building of illegal settlements
and the continuing gross violations of the basic
human rights of the Palestinian people. We call upon
the Security Council to take urgent action to protect
civilians. The restrictions imposed on the movement
of people and goods in and out of the Gaza Strip must
be lifted immediately to ensure the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
The crisis in Syria is indeed one of the gravest
tragedies of our time. Thousands of people have been
killed and many have been forced to flee their homes
since the start of the conflict. Locked in a stalemate,
the conflict is not only exacerbating the humanitarian
crisis but also destroying the future of young Syrians.
With over 11 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance, the continued hostilities affecting civilians
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure can only
deteriorate the situation further. We cannot falter in
our duties to bring back peace for the people of Syria.
The Security Council and the international community
must do more to reinvigorate talks to find a peaceful
settlement to the conflict.
We are encouraged that the momentum to reach a
political settlement in Yemen has been progressing. But
we must remain steadfast and continue to strengthen
and support the efforts to end the war in Yemen. We
welcome the signing of the Riyadh agreement and
commend the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and other countries involved in achieving that important
milestone and opening the door for broader peace talks.
The Security Council is the most vital organ of the
United Nations. It has the responsibility of maintaining

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

international peace and security. It therefore needs to do
more to ensure that its authority and legitimacy are not
compromised. The Council needs to step up its efforts
to ensure that its decisions are respected by everyone,
every Member State and every member of the Council.
If we fail to uphold our obligations, we cannot ensure
the peaceful resolution of these conflicts and wars. As
we enter a new decade, let me call on all to give peace a
chance and a home for the people of Palestine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mustafa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The Sudan
is honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Group of Arab States as Chair of the Group, under
the agenda item “The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question”.
As the United Nations celebrates the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations in 2020,
the Palestinian question remains unchanged. While it
is the most significant challenge facing the world, no
progress was achieved in 2019 on the implementation of
United Nations resolutions on the Palestinian question
or on resolving the Middle East conflict. The conflict
poses a serious threat to world peace and security. As
such, its settlement would be the linchpin in achieving
stability throughout the region, while a failure to address
it would have grave repercussions on the entire Middle
East region, which is already engulfed in turmoil.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian and Arab
territories deteriorated over the past year. In Gaza alone,
44 Palestinians were killed, including nine children
and three women, by the Israeli occupation authorities
as a result of air strikes, protests, clashes, security
operations and other sporadic incidents. Approximately
2,490 Palestinians were injured, including dozens of
children. In the West Bank, another four civilians were
killed, including one woman, while 1,064 were injured,
including 23 children.
The Israeli occupation authorities demolished or
confiscated 617 houses and buildings in the occupied
West Bank in 2019, including in East Jerusalem, and
forcibly evicted 898 Palestinians. Also worrisome is the
fact that incidents of attacks, harassment and incitement
by Israeli settlers have also increased, especially as
we approach the olive harvest season and in the city
of Hebron.

20-0166625/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/01/2020

The Arab Group is closely following the
deteriorating situation and takes this opportunity to
stress its steadfast solidarity with the Palestinian people
and its continuous commitment to their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination. We are
committed to ending the tragedy of the Palestinian people
through a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian
question in all its aspects. That solution is well known
and must be based on international law, the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Charter of the United
Nations and the two-State solution. That remains the
only viable solution, as the international community,
including the Security Council, will not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 border, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, which must
be implemented, especially resolution 2334 (2016), and
in respect of the principle of peace, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the principle of land for peace. The
Arab Group calls for the effective implementation of
all of that.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza is truly dire, and
the economic and social situations there are deplorable.
We need a sustainable solution to the human suffering in
the Gaza Strip, which requires lifting the illegal Israeli
blockade once and for all and the speedy delivery of
humanitarian aid to all the besieged people in Gaza.

The Security Council is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security. That is why it must
uphold the principles of the Charter, especially during
its seventy-fifth anniversary. The Council’s relevant
resolutions on the matter do not only reflect the spirit
and text of the Charter but are also legally binding
for all the States Members of the United Nations. We
are gravely concerned that the Council has long been
unable to fulfil its mandate in that regard.

The Group of Arab States supports the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, which is responsible for managing
and safeguarding the Muslim and Christian sites in
Jerusalem, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Group
also supports the Hashemite guardianship of those sites
represented by King Abdullah II Bin Al-Hussein. The
Group further welcomes the 30 March 2019 signing
in Rabat of the appeal for Jerusalem by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI and His Holiness Pope Francis.
The appeal emphasizes the important role of Jerusalem
as a city of tolerance and mutual respect among the
followers of the three heavenly religions. We must
preserve its characteristics and features as a city of
peaceful coexistence.

Our region is awash in a complicated situation as
a result of regional and international crises. That is
why Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled
to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions.
It must be held accountable for all violations against
Palestinian and Arab peoples, who have been suffering
under the yoke of occupation for centuries. The absence
of justice enhances impunity, and thereby exacerbates
the situation on the ground and diminishes the prospects
for peace.
The States of the Arab Group are appalled by
the Israeli intransigence and the illegal policies that
undermine the peaceful settlement of the PalestinianIsraeli conflict. We reiterate our deep concern about the
continuing deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and
especially in the Gaza Strip, which has been suffering
from a severe illegal Israeli blockade.
26/37

Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled to
stop its expansionist activities, demolition of houses
and property, forced displacement of Palestinian
citizens and practices of violence, provocations and
incitement, in addition to other violations of human
rights that amount to war crimes against Palestinians
living in the occupied territories, including East
Jerusalem. Israel must uphold all its responsibilities
and commitments under international law. It must also
refrain immediately from pursuing policies aimed at
changing the demographic character of the occupied
territories. It must respect the identity and legal status
of the occupied territories and the historic status of the
holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem, especially the
Al-Aqsa Mosque.

The Arab Group reaffirms that Israel must abide
by resolution 497 (1981), and fully withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the 1967 borders, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The Arab Group condemns and rejects any unilateral
action involving the occupied Syrian Golan. We call
on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility
by explicitly condemning such provocative and illegal
unilateral actions.
The Arab Group reiterates its repeated calls for
sustaining humanitarian and socioeconomic aid to
the Palestinian people and refugees. We highly value
the important work and support of the United Nations
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), and we welcome the extension of
the Agency’s mandate to 30 June 2023. We thank and
appreciate all the contributing countries to UNRWA
and the Palestinian people, especially Arab countries.
In conclusion, the States of the Arab Group
reaffirm their firm solidarity with the Palestinian
people and their continuous support for the just
Palestinian question. We are seriously committed to
strengthening and coordinating international efforts
to reach a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question in all its aspects, including
Palestinian refugees, in line with the United Nations
resolutions. We hope that this year will see tangible
progress towards realizing the legitimate national goals
and aspirations of the Palestinian people to enjoy their
fair rights, especially the right to self-determination,
freedom and an independent sovereign Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Finally, I congratulate Viet Nam on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. We thank the United States for its presidency
in December 2019, and we congratulate Tunisia, the
Niger, Estonia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as
newly elected members to the Council. We wish them
every success.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important open debate. I also thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller for their briefings yesterday (see
S/PV.8706).
Several days ago, the Security Council and a large
number of delegations debated an issue of overall
consensus, namely, upholding the Charter of the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security
(see S/PV.8699). Delegations stressed the fact that the
Charter provides Member States with a blueprint for
achieving peace, security, stability and progress. In
order to avoid crises, the world needs to uphold the
Charter in letter and spirit.
One pertinent example is the Palestinian question,
given that, in relation to it, there is no commitment
to the Charter, international law or international
resolutions. We reject the Israeli occupation and illegal

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

settlements in the occupied territories, as well as Israeli
practices of oppression of the brotherly Palestinian
people, which is in non-conformity with the Charter
and international law.
In order to resolve the Palestinian question, the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan and Lebanese
territories, must be stopped. Settlements in occupied
territories must end and the blockade on Gaza Strip
must be lifted. Illegal practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories must cease. Refugees must be
allowed to return and all practices that jeopardize the
realization of the two-State solution must be stopped.
An independent and viable Palestinian State must
be established within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.
It is high time that we realize a just and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question that
grants the Palestinian people their rights and lets them
meet their legitimate aspirations, through dialogue and
meaningful negotiations in line with the Charter of the
United Nations, international law, the international
resolutions, the agreed terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative. The international community must
spare no effort to achieve this envisioned goal so as
to halt the long-standing suffering and instability and
avoid putting the region and the world at further risk.
The State of Qatar has been eager to play its role
at every level to create an environment conducive
to lasting and comprehensive peace. Aware of the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, in particular in the
Gaza Strip, the State of Qatar has continued to support
the budget of the Palestinian Authority and provide
humanitarian needs. We have also supported multiple
projects, in particular the provision of electricity to
Gaza, and United Nations temporary employment
programmes to improve the living conditions of our
Palestinian brothers.
With regard to Syria, the crisis continues,
accompanied by exacerbated humanitarian suffering
and serious violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. It is high time
that the brotherly Syrian people were able to see their
legitimate demands for peace, security, a dignified
life, unity, sovereignty and independence answered.
Only a political solution, in line with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254

20-0166627/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(2015), will lead to achieving those goals. At this point,
the Constitutional Committee must be promoted as
a step in the right direction, and we will continue to
support such efforts to eliminate obstacles to reaching
a political solution in line with the United Nations and
legal terms of reference.
Concerning Libya, the military operations carried
out by militias targeting the capital Tripoli and the
attacks on the legitimate Government recognized by
the international community threaten the unity and
stability of Libya. We call on all actors to uphold their
responsibilities, respect the will of the Libyan people for
a peaceful solution, end the violence, achieve national
consensus and implement the Security Council’s
resolutions. In that regard, we fully support the efforts
of Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
With regard to Yemen, the Yemeni people deserve
an end to the conflict and their acute humanitarian
suffering. Actors must participate in dialogue geared
towards achieving a political solution and national
reconciliation, in accordance with resolution 2216
(2015). That would ensure the unity of Yemen and restore
security and stability. We also support the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and reiterate
the need to uphold international law, safeguard human
rights and meet the basic needs of all the Yemeni people
by facilitating access of humanitarian assistance.
Concerning Iraq, the State of Qatar is closely
following developments there and the evolving sensitive
situation in our region. That requires us to deploy
collective efforts, mend communication bridges and
relying on multilateralism instead of unilateralism in
order to find solutions. We underscore the importance
of depending on wisdom and reason to reduce tensions
and achieve de-escalation. The State of Qatar has
always stressed the importance of preventive diplomacy
and the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts
through dialogue and mediation.
Today, our position remains steadfast. We call for
respect for international law and friendly relations
among countries. The international community must
uphold its responsibilities by guaranteeing stability
and security in our region. We will spare no effort,
in cooperation and collaboration with friendly and
brotherly countries, to reduce tensions and restore calm
through diplomatic channels.
28/37

22/01/2020

The State of Qatar remains fully committed to its
principled positions concerning the continued unjust
blockade and illegal unilateral measures imposed on
my country for more than two and a half years. That is a
serious violation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. It destabilizes our
region and threatens regional and international peace
and security. The countries imposing the blockade
on my country have also engaged in campaigns of
allegations and incitement reflecting their failure. The
State of Qatar is steadfast in its position in favour of a
peaceful resolution of this crisis through unconditional
constructive dialogue that preserves State sovereignty,
in keeping with the United Nations Charter, international
law and cordial relations among countries. In order to
defuse tensions and achieve international peace and
security, we remain committed to mediation in seeking
a solution to the crisis. In particular, we commend
the efforts of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the sisterly State of Kuwait.
In conclusion, the Middle East is now more than
ever in need of ending all tensions that have serious
consequences on international peace and security. The
Security Council has a responsibility to take necessary
measures in order to end all grave violations of
international law and crises, leading to a safe region for
its people and achieving peace, stability, development
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to sincerely congratulate the
delegation of Viet Nam on its successful presidency of
the Security Council in January. I also thank Ms. DiCarlo
and Ms. Mueller for their valuable briefings.
A new year has begun, and the Palestinian people
continue to endure the Israeli occupation of their
territories and the daily violation of their legitimate
rights. The Palestinian territories continue to endure
practices that violate United Nations resolutions and
international humanitarian law, including continued
settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, as well as the demolition of houses and
systematic attacks against the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Such acts affect the socioeconomic situation of the
Palestinians and undermine prospects for peace in the
region. In that context, the Kingdom of Morocco and
King Mohammed VI, who chairs the Quds Committee
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, reiterate
their solidarity with the Palestinian people and support
for the achievement of their legitimate rights and the
establishment of an independent State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates the need to
stop settlement activities and implement resolution
2334 (2016). The Kingdom of Morocco considers East
Jerusalem to be a Palestinian territory that has been
occupied since 1967 and should be the capital of the
Palestinian State. It is one of the final-status issues that
have yet to be resolved through negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis; it is at the heart of the Middle
East conflict and is key to a genuine political solution
between Palestinians and Israelis.
Furthermore, we reject any unilateral measure
against Jerusalem that would contravene Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 476 (1980)
and 478 (1980). We must preserve the historic and legal
status of Jerusalem in accordance with the values of
tolerance and coexistence among religions that Morocco
has always supported. His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, together with Pope Francis, signed the Al-Quds/
Jerusalem declaration when the Pope visited Morocco in
March 2019. On that occasion, His Majesty the King and
the Holy Father stressed the need to preserve the city of
Jerusalem so that it can continue to be part of the world
heritage of all humankind. Jerusalem must be promoted
as a multi-faith city and free access to the city must be
ensured for all believers of the monotheistic religions.
The role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, headed
by His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al-Hussein as
custodian of all the holy sites in Jerusalem, is important
and must also be preserved.
The Kingdom of Morocco also reiterates its support
for the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
for the Agency’s efforts to alleviate their suffering in
countries of the region while enabling them to access
basic services and medical care, especially for children.
The Al-Quds Committee continues to carry out its
mission to protect Jerusalem and support the well-being
of its people through the implementation of various
projects aimed at protecting the city’s cultural and
architectural heritage, while preserving the national
Palestinian archive. The Agency has also launched
phase two of renovating and reforming the Moroccan
Cultural centre in Jerusalem, the Moroccan House.

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

The Kingdom of Morocco continues to believe in
the existence of solutions to the Palestinian question,
but the absence of negotiations between the Palestinians
and the Israelis has prevented an end to the violence and
led to a lack of trust between them. The international
community must take control of the situation and work
actively to bring Israelis and Palestinians back to the
negotiating table in order to achieve a two-State solution
within the 4 June 1967 borders and to ensure that East
Jerusalem becomes the capital of the State of Palestine.
Such negotiations must be conducted in good faith and
on a clear basis with a view to restoring confidence
between the parties and to laying the foundations of a
viable Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security, in accordance with international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We also
appreciate international efforts to achieve lasting peace
and security in the Middle East region.
The President: As we are running a little behind
schedule, I thank speakers for keeping their statements
brief and request the other delegations to respect the
time limits.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Once again, we are here to discuss the world’s longest
crisis — the question of Palestine.
In the early days of the year marking the United
Nations seventy-fifth anniversary, it is very timely
to ask why the Council is unable to end the decadeslong occupation of Palestine, to protect the very basic
rights of millions of oppressed Palestinians at home and
abroad and to confront an occupying regime that has
committed all four core international crimes, not once
but several times.
The answer is clear. The United States, by
violating the peremptory norms and basic principles
of international law, disregarding all standards of
international conduct and breaking all principles of
humanity and morality, as well as by abusing its status
as a permanent member of the Council, continues to
completely, systematically and unreservedly shield
the Israeli regime. One example is its use of the veto
to protect Israel 44 times, thus further emboldening
that regime to commit more brutal crimes with more
brutality and in total impunity.
Moreover, the United States has been engaged
in other destabilizing activities in our region. In

20-0166629/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

pursuit of its intrinsic animosity towards Muslim
nations, particularly in the Middle East, the United
States continues military adventurism in our region,
the latest example of which is the recent horrific
assassination of the martyr Qasem Soleimani and
his companions at Baghdad International Airport.
The assassination was a clear manifestation of State
terrorism, which constitutes a gross violation of the
fundamental principles of international law and entails
the international responsibility of the United States.
We categorically reject all United States fabrications
to justify that heinous crime, including by resorting to
sham claims that Mr. Soleimani was planning to target
American interests in the region. The United States
is well aware that, in addition to his decisive role in
fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
in Iraq and Syria, Mr. Soleimani was also a highly
influential and respected politician, working hard for
stability in the region. Without a doubt, that extremely
provocative move was a pre-planned plot aimed at
escalating tensions in our region.
The assassination clearly invalidated the United
States claim that it is fighting terrorism. It is, in fact,
fighting those who combat terrorists. The martyr
Soleimani’s demise was a big gift from America to ISIS
and other regional terrorist groups. Rallies and crowds in
the region commemorating the martyr Soleimani’s role
in fighting terrorism and denouncing his assassination,
as well as the fact that millions in our capital alone
participated in his funeral procession — the second
largest in the history of our nation and the entire
region — demonstrate how beloved he was nationally
and regionally. If anything, United States adventurism
testified to one fact — that after the cowardly
assassination, the region is less secure and less stable.
Consequently, the most effective way to ensure regional
peace and security is the withdrawal of United States
forces from the region, as they have always been the
source of instability in our neighbourhood.
The Council needs to address its deepening trust
deficit and diminishing legitimacy and credibility
emanating from its inaction in cases of clear violations
of international law, such as its silence on the
assassination of Martyr Soleimani. In order to correct
its past mistakes in the Middle East, the Council must
uphold its responsibility by preventing the imposition
of all the unlawful policies of the United States and the
Israeli regime against the entire region. The Council
must remain vigilant about the deceitful nature of
30/37

22/01/2020

the Israeli regime and must not allow it to abuse the
Council’s open debates to play victim in an effort
to distract attention from its oppressive policies in
our region.
That is exactly what the representative of the Israeli
regime did yesterday (see S/PV.8706) when, instead of
explaining why it continues to flout international law
and maintain its inhumane practices in the occupied
territories, he attempted to level accusations at my
country through a series of lies and fabrications, which
I reject completely and do not want to dignify with
an answer.
It is no accident that, in a coordinated move, the
United States representative also did likewise, keeping
completely silent on the topic of the meeting — the
question of Palestine — and instead ventured to give
a rosy picture of Israel, justifying its illegal practices
while orchestrating a disinformation campaign, which
we totally repudiate, against my country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of today’s debate
under the presidency of Viet Nam and associates
itself with the statement made earlier today by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. As we have expressed
in previous debates, the question of Palestine has
historically been an issue of concern and importance
to Ecuador. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
informative briefing.
Last December marked three years since the
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2334
(2016). Since then, the situation on the ground has
only deteriorated. We deeply regret that, after yet
another year, the conflict has not been resolved. No
action was taken during the reporting period to end
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory
as required by resolution 2334 (2016). On the contrary,
demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian-owned
structures continued throughout the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, resulting in the
demolition or confiscation of 150 structures and the
displacement of 260 people, including 133 children and
approximately 60 women. We reiterate our concern
about the implementation of those measures.
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are also deeply concerned about the number of
deaths and injuries from violence and terrorist attacks
against civilians. As a result of air strikes and in the
course of demonstrations, clashes, security operations
and other incidents, 44 Palestinians were killed,
including nine children and three women, while 2,940
others were injured. A total of 46 Israelis — 41 civilians,
including women and children, and 5 members of the
Israeli security forces — were injured in the attacks,
skirmishes and other incidents.
We reject all incitements to violence, which
propels us further from a political, peaceful, definitive
and fair solution for both parties. We reiterate the
call of resolution 2334 (2016) on both parties to
act in accordance with international law, including
international humanitarian law, and to demonstrate
calm and restraint, refraining from acts of provocation
and incitement.
We are extremely concerned about the humanitarian
situation, human rights violations and non-compliance
with international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We call on all parties to make
collective efforts to start credible negotiations and to
intensify regional and international diplomatic efforts
to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East without delay.
Unfortunately, the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2019/938) does not indicate any progress in
that regard. We believe it is imperative that the Council
act and adopt actions aimed at the full implementation of
the fundamental principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, as has been repeatedly
requested of it. We agree with the report that,
“no amount of humanitarian or economic support
on its own will resolve either the situation in Gaza
or the broader conflict” (S/2019/938, para. 59).
Political solutions based on justice, human rights
and international law are needed. Preventive diplomacy
is a critical tool for defusing tensions before they
escalate and worsen. My delegation once again calls on
the international community to make tangible progress
in supporting the advancement of a political, peaceful,
definitive and just solution for the parties based on the
existence of two States — Palestine and Israel — living
side by side in peace and security within recognized
borders on the basis of the 1967 borders, a consensus
reaffirmed in Council resolution 2334 (2016).

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

Finally, after listening to the briefing by Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, we believe that we ought to pay particular
attention to how many children are affected on a
daily basis — in terms of their enjoyment of rights,
access to education and mental health — by this
unresolved situation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by congratulating the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam on its presidency of the Council for the month
of January, its first month as a non-permanent Council
member. We also welcome the beginning Council term
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as a representative
country from the Latin America and the Caribbean
region. Finally, we also welcome the other incoming
Council members — the Niger, Estonia and Tunisia.
As we commemorate 75 years of operation of the
United Nations, this is a moment to pause and reflect
on the Organization we want. Given the constant
sources of tension in the Middle East, in particular
the conflict between the State of Israel and the State
of Palestine, which is mired in a permanent paralysis
that promotes extremism and instability in the area, we
must take clear, concrete and sustainable measures in
the short, medium and long term that will help achieve
a definitive political solution — never military — to
the long and complex conflict between the two States.
The Security Council has spent decades discussing
the situation in the Middle East without achieving
the results desired by the Palestinians, Israel or the
international community. The lack of consensus,
including on previously agreed parameters, only
increases the complexity of the conflict. As we mark
our seventy-fifth year, this is undoubtedly one of the
Organization’s greatest failures.
As established by the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council has the primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security and
improving its work in the area of conflict prevention,
while taking into account human rights considerations.
That is why we urge the Council members to take
concrete and sustainable action to promote dialogue and
peace in the Middle East. War cannot be fought through
more wars. Peace is built through dialogue, solidarity
and international cooperation. It is time for action and

20-0166631/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

it is time for the members of the Security Council to
assume their responsibilities under the Charter.
As the famous saying goes, insanity is doing the
same thing over and over again, but expecting different
results. Time is running out. The conflict continues to
escalate. Now is the time to find definitive solutions.
We must be familiar with history in order to understand
the mistakes of the past and avoid repeating them. That
is why Costa Rica reiterates its strong support for a
negotiated and definitive solution to the conflict — one
that is reached peacefully and is legally binding on
all parties.
We know that we cannot or should not work in
isolation. We must work together in a coordinated
manner and in pursuit of shared objectives in order
to deal with the crises, in particular the humanitarian
crises, that require an urgent response. In that regard,
Costa Rica warmly welcomes the renewal of paragraphs
2 and 3 of resolution 2165 (2014), which will ensure that
humanitarian assistance, including medical and surgical
supplies, reaches people in need throughout Syria. We
underline, however, that humanitarian aid should have
no conditions or limitations whatsoever as long as it
is in line with the basic principles of independence,
impartiality, neutrality and humanity.
In the view of Costa Rica, blockades on the provision
of humanitarian and medical assistance to civilians
constitute a flagrant violation of State obligations
under international law. That is why we deplore the fact
that the recent extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
has curtailed humanitarian assistance operations,
which, above all, must ensure human dignity.
We recall that nearly 27 years have passed since
the Oslo Accords were signed to open up a path to
peace, yet the lack of political will has left them at a
standstill. As stipulated in resolution 2334 (2016),
Israel’s establishment of settlements in Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and
an impediment to the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. We therefore call
upon the State of Israel to cease all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
We urge the State of Israel and the State of Palestine
to resume, as soon as possible, negotiations that should
lead to the establishment of a fully sovereign Palestinian
32/37

22/01/2020

State, on the basis of the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Similarly, we call for calm and
restraint and on the parties to refrain from provocative
actions and the use of inflammatory rhetoric. We
reject and condemn the disproportionate use of force,
including the firing of rockets, mortars and incendiary
devices, by Palestinian militants in Gaza against
civilians in Israel and the use of lethal force by Israel
against Palestinians. The only solution to the conflict is
dialogue and the political will of the parties, with the
acceptance of their mutual right to exist.
Costa Rica reiterates its unwavering commitment to
multilateralism, peaceful conflict resolution, mediation
and dialogue, as fundamental tools for achieving peace.
Costa Rica will remain committed to building peace
in the Middle East and will support all efforts aimed
at achieving the noble objective that its people demand
and deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I would like to thank
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his tireless efforts to
promote peace, as well as Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for
their valuable interventions yesterday.
This quarterly debate falls just days before
International Holocaust Remembrance Day. Canada’s
Governor-General will be in Jerusalem this week
to join leaders from around the world in the fifth
World Holocaust Forum at Yad Vashem and to mark
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the liberation of
Auschwitz-Birkenau. Canada remembers the 6 million
Jewish victims of the Holocaust and the millions of
others persecuted and killed by the Nazi regime. As
we look forward, it is always important to recall the
past, particularly in the context of a global rise in
anti-Semitism and hatred of all kinds. As the SecretaryGeneral said yesterday, never again means telling the
story of the Holocaust again and again.
Alongside all Member States, Canada closely
follows developments in the Middle East, including the
deliberations of the Council.
Before I begin, I would be remiss if I did not mention
the tragedy of Ukrainian Airlines Flight PS-752, which
killed 176 people, including 57 Canadians. Canada
offers its condolences to all the families of the victims
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and all the countries whose citizens perished in the
tragedy. All of Canada mourns the loss of those bright
individuals. As our Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs have said, Canada will not rest until
the families of that terrible tragedy get the closure,
accountability, transparency and justice from Iran that
they deserve.
We are working with other grieving nations to
ensure a thorough and credible investigation, followed
by full accountability, including compensation. Iran
has taken responsibility for the tragedy, which we
appreciate and which brings consequences. We will
continue to judge Iran by its actions.
(spoke in French)
The tragedy occurred at a time of heightened
tensions in the region. As Mr. Mladenov said, we are
well aware of the new flashpoints in the region. We are
fully committed to supporting any and all efforts to
promote de-escalation. Canada understands all too well
that failure to do so could have tragic consequences for
civilians in the region and around the world. So many
lives have been needlessly lost as a result of this time of
tension, including the lives of those aboard Ukrainian
Airlines Flight PS-752.

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. We also work in
close partnership with the Government of Iraq, where
Canada leads a NATO training mission of Iraqi Armed
Forces and supports the efforts of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh. In Iraq, the Government continues to
confront internal and external challenges as it seeks to
consolidate the territorial defeat of Da’esh.
Canada continues to be deeply engaged in
development, humanitarian, military and diplomatic
efforts to support Iraq. Our priority remains a stable and
united Iraq and preventing the resurgence of Da’esh.
In Jordan, we are working with the Government
to train local leaders, particularly women, to identify
early signs of violent extremism in their communities.
Jordan hosts thousands of Palestinian, Iraqi, Yemeni
and, most recently, Syrian refugees. Jordan has done so
for generations, often without full appreciation by the
international community of the impact that that has had
on its society.
Lebanon and Turkey, which host the highest number
of refugees per capita and the most in total, respectively,
also remind us how the region and the world as a whole
have been deeply affected by the crisis in Syria.

As Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said, if there
had been no tension or recent escalation in the region,
those Canadians would be at home right now with
their families. That is what happens when there is
conflict and war. Innocent people become victims. It
reminds us of the importance of efforts to de-escalate
and — looking ahead — to reduce tensions.

Much of the focus of this open debate is on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Today, I reiterate Canada’s
long-standing support for a two-State solution, brought
about through direct negotiations between the parties.
That is just, in line with international law and can
deliver lasting peace to the region and security and
prosperity to both Israelis and Palestinians.

Since the beginning of the crisis, Canada has
advocated diplomacy and international cooperation
and called on all parties to honour their obligations.
Indeed, that is in keeping with Canada’s international
relations since the founding of the United Nations.
Approximately 10 days ago, during the open debate
on the Charter of the United Nations (see S/PV.8699),
we recalled the leading role Canada’s then-Foreign
Minister Lester B. Pearson played in defusing the Suez
Crisis and creating the United Nations first large-scale
peacekeeping force.

We also unequivocally condemn rocket attacks on
Israel by Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, which
have targeted, killed and injured civilians. Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad are terror groups that
control a vulnerable population. We are thankful
to Mr. Mladenov and to Egypt for their concerted
diplomatic efforts regarding Gaza. The humanitarian
and political situation in Gaza has become critical. If
the security situation were to deteriorate any further,
we could face another humanitarian catastrophe in the
region. Canada urges all members of the international
community to take the necessary action to avoid
that outcome.

(spoke in English)
Today, Canada contributes to numerous United
Nations peace operations worldwide, including the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United

Our ties to the region are deep, broad, diverse and
long-standing. They are based on historic but evolving
and ever-expanding relationships between Canadians

20-0166633/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and their friends, families, colleagues and business
partners across the Middle East, from the Maghreb to
the Gulf. There are millions of Canadians who trace
their origins back to that region. Each has enriched
Canada’s social fabric, including the more than 60,000
Syrian refugees who have arrived since 2016 and are
becoming Canadian citizens, such as Tareq Hadhad, the
founder of a family-run company in Nova Scotia, Peace
by Chocolate, which now employs 55 people. That is
what we mean when we say diversity is our strength.
It is in that spirit of commitment to diplomacy and
international cooperation that Canada continues to
be firmly committed to working with its partners in
the region to combat the terror and violent extremism
that have afflicted far too many countries represented
here today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): We wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, which
is becoming increasingly complex in the light of
developments that constitute a threat to international
peace and security. We would like to congratulate you
on your able leadership of the Security Council during
the month of January. We would also like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their valuable briefings.
In order to establish security and stability in the
Middle East and in the world, we need joint political
will and collective integrated action. We need to
create the positive conditions that will ensure the
success of political settlements. We need to refrain
from interfering in the internal affairs of States and to
ensure that States affected by conflicts can restore their
sovereignty, security, stability and territorial integrity.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its position in
support of the right of the brotherly Palestinian people
to establish an independent State along the lines of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based
on the Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and
the relevant international resolutions. In that regard,
we stress that just, comprehensive and durable peace
in the region will be possible only if we resolve the
Palestinian question and grant the Palestinian people
all their legitimate rights, just like other peoples in the
34/37

22/01/2020

world. To that end, the international community must
spare no effort to reach a just and durable solution to
that central question.
The Kingdom of Bahrain emphasizes that terrorist
acts committed by Houthi militias seek to hamper
efforts to reach a political solution that preserves
the unity and territorial integrity of Yemen and that
fulfils the aspirations of the brotherly Yemeni people
for security, stability and prosperity. The Kingdom of
Bahrain strongly condemns the terrorist act of Houthi
militias, supported by Iran, that targeted a mosque in
Ma’rib governorate in the sisterly Republic of Yemen
and killed and injured dozens of people. We express our
sincere condolences to the families of the victims and
we wish the injured a rapid recovery. That terrorist act
is shameful and is inconsistent with human, ethical and
religious values.
The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the final
communiqué adopted at the Libya conference held
in Berlin, the Federal Republic of Germany. We
welcome the agreement among participants regarding
a comprehensive plan to resolve the crisis in Libya
and their pledges not to interfere in the internal
affairs of Libya and to disarm the armed groups and
other binding commitments. We welcome all such
commitments, which represent an important step
towards a comprehensive political settlement in Libya.
We commend the Federal Republic of Germany
and the participating States as well as their pledge to
restore security and stability in Libya. We hope for
increased efforts in that regard and look forward to
the implementation of the Skhirat Political Agreement,
signed in 2015 in the Kingdom of Morocco. The
Agreement is the political framework accepted by the
international community and all the parties in Libya.
It is therefore a strong foundation for fulfilling the
aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people to achieve
stability and security and for resolving the crisis
while preserving the safety and territorial integrity
of Libya, leading to an end to violence and the
eradication of extremism and terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
In conclusion, in order to achieve stability and
security in the Middle East, we must be united
and overcome existing and emerging challenges.
The Kingdom of Bahrain will cooperate with the
international community to resolve conflicts by
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peaceful means and to achieve security and stability in
the region and worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Rodrigo (Sri Lanka): At the outset, I wish to
thank the presidency of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam for organizing this very important and timely open
debate. My delegation also notes with appreciation the
comprehensive briefings by Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller. Sri
Lanka aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The briefings by the Under-Secretary-General and
the Assistant Secretary-General highlighted the fragile
situation in the Middle East and the grave situation in
Palestine. This debate is taking place at a crucial time,
when the region faces an escalation of tension and
pressures. We join the calls by the Secretary-General
and the international community for the parties
concerned to exercise restraint, and we urge greater
diplomacy and dialogue.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations. However, a solution to the Middle East
conflict continues to elude us. Peace cannot come to the
Middle East until the question of Palestine is addressed
comprehensively and a just and lasting resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the two-State
solution, where both sides can coexist, is reached.
We remain deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian
territories with the increase in settlement expansion,
related attacks and the demolition of Palestinian
homes and structures and the forced displacement of
Palestinian civilians. All illegal settlement activities
by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories must
cease forthwith and comply with the provisions and
responsibilities under international law. Policies and
measures aimed at altering the demographic character,
identity and legal status of the occupied territories must
also stop.
We remain concerned about the critical situation in
Gaza as a result of the ongoing blockade and closure,
which are entering their fourteenth year and have
created a dire and deplorable socioeconomic situation
for the Palestinian people. With half of its population of
1.8 million under the age of 15 years old, the blockade

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

has had a grave effect on over 840,000 children. We join
the international calls for the lifting of the blockade and
for concerted action to improve the living standards of
the Palestinian people.
My delegation reiterates its support for resolutions
242 (1967), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016), concerning the
question of Palestine, as well as the implementation
of all resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, ending the occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the cessation of all illegal
settlement activities. Both parties to the conflict
must create the necessary environment to facilitate
peace. There is also an urgent need for mutual
confidence-building measures to support efforts to
resume dialogue and substantive negotiations.
Sri Lanka continues to reaffirm its unwavering
support and solidarity in the legitimate struggle of
the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights
and national aspirations, including their right to
self-determination and for the establishment of
an independent and sovereign State. Let us, as the
international community, redouble our collective
efforts and commitment to helping forge a peaceful,
durable settlement of the situation in the Middle East
and that of the question of Palestine.
In conclusion, I wish to state that the sustained
provision of vital humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people by the United
Nations and the international community is
commendable. The update from the briefing on the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was
heartening. My delegation was fortunate to have firsthand experience, having visited an UNRWA-funded
school and medical centre in Jordan last year, and can
testify to the crucial role it plays in providing essential
services to the Palestinian people. Sri Lanka reiterates
its full support for UNRWA’s work and welcomes the
extension of its mandate until the end of June 2023.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and I would like
to thank our briefers from yesterday — Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian
Affairs — for their statements (see S/PV.8706).

20-0166635/37

S/PV.8706 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On Monday, we celebrated Martin Luther King Jr.
Day. It is so fitting to celebrate his birthday the same
week of the debate on the situation in the Middle East.
Everything that Martin Luther King Jr. believed in
and fought for — civil rights, human rights, justice,
non-violence, inequality and non-discrimination — is
on display in the Middle East today. All of those issues
present the most difficult challenges that exist across
the Middle East and are devolving into violence and
conflict with dire consequences. The region is currently
home to the largest humanitarian crises and refugee
influx in its history, and yet also to the smallest chance
of peace and security for its peoples.
The situation in the Middle East presents a difficult
challenge to the international community and to the
United Nations. The conflicts are many and multiplying
but, most importantly, violations of the Charter of the
United Nations and its principles are being committed
in total disregard of international law, especially
international humanitarian law. For instance, turning
to the Palestinian issue, as we heard yesterday from the
briefers and other Member States, the situation is dark
and worsening by the day. I am sure that we all heard
about the total despair of the Palestinian people in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs’
briefing to the Council.
What can one expect from a people who have been
living under occupation for seven decades and whose
human rights, legal rights, civil rights and rights to
their land, water, and dignity have been taken away
from them? What kind of lives can people lead when
their cities are described as large prisons? The United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Mladenov, recently said that we are always
no more than two to three days away from another war
in Gaza. What kind of future do the Palestinians have
when youth unemployment is at 60 per cent and, as
Ms. Mueller said, one in every two Palestinians is in
need of humanitarian aid? These are desperate people
and desperate people do desperate things.
At the political level, they have no horizon and
no hope for a peaceful settlement. The two-State
solution has been emptied of every element essential
for a Palestinian State and all final-status issues — the
basis of an equitable solution to the conflict — have
been dismantled by unilateral Israeli actions such as
annexation, which will render the two-State solution
an impossibility. The expansion of settlements, the
confiscation of land and Israel’s actions in Jerusalem
36/37

22/01/2020

are making it impossible for East Jerusalem to be the
future capital of a Palestinian State. The situation is
leading not only to despair but also to a loss of faith
in the international community and in peace. The
pessimism of the Palestinians was captured in a survey
conducted by the International Committee of the Red
Cross when it found that 52 per cent of Palestinian
millennials believe that the conflict will never end.
There is an urgent need for a different path, a different
construct and a new page in the Middle East. The status
quo is not tenable anymore.
In Lebanon, a new Government headed by Prime
Minister Hassan Diab was formed last night after three
months of political crisis and a wave of demonstrations
never seen before in the history of the country. The
new Government, dubbed the “salvation Government”,
is facing a major challenge to get Lebanon out of the
current crisis. We are counting on the support of all
Lebanon’s friends in the international community,
because Lebanon’s stability is important for the
entire region.
The new Prime Minister promised the
demonstrators that he will work to fulfil their demands.
The new Government has formed a committee to draft
its policy statement in order to win the confidence
vote in Parliament. The situation in the south of the
country is calm, as the United Nations has reiterated,
but Israeli violations of resolution 1701 (2006), as well
as of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity,
continue unabated. The Lebanese defence forces
recorded 2,620 violations, including land, sea and
air violations, in 2019. Those violations run counter
international legality and are fuelling tensions in the
south of Lebanon. Air violations in particular terrorize
the Lebanese population on daily basis.
The situation in the Middle East requires the Council
and the international community to unite around the
idea that, as my German colleague said yesterday,
international law is not an á la carte menu. The Council
needs to implement its resolutions — whether on
Palestine, Lebanon, the Golan Heights or other parts of
the region — in order for justice and peace and security
to be restored to the Middle East.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Bourgel (Israel) (spoke in French): We
have taken note of the concerns expressed by certain
20-01666

22/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

members regarding the subject matter that my delegation
chose to focus its statement on during this debate (see
S/PV.8706). In that connection, we recall that the theme
of this open debate is “The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question”. It is therefore
naturally up to each delegation to freely decide on the
subjects it chooses to address, in accordance with its
positions and concerns. That is the very essence of the
wealth of our exchanges and we cannot imagine that
some would seek to impose a single way of thinking on
this matter from which it is prohibited to deviate.
As far as my delegation is concerned, we do
indeed believe that, at the risk of repeating ourselves,
it is essential to recall that Iran’s destabilizing
activities constitute a serious threat to peace and
security in our region. Iran is spending approximately
$7 billion dollars a year to finance its networks — of
course, to the detriment of its own citizens and their

S/PV. 8706 (Resumption 1)

needs — and is exporting its missiles, as well as
excessively disseminating its devastating ideology in
violation of Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006), 2216 (2015) and
2231 (2015).
Iran has openly called for the destruction of Israel,
a State Member of the United Nations since 1949. It is
therefore incumbent upon the Security Council and the
international community to firmly condemn Iranian
violations and to take all necessary measures to ensure
that they are brought to an end at any cost.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning, I would like to thank the
interpreters for their efforts.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

20-0166637/37
