S/PV.8541

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8541st meeting

Monday, 10 June 2019, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2019/461)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-16756 (E)
*1916756*

Kosovo

S/PV.8541

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.

change in a myriad of dimensions, in Kosovo, in the
region and in the world.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2019/461)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo; and Mr. João Miguel Ferreira de
Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel.
Mr. Tanin is participating in the meeting via videoteleconference from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/461, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: As reflected in the details of the report
before the Security Council (S/2019/461), the situation
in Kosovo, and between Belgrade and Pristina, is again
at a fragile moment. Today’s meeting coincides with
a significant anniversary. It has been 20 years since
the Security Council last adopted a full resolution in
response to the conflict (resolution 1244 (1999)). Over
those 20 years, there has clearly been progress and
2/28

10/06/2019

At the same time, we should make an additional
reflection. In the absence of a genuine and necessary
process of engagement between the parties to this
conflict, the situation does not simply remain tenuous,
but could slide backwards. Often it has done so.
Productive engagements between Belgrade and Pristina
have not taken place since autumn 2018, and, while
much attention is focused upon day-to-day disputes and
provocations, these are not the only factors complicating
efforts to return to negotiations.
The imposition of a 100 per cent import tariff on
Serbian and Bosnian goods by Pristina last November
continues, despite a near-unanimous call by the
international community for its removal. Belgrade’s
position is that lifting the import tariffs is a minimum
condition for resuming talks within the format facilitated
by the European Union. Pristina leaders have also set
out public conditions, though not always with unity of
voice, and while a Pristina negotiating team has been
created, its full responsibilities await clarification. To
resolutioneduce these complex nuances into a single
assessment: multiple inconsistent public signals have
hampered all efforts to ensure the full engagement of
both parties in a single or definitive process.
In such circumstances, leaders from all sides must
exercise their responsibility to steer this complex
situation clear of any serious escalations. Engagement
in good faith, without threats or ultimatums, is
necessary for re-establishing the conditions for the
resumption and continuation of political dialogue.
I hope that all parties engaged may be able to work
collectively to ensure that the planned meeting in July
in Paris is used by the parties to return to substantive
matters, in particular those that directly affect the lives
of people and communities. Engaging more actively
with a wider array of stakeholders, demonstrating a
commitment to advancing the interests of populations
hoping for better opportunities, and meaningful and
equal participation of all segments of the society are
elements essential to achieving a measure of political
process, but unfortunately each appeared to be lacking
in the efforts we observed during this past period.
One of the significant developments since the end
of the official reporting period was the organization
of elections in the four Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities in northern Kosovo. Following the
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

resignations of the mayors of these municipalities in
response to Pristina’s increase of the import tax on
Serbian and Bosnian goods, the President of Kosovo
called an extraordinary election, which took place on
19 May. The election proceeded peacefully. According
to Kosovo’s Central Election Commission, the elections
resulted in a clear victory for the Serbian List candidates
who already held power in the relevant municipalities,
and who received above 90 per cent of the vote.
Restricted electoral competition and limited political
participation in Kosovo Serb communities were issues
underlined by some of the diplomatic representatives
monitoring the election process.
On the morning of 28 May, the Kosovo police
conducted a special operation — concentrated mainly
in the northern municipalities — targeting smuggling
and organized crime suspects, under warrants issued
by the Pristina Basic Court. The operation led to the
arrest of a number of suspects, including local officials.
Suspects and Kosovo police officers were injured in the
course of the operation. During this operation, two staff
members of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), based in Zubin Potok,
a municipality in the north, one international and
one locally recruited, were arrested and injured, in
separate incidents. It is a United Nations responsibility
to determine objectively the circumstances affecting
its staff, which we have already undertaken in a
systematic manner, in full accord with United Nations
practice and with the imperative to determine the facts
expeditiously. This point is particularly important
for Council members to know, given the extent of
unverified information and speculation that have since
appeared in the public domain.
Today, I would like to put on record just a few other
pertinent points.
First, there has been a failure to observe our staff
members’ relevant immunities to arrest and detention.
United Nations property was also improperly searched
and seized, in contravention of all relevant laws and the
Organization’s immunities.
Secondly, despite our requests and a normally
productive working relationship with authorities in
Pristina, the situation at present is that the authorities
have shared very little relevant or factual evidence
with the United Nations about the arrest and injury
of our staff. Simultaneously, Kosovo authorities have
issued statements in the press, and in correspondence

S/PV. 8541

directed to States Members of the United Nations, that
contains information lacking an adequate evidentiary
basis, contrary to much of our understanding so far, and
avoids matters essential for an objective enquiry.
Thirdly, the day after the transfer of our
international staff member outside Kosovo to receive
required medical treatment, he was publicly declared
persona non grata, upon which occasion I received in
parallel a communication from Pristina authorities
stating the same. As already stressed, the doctrine of
persona non grata does not apply to, or in respect of,
United Nations personnel.
Fourthly, I am alarmed that both staff members
were apparently subjected to excessive force and
mistreatment upon their arrest by police, causing
injuries requiring hospitalization. That is a matter that
will form an essential component of the enquiry that we
have initiated.
During those events, I was obliged to call
repeatedly for the immediate release of United Nations
staff, as well as respect for their rights and immunities.
That would not have been necessary had the authorities
respected the immunity of UNMIK personnel and
communicated with the Mission in a more forthright
and timely manner. Nonetheless, we remain hopeful
that communication from the highest levels of Pristina
authorities will improve as we work to clarify the
precise circumstances of 28 May.
I also wish to make clear that our Mission stands
fully behind all efforts of the Pristina institutions to
combat organized crime networks and eliminate public
corruption. That struggle, as I emphasized in my
public statement on 28 May, must also sit within the
framework of the international rule of law and human
rights principles, which are guarded by the United
Nations, and foremost by this Council.
Regardless of events such as the ones on 28 May,
UNMIK continues to focus its efforts and resources on
the objectives of peace and stability in Kosovo and the
region. We will do so effectively only with the direct
support of the Council.
Internally, I consistently review our Mission’s
priorities and will need the Council’s support to ensure
that we continue to fulfil our role in the most efficient
and appropriate way. Our approach is guided by the
Secretary-General’s prevention agenda, epitomized
by the Mission’s focus on trust-building among

19-167563/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

10/06/2019

communities. In that, we work closely with all actors
who are engaged in good-faith efforts to transform the
environment from one of contained conflict into one of
peace and progress.

established to support the Ashkali, Egyptian and
Roma communities. The Secretary-General has urged
additional contributions, which are essential to respond
adequately to the needs of those vulnerable groups.

In collaboration with the United Nations Kosovo
team, and our other international partners on the
ground, we continue to empower trust-building actors,
including in the areas of language rights and human
rights more broadly, youth empowerment, gender
equality, justice and intercommunal dialogue. We
have followed a road map created during the United
Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, held in May
2018, utilizing public spaces in Kosovo to underline
the priority of reconciliation expressed by Kosovo’s
leadership. The debates that we are fostering are
designed specifically to tackle the most sensitive areas of
public concern, including the political decision-making
process, religious tolerance, empowering the younger
generation in the daunting challenge of overcoming the
past and ensuring a more just and peaceful future for
the next generation.

UNMIK will continue to work closely with our
international partners, particularly the EU and the
Kosovo Force, as well as with the many bilateral actors
who are investing their resources in Kosovo’s stability,
community reconciliation and economic development.
Our international partners have invested substantial
resources in Kosovo and the region, and the parties
have expressed their desire to move ever closer to the
European Union. I therefore call upon the parties to do
their part and assume responsibilities for delivering
on the objectives of normalizing relations and helping
to bring not only a more lasting stability but growing
prosperity to the region.

We are pursuing our goal of being directly engaged
with Kosovo institutions to help the implementation
of human rights initiatives and legislation. Although
largely drowned out by the news stories of the same
time frame, on 24 May, the Working Group on Missing
Persons met in Pristina, agreeing on several very
practical steps jointly to uncover further information
needed to address still-unresolved cases. The same
Group will soon submit a report documenting the
actions since 2004, during which identifications in over
3,300 cases were accomplished.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.

We consistently seek innovative avenues to
promote trust, together with all our partners. We hope
that the institutions from both sides will continue to
join us in that effort. The third United Nations Youth
Assembly, co-organized by UNMIK and UNICEF,
with the vital participation of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, produced specific recommendations
for young people from across Kosovo to engage their
Government and non-governmental institutions. The
Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security in
Pristina, in collaboration with the European Union
(EU), highlighted the need for the greater inclusion
and engagement of women, including in the highest
political processes.
I would also like to take the opportunity to
welcome the initial contribution to the trust fund
4/28

In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its support and reiterate our
assurance that we will continue to implement the peace
and security mandate with which it has entrusted us.

I now give the floor to Mr. De Serpa Soares.
Mr. De Serpa Soares: I would like to begin my
briefing by providing a short outline of the legal
regime of immunity for United Nations staff members
in Kosovo, since that is an important element for the
appreciation of the overall response to the events of
28 May and their follow-up.
The regime of immunity applicable to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and its personnel in Kosovo is spelled out
in UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47 of 18 August 2000,
on the status, privileges and immunities of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and UNMIK and their personnel in
Kosovo. The pertinent provisions are sections 3.3 and
3.4, as read with section 5.
Pursuant to section 3.3 of UNMIK Regulation
2000/47, UNMIK personnel, including locally recruited
personnel, shall be immune from legal process in respect
of words spoken and all acts performed by them in their
official capacity in Kosovo. That is what is often termed
functional immunity. Pursuant to section 5 of the same
UNMIK regulation, that specific immunity continues
after the expiration of the Mission’s mandate or after
the personnel are no longer employed by UNMIK.
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

Section 3.4 of UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47
further provides that UNMIK personnel shall be
immune from any form of arrest or detention, and
that, if they are erroneously detained, they shall be
immediately turned over to UNMIK authorities.
Allow me to highlight that the immunity from legal
process enjoyed by UNMIK personnel in Kosovo is
held in the interests of UNMIK and not for the benefit
of the individuals themselves. Importantly, it is the
Secretary-General who has the right, and the duty, to
waive the immunity of UNMIK personnel in any case
where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede the
course of justice and can be waived without prejudice
to the interests of UNMIK. That is all clearly stated in
section 6.1 of UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47.
As will readily be appreciated, in order for the
immunity and the procedure that I have just outlined
to be effective, the local authorities, before they take
any legal action against UNMIK personnel, should
first inform the Secretary-General — in this case, his
Special Representative, Mr. Tanin — of the facts and
circumstances of the acts of the personnel concerned
and do so with a degree of specificity sufficient for
a determination to be made on the applicability of
immunity to those acts. Mr. Tanin would then inform
the authorities whether immunity applied and, if it did
not, the legal action against the UNMIK personnel
could go ahead.
Resolution 1244 (1999), pursuant to which
UNMIK was established, remains in force and the
legal framework established by UNMIK pursuant
to the powers assigned to it under resolution 1244
(1999) continues to apply, albeit under very different
circumstances today. That includes UNMIK Regulation
No. 2000/47 on the Status, Privileges and Immunities
of KFOR and UNMIK and their Personnel in Kosovo.
Following the adoption of the declaration of
independence by the Assembly of Kosovo on 17 February
2008, the Secretary-General reported to the Security
Council on that development and stated that
“pending guidance from the Council, the
United Nations would continue to operate on the
understanding that resolution 1244 (1999) remained
in force and that UNMIK would continue to
implement its mandate in the light of the evolving
circumstances” (S/2008/354, para. 4).

S/PV. 8541

Since that development, the Secretary-General has
maintained a position of status neutrality. That refers
to the continued operation of UNMIK in the light of
the prevailing circumstances and to the constructive
engagement with the Kosovo authorities in a manner
that does not imply recognition of any statehood. That
approach continues to be followed.
As Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin has noted, two UNMIK staff members
were arrested and detained on 28 May during a police
operation in northern Kosovo. They were later released
from detention. The internationally recruited staff
member Mr. Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, who is the
team leader of the UNMIK office in Zubin Potok and
a Russian national, was released on 28 May. Mr. Dejan
Dimovic, a Kosovo Serb and a Programme Assistant
in the UNM1K office in Zubin Potok, was released on
29 May. The arrest and detention of Mr. Krasnoshchekov
and Mr. Dimovic were not consistent with their
privileges and immunities as UNMIK personnel, as set
forth in UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47.
It is our understanding from the facts, as we
know them so far, that both Mr. Krasnoshchekov and
Mr. Dimovic were on official assignment to monitor
the police operations in northern Kosovo at the time of
their arrest. As Mr. Tanin noted — and I must say that
we share his alarm, it is of serious concern that both
staff members were apparently beaten and mistreated
upon their arrest. Both required medical attention upon
their release. Mr. Krasnoshchekov was transferred to
a hospital in Belgrade on 30 May, where he remains
admitted. Mr. Dimovic, for his part, was hospitalized
in Kosovo on 30 May and released from hospital on
3 June.
As is required in all such incidents, the United
Nations Department of Safety and Security undertook an
internal investigation to gather all available information
regarding the circumstances surrounding the arrest and
detention of Mr. Krasnoshchekov and Mr. Dimovic and
to look into the allegations by the Kosovo authorities
regarding their conduct. It is our understanding that both
staff members still face the possibility of criminal legal
process in Kosovo. Regarding Mr. Krasnoshchekov,
UNMIK is in receipt of a request from the Chief
Prosecutor in the municipality of Mitrovica for a waiver
of immunity which, although the name is not correctly
stated in the document, we believe concerns him. The
request is made in respect of charges of co-perpetration
in “obstructing official persons in performing official

19-167565/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

duties” and in “participating in a crowd committing
a criminal offence and hooliganism”. That request is
being looked at by my Office.
As for Mr. Dimovic, UNMIK has not received a
request for a waiver of his immunity. What we know
is that he was arraigned on charges of “obstructing
official persons in performing official duties” and
that he appeared with five co-accused before the
Basic Court of Mitrovica, Zubin Potok branch, on
29 May. The hearing was to consider a request from
the Prosecutor for his continued detention, as well as
for the detention of the five other persons arraigned
with him. UNMIK has obtained and forwarded to
United Nations Headquarters a summary translation of
those proceedings. On the basis of that document, we
understand that Mr. Dimovic’s release, and that of his
five co-arraigned, on 29 May was decided on the basis
of a lack of sufficient evidence to confirm a reasonable
suspicion of the alleged criminal offence. Mr. Dimovic
was represented by private counsel in the hearing and
accompanied by an UNMIK staff member. As we
understand it, the decision to release the co-accused is
still subject to an appeal by the Prosecution. The appeal
is scheduled to be heard during the week of 10 June.
The results of a thorough internal United
Nations investigation will help to establish a better
understanding of the relevant facts, which will aid the
Organization in considering the next steps, including
under UNMIK Regulation No. 2000/47 on the Status,
Privileges and Immunities of KFOR and UNMIK and
their Personnel in Kosovo.
Before I conclude, I would recall that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin has noted
UNMIK’s receipt of a formal notification on 31 May,
declaring Mr. Krasnoshchekov persona non grata in
Kosovo. As Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin noted in a very clear statement to the
Kosovo authorities, and as the Deputy Spokesperson
also noted at his noon briefing of 3 June, the doctrine
of persona non grata is not applicable to United Nations
personnel and is not contemplated under UNMIK
Regulation No. 2000/47. Any concerns regarding a
member of UNMIK personnel should be addressed to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
so that UNMIK can address the matter in line with its
status, privileges and immunities. In that regard, I wish
to emphasize that allegations of misconduct by United
Nations personnel throughout the Organization are
6/28

10/06/2019

taken very seriously by the Organization and prompt
action is taken where it is warranted.
The fullest measure of cooperation by the Kosovo
authorities will continue to be required to facilitate
the United Nations investigation so as to allow the
Secretary-General to determine the next steps under
the legal framework that I have outlined.
I would like to thank the Council and its members
for the opportunity to provide this briefing.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. De
Serpa Soares for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note 507 (S/2017/507),
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Special Representative Tanin for their
efforts in implementing the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) under resolution 1244 (1999).
For almost two years now we have been arguing
in the Security Council about whether we should be
meeting two, three or four times a year. All this time,
however, the situation in Kosovo and Metohija has
been going from bad to worse. Unfortunately, it is clear
from the current situation that the decision to reduce
the number of meetings was premature. However, I do
believe that we are now done with the procedural issues
and can begin to address the core issues and ensure
that our meetings are productive. Despite the claims
of some that our deliberations are often antagonistic
and unconstructive, the Council’s consideration of
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija represents a
vital opportunity for providing the Security Council
and the international community with regular and
transparent advice on the situation on the ground and
the key political and security challenges that we face in
Kosovo, however difficult they may be and despite the
fact that it is evident that our positions differ.
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

At the outset, I want to reiterate my call for a
dialogue and for a solution to the decades-long problem
of Kosovo and Metohija through peaceful means and
compromise. I hope that the entire Council subscribes
to that and is willing to state loudly and clearly what is
required for a successful dialogue. What we need are
two countries that behave reasonably and sensibly and
that are ready to talk and then to implement what they
agree on. In the European Union-facilitated negotiations
in Brussels, one of the parties to the dialogue has done
so since the very beginning. The other, regrettably,
has not.
Last week we heard from Pristina that it was not
planning to implement any part of what was agreed
to six years ago, including the establishment of a
community of Serb municipalities. That statement by
Hashim Thaçi makes us wonder what we have been
doing all this time. Because if an agreement is reached,
signed and guaranteed, including by the European
Union, but goes unimplemented by Pristina for six
years and is eventually rejected outright, we have to
ask if there was ever a dialogue at all. It was not just
Serbia that was deceived. The entire international
community encouraged us to continue the dialogue.
We were asked to be patient in the face of Pristina’s
constant prevarications about implementing any
agreement. This also represents a serious dent in the
credibility of the European Union, which is a signatory
to the Brussels Agreement and thereby a guarantor of
its implementation.
Let me once again remind the Council that in August
2013, as the then Prime Minister of Serbia, together with
Hashim Thaçi and Catherine Ashton, I signed the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina, known as
the Brussels Agreement. The negotiations that preceded
the signing were very difficult for Serbia, but as a
responsible partner, my country has implemented all
the obligations it assumed. We signed the Agreement
only because it guaranteed the establishment of a
community of Serb municipalities.
However, the representatives of Pristina, without
mincing their words, have said that they are not going to
implement what was agreed to. Dissatisfied with their
treatment, they threatened the European Union that
they would consider unification with Albania and annex
three other municipalities in southern Serbia to boot.
Can Pristina be considered a serious and responsible
party with which we should continue to negotiate? Who

S/PV. 8541

can convince us now that it will not behave in the same
way in this process in the future? We have also heard
a litany of threatening messages from Albania’s Prime
Minister Edi Rama on the possibility of the unification
of Albania and Kosovo. Yet those messages are being
dismissed without a response and glossed over as trivial.
Two weeks ago, a so-called anti-corruption and
anti-organized crime operation was carried out in
northern Kosovo and Metohija. Kosovo’s special
police Regional Operations Support Unit arrested
more than 30 people. Serbia supports the fight against
organized crime throughout its territory, but the
use of long guns and excessive force, along with the
televised spectacle that followed, were indicative of a
different goal altogether — intimidating the remaining
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. More than 70 combat
vehicles were deployed and Serbs were brutally
beaten, while Albanians were apprehended without
any forceful measures. If that unacceptable act is not
widely condemned, including by the Council, it will
have served its purpose, and the Serbian population of
Kosovo and Metohija will continue to be intimidated
and terrorized.
Following the signing of the Brussels Agreement,
I attended a meeting with Catherine Ashton, Hashim
Thaçi and Aleksandar Vučić at NATO’s headquarters
in Brussels. It was agreed at the meeting that no
Kosovo security force would enter the North without
first complying with two conditions — notifying the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and advising the representatives
of the Serb communities in northern Kosovo and
Metohija, neither of which condition was met on this
occasion. On top of that, two United Nations personnel
were brutalized and arrested, although they did not
attempt to resist and were not armed. I spoke about it
with Special Representative Tanin, who informed me
officially that they were in fact there on duty. Mikhail
Krasnoshchekov was beaten, unlawfully arrested and
subsequently declared persona non grata, contrary to the
relevant United Nations convention. Not even members
of the United Nations Mission are safe in Kosovo. How
can we expect the Mission to carry out its mandate
if its personnel can be attacked at will and declared
undesirable if they do not happen to be to Pristina’s
liking? What will it be next — the expulsion of the
entire Mission? And Pristina, which has no shame, is
now offering to negotiate UNMIK’s future presence in
northern Kosovo with the Secretary-General. I would
like to point out that it is the Council that decides on

19-167567/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

the Mission’s mandate and that it was established by
resolution 1244 (1999).
The developments in Kosovo and Metohija over the
past several weeks and months are telling evidence that
the international community should be much more alert
and invest much more effort, and that the international
organizations in Kosovo and Metohija should be much
more active. We have recently witnessed some Security
Council members calling for a so-called strategic
review of UNMIK’s mandate and for its reduction and
even withdrawal. At this point in time, however, it is
difficult even to conceive of making any kind of change
in direction, let alone taking action on it. Surely we
all understand how far we are today from a stable and
secure situation in Kosovo and Metohija that no longer
warrants the Council’s attention. The risk of the situation
worsening on the ground could prove costly, and in the
context of recent developments I am sure that no one
wishes to run that risk. Unfortunately, the authorities
in Pristina are turning a deaf ear to discussions of the
matter. They think that they can reduce the Mission by
beating up its members and expelling them.
On this very day, 20 years ago, the illegal bombing
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the aggression
by NATO, without any decision of the Council, came to
an end. We are all aware of the negative effects that
this precedent has had on international relations and
on various events that have happened in the world over
the past 20 years. However, I cannot let the occasion
pass without mentioning the numerous civilian victims
and their tragic fate, and how Serbia was ravaged in 78
days of bombardment with depleted uranium. I want
to remember the 666 victims who died in Kosovo and
Metohija after the war ended on 10 June 1999, and
following the arrival of the United Nations Mission
and KFOR. Of the 666 victims, 562 were Serbs, and
7,391 of the 8,134 attacks were against Serbs. Twenty
years later, the only thing that we can say with certainty
is that the primary victims of the conflict in Kosovo
and Metohija and the bombing of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia were innocent civilians who were either
killed or expelled, regardless of whether they were
Serbs, Albanians or some other nationality. Despite
the differences in positions on the issue, it cannot be
denied that all sides committed crimes and that there
were victims on all sides. Regrettably, we cannot bring
back the victims, but we can learn from our mistakes
and make sure that they are not repeated. It is therefore
important to condemn all the crimes, mourn all the
8/28

10/06/2019

victims, rule out war as a means of resolving conflict
and embark on a path to compromise and a sustainable
settlement while achieving lasting reconciliation and
economic and political stability.
Twenty years ago to the day the Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999). I will try to describe the way
in which its provisions dovetail with the facts on the
ground, because the way they do that says a great deal
about the validity and relevance of the resolution and
UNMIK, as well as the task ahead of us. In crafting
the mandate of the international presence in Kosovo
and Metohija, in its tenth preambular paragraph the
resolution reaffirms
“the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the other States of the
region, as set out in the Helsinki Final Act”.
However, many have taken a sledgehammer to that
provision in order to conceal the fact that an ethnic
minority — the Albanian minority, whose mother
country is Albania — tried to secede from and take
with it a part of the territory of a sovereign country.
In paragraph 5 of annex 2 of the resolution,
among other things, the Security Council calls for the
“[e]stablishment of an interim administration ... to
ensure conditions for a peaceful and normal life for all
inhabitants in Kosovo.” In paragraph 9 (c), it also calls
for the establishment of “a secure environment in which
refugees and displaced persons can return home in
safety”. Efforts have been made in that regard and some
refugees and displaced persons have indeed returned.
But only 1.9 per cent of Serbs have returned for good,
while 200,000 of them have remained away from home
for 20 long years and it is not likely that they will go
home any time soon. And we all know why. What can
they expect if year after year they are met by organized
attacks with sticks and stones even when they come to
pay their respects to their dead on Christian holy days?
The catalogue of human rights violations in Kosovo
and Metohija goes on and on, and we cannot list them
all. It is not the subject of our deliberations today, but
according to the United States Department of State, in
its 2018 report on human rights in Kosovo,
“[s]ecurity incidents against Kosovo Serbs
persisted ... In the first seven months of the year,
there were more than 100 incidents involving thefts,
break-ins, verbal harassment, and damage to the
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

property of Kosovo Serbs and the Serbian Orthodox
Church ... Ethnic minorities ... faced varying levels
of institutional and societal discrimination in
employment, education, social services, language
use, freedom of movement, the right to return to
their homes (for displaced persons), and other
basic rights.”
The brutal truth is that, after 20 years, multi-ethnic
Kosovo and Metohija has become almost mono-ethnic.
Let me once again bring some facts to the Council’s
attention. Of the 427 towns and villages in which the
Serbs lived prior to 1999, they now live in only 116.
In other words, in the past 20 years, 311 settlements
previously inhabited by Serbs have now been ethnically
cleansed — that is, they are exclusively Albanian. What
is that, if not ethnic cleansing? It is stark evidence of
the falsehood of an alleged genocide against Albanians.
After all, more Albanians live in Kosovo and Metohija
today than did before 1999, while more than 200,000
Serbs have been expelled and 311 of their settlements
have been ethnically cleansed. Those are the official
figures from the Kosovo census. To cite just a couple
more examples to illustrate my point, in 1999 there
were more than 40,000 Serbs living in Pristina. Today
there are fewer than 100. In 1999, there were more than
10,000 Serbs living in Prizren, the Serbian capital in
Tsar Dušan’s reign in the fourteenth century — the
town where I was born, incidentally — but today only
23 remain. Unfortunately, and very sadly for Serbs,
those are the exact numbers.
Paragraphs 11 (i) and 14 of resolution 1244
(1999) call for “[m]aintaining civil law and order’ and
‘[d]emands full cooperation by all concerned ... with
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.”
We truly believe that all who committed crimes should
be brought to justice, and we have complied with our
obligations. The results of the Tribunal, however, have
left much to be desired. The full force of international
justice was employed in the attempt to prosecute Serbs,
and they paid the price, personally and politically,
while the token few who were tried and sentenced on
the other side were quickly released, and some of them
are walking the corridors of power in Pristina today.
In a recent statement, Philip Kosnett, the United States
Ambassador in Pristina, expressed deep concern about
the appointment of unqualified individuals to senior
positions in the Kosovo Government, including people
convicted of war crimes, under active indictment for
serious crimes or suspected of serious abuses of power.

S/PV. 8541

We continue to hope that justice is attainable.
The Specialist Chambers and Office of the Specialist
Prosecutor recently began their work and have a
massive caseload. Among those under investigation,
some are suspected of heinous crimes, including the
abduction and killing of Serbs, as well as Albanians
whom they considered disloyal, in order to harvest
their organs. There is ample evidence of that in the
Marty report. We want to believe that they will be
brought to justice despite the time that has passed, the
destruction of evidence, the intimidation of witnesses
and their families, and even the deplorable killings of
protected witnesses.
Resolution 1244 (1999) states that the international
military presence will provide security for all the
inhabitants in Kosovo and Metohija. However, last
December Pristina violated it once again by taking the
unilateral decision to establish a Ministry of Defence
and begin the process of transforming the Kosovo
Security Force into the Kosovo Army, despite the
admonitions of the United Nations, the European Union
and NATO, in a dangerous manoeuvre that threatens
security in Kosovo and beyond, and further aggravates
the situation of Serbs and other non-Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija. Pristina has taken similar steps
in the past, that some members of the international
community regrettably have not adequately condemned.
It seems to have created a perception in Pristina that
it can take such unilateral actions with tacit approval
in some quarters. That is exactly why these unilateral
acts should be unequivocally condemned. KFOR must
act preventively and deter any attempt by the Kosovo
forces to threaten civil peace and security, which has
the potential for destabilization.
From the platform of this leading organ of our
world Organization, I want to warn the Council
that, according to our information, the authorities in
Pristina are planning an attack on northern Kosovo
and Metohija. Everyone here should take note of that
and put a stop to Pristina’s war machine before it causes
more bloodshed. I also want to remind the Council that
KFOR’s task is safeguarding the peace and security of
all, including the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. I want
to ask the Council if it will or will not, because I am
sure that it can. This is a very serious warning.
It is evident that because of Pristina’s failure to
implement the resolution and outright violations of
it, the continuation of UNMIK’s mandate is crucially
important to the fate of many in Kosovo and Metohija.

19-167569/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

Serbia believes firmly that the Mission must remain
fully engaged on all issues relevant to the consistent
implementation of its goals and objectives, with its
scope undiminished and its mandate unchanged.
Anything else would send a message to Serbs living
in Kosovo and Metohija that they will not be able to
stay in their ancestral land and to those who have been
displaced that they are not welcome to return, a message
that fits in with Pristina’s intentions and goals. If that
is permitted it would be tantamount to an admission
by the international community, the United Nations
and the Security Council that they are powerless and
have no means to implement the decisions they made
to maintain peace and create an environment conducive
to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We hope and
believe that is not the case and that UNMIK will remain
in Kosovo and Metohija in its full capacity.
Serbia has done everything possible to normalize
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija, and we firmly
believe that negotiations are the only way forward to
address all outstanding issues. However, if we are the
only ones to commit to dialogue or to a constructive
approach to reaching a sustainable compromise
solution to the question of Kosovo and Metohija, that
is not enough to enable negotiations to continue at this
time. As I said, we have no partner for a serious and
responsible dialogue, and yet both sides, Belgrade and
Pristina, are being called on to resume negotiations.
The implication is that both are responsible for the
impasse in negotiations even though the responsibility
is Pristina’s alone. How can we negotiate if rather than
removing obstacles, the other side is doing everything
it can to create new ones?
In November, in its frustration at not being made a
member of INTERPOL and at 13 countries’ revoking
of their recognition of Kosovo’s unilaterally declared
independence, Pristina imposed 100 per cent tariffs on
goods from central Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a step unprecedented anywhere in the world. Six
months later, and in the face of condemnation by
almost all international actors and of calls to take
back that senseless decision, Pristina is in no mood
to do so. It is not only dismissive of those calls but
is piling on provocations and unilateral acts that can
only lead us to conclude that it is taking systematic
steps to make dialogue impossible. How else are we
to understand its adoption in March of its so-called
platform for dialogue, which asserts that the only goal
10/28

10/06/2019

and outcome of the dialogue is Serbia’s recognition of
Kosovo’s independence?
With regard to the open protests from Pristina and
some Security Council members about the 13 countries’
revocation of their recognition of Kosovo, and their
accusations that Serbia’s activities are undermining
dialogue, I would like to remind the Council that
23 countries have recognized Kosovo’s unilaterally
declared independence since the Brussels dialogue
began, following intense lobbying by Pristina and
pressure exerted by some Security Council members. In
addition, Gent Cakaj, Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs of Albania, who was born in Kosovo and
Metohija, said that Albania had set up a special team
to lobby for additional recognitions and for Kosovo’s
membership in international organizations.
I have been participating in Council meetings for
seven years now, and in that time, right in my face,
some Council members have loudly urged all countries
to recognize Kosovo and vote in favour of admitting
it to INTERPOL, UNESCO and other international
organizations. Why do they have the right to make
those demands and we do not? And why does the issue
upset Pristina, Tirana and certain Council members
while Serbia’s grievances meant nothing? Apparently
the Council considered that normal. Pristina also goes
around complaining that Serbia prevented its admission
to INTERPOL, but the fact is that at the INTERPOL
General Assembly in Dubai last year, only 75 of its 194
members voted in favour of Kosovo’s admission. What
happened to the 116 countries that Pristina claims have
recognized it? Some Council members would have us
believe that little Serbia is so powerful that it could
influence the decision of many INTERPOL members.
The authorities in Pristina also recently adopted
a resolution on Serbia’s alleged genocide in Kosovo.
Such measures are tantamount to playing games with
international law. They increase tensions among
communities and contribute nothing to a climate of
reconciliation or dialogue. The scandal regarding
the allegations made by Flora Brovina, a member of
Kosovo’s Parliament, are also very illuminating in
that context. She was sentenced in Serbia for intent
to commit a terrorist act, but in an act of goodwill on
the part of my country, she was pardoned in 2001. She
showed the media a photograph in the so-called Kosovo
Assembly as proof of the alleged rape of an Albanian
woman by Serbian forces and said that the woman,
whose identity was known, was still living in Kosovo.
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

Upon investigation not by Belgrade but by the Kosovo
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, with expert analysis
by the Kosovo Forensics Agency, and based on other
evidence, it was concluded that the photograph was a
fake. The media in Pristina reported that the photograph
had nothing to do with Kosovo but had originated in Iraq
and been downloaded from the Internet. Does anyone
really think that justice for victims and survivors can be
achieved through the crude misuse of tragedy and the
presentation of false evidence? Ms. Brovina’s callous
act was a deep offence to the victims and their families.
The United States Ambassador to Pristina was explicit
when he said that Kosovo’s leaders should be helping
victims heal, not exploiting them for political gain.
Where this sensitive issue is concerned, I want
everyone to fully understand that Serbia condemns
each and every act of sexual violence in conflict and
calls for justice for all victims. To achieve that we need
a rational, documented approach without politicization,
and that is a precondition for protecting the rights of
each individual victim. I want to reiterate that the
number of victims does not diminish the horrific effect
of this form of violence on each individual. However,
manipulating numbers is detrimental to justice, leads
to politicization and slows the reconciliation process.
Based on the data provided by the commission
responsible for the verification and recognition of the
status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence,
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/461) says
that 982 applications have been submitted, of which
308 have been accepted. Pristina’s representatives,
however, continue to talk of 20,000 raped Albanians as
if there were no Serbian victims of sexual violence. In
that regard, Fatmir Limaj, among others, was indicted
based on the testimony of the Mazreku brothers,
Albanian witnesses and accomplices to his crime. And
I would like to point out, if I may, that according to a
decision of the Government and Parliament of Kosovo,
Fatmir Limaj heads the Pristina negotiation team in the
dialogue with Belgrade.
As I said in my statement to the Council in
February (see S/PV.8459), I am not here for rhetorical
one-upmanship. I am here to help bring lasting peace
and normalcy to the people of Kosovo and Metohija.
We must not let them down. We must pursue dialogue
and achieve compromise. Our disputes will not bring a
better life and prosperity to either Serbs or Albanians
in Kosovo and Metohija. They will not provide security
to Serbs, enable them to return home, see their property

S/PV. 8541

restored, prevent physical attacks on them or allow them
to live in peace and dignity. We must be bold, strong and
inclusive of all. We must make sure that what is decided
in the Council is respected and reflected on the ground,
for it concerns the condition of many and speaks to
who we are. This topic must not be allowed to cool or
be superseded by some other acute political problem
facing the international community because, contrary
to Pristina’s assertions otherwise, nothing has yet been
resolved with respect to the question of Kosovo.
I therefore call on Pristina once again to revoke
the senseless tariffs and return to dialogue, which
is the only alternative for the Serbian and Albanian
peoples. Serbia is ready to achieve a lasting solution
through negotiations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: Twenty years ago this day, on 10 June
1999, in this Chamber, the predecessors of today’s
representatives, sitting around this very table, voted
in favour of resolution 1244 (1999) and established
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (see S/PV.4011). The people of Kosovo will
never forget that, on that day, it was the Council that
stood for humankind. We will not forget that it was
the allied forces that stopped the ethnic cleansing and
brutalization of innocent civilians in Kosovo by Serbian
forces. More than 10,000 innocent people were killed,
approximately 20,000 women were raped and thousands
are still missing. We will never forget that when more
than 1 million refugees came back to find their homes
in ashes, we had United Nations personnel by our side,
helping us to rebuild our homes and our lives.
The wounds of war do not heal easily and they
never truly disappear. But freedom has recuperative
power — so slowly, but surely, we rebuilt. We drew
strength from one another and had hope because we
were not alone in our misfortune. Today and every day,
we remember Sergio Vieira de Mello, the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
and all the women and men of the United Nations who
have served in Kosovo during the past two decades.
Much has been accomplished in Kosovo during
the past 20 years and there is a lot the United Nations
can be proud of. It may have been a laborious and
undramatic task, but the Organization’s contribution
cannot be overstated. The United Nations helped
build the youngest democracy in Europe and held our

19-1675611/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

hand through multiple transitions. And although the
challenges were not in short supply or small in scale,
the Organization stood by us when it mattered the most.
Through all the ups and downs, the United Nations
was our rock. It is only fitting that it was the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, the wise President
Martti Ahtisaari, who, after years of negotiations,
proposed that Kosovo declare its independence. As the
International Court of Justice confirmed — and, might
I add, upon Serbia’s request — Kosovo was well within
its rights when it declared independence and did not
violate any international laws in doing so.
Allow me to be clear on the following point:
Kosovo’s independence is not a product of a secessionist
movement. As members are all too keenly aware,
Kosovo’s independence is a product of decolonization.
Nevertheless, the situation in Kosovo in 2019 is
strikingly different from what it was 20 years ago when
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) was first installed. Kosovo is no
longer in a state of crisis. Our country has made enormous
strides and is becoming increasingly integrated into the
international community, in large part thanks to the
efforts of the United Nations, which, in tandem with
the European Union and NATO, has promoted security
and stability in Kosovo and the region.
While we are deeply grateful to UNMIK for
the vital role that it played in the first decade of our
liberation, we simply do not see any reason for its
continued presence in our thriving Republic. UNMIK is
not an administrative mission because Kosovo governs
itself. UNMIK is not a peacekeeping mission because
Kosovo law enforcement mechanisms and the Kosovo
Force guarantee the safety and security of our people.
Can anyone in the Chamber tell me in all honesty what
exactly the job of UNMIK in Kosovo is today? With
so many issues plaguing people around the world at
this very moment, I am certain that the resources that
this institution allocates to Kosovo can be put to much
better use elsewhere.
As we reflect on the progress that Kosovo has made
during the past two decades, there is one particular
element I would like to highlight and that is the Kosovo
police. The Kosovo police is an organization that
operates to the highest standards of professionalism
and integrity. Since its inception, it has continuously
proven to be a credible partner in global efforts to
combat organized crime and terrorism by cooperating
with international law enforcement mechanisms to
12/28

10/06/2019

curtail dangerous plots. On 28 May, the Kosovo police
successfully conducted a large-scale operation aimed at
tackling organized crime across several municipalities
in the Republic of Kosovo. That operation followed a
months-long investigation, which began in April 2018,
and examined several criminal groups involved in the
misuse of official position, smuggling, bribery and
illegal trade.
Based on the evidence collected by the Office of
the Specialist Prosecutor of the Republic of Kosovo as
part of that investigation, the Basic Court of Pristina
authorized a request to raid a set of premises utilized by
the suspected individuals. The targets were located in
Zubin Potok, Leposavić, Vushtrri, the city of Mitrovica,
Skenderaj and Drenas. In accordance with the Court’s
request and under the direction of the Office of the
Specialist Prosecutor, the Kosovo police raided 12
premises and arrested 19 Kosovo police employees
and nine civilians with outstanding arrest warrants.
The arrested suspects are all citizens of Kosovo and
include 11 Kosovo-Serbs, four Kosovo-Albanians and
four Kosovo-Bosnians. The group consists of one
commander of a police station, three sergeants and
seven police officers. All of them have since been
suspended from duty.
The Kosovo police did not encounter any resistance
during the implementation of their action plan across
the different municipalities, with one major exception.
In Zubin Potok, police officers were met with armed
resistance and gunfire and blocked by large barricades
set up by violent gangs. During that phase of the action,
Kosovo police officers apprehended seven civilians
who were actively engaged in creating barricades and
obstructing the operation.
Among them was a United Nations diplomat of
Russian nationality named Mikhail Krasnoshchekov.
Mr. Krasnoshchekov used an official United Nations
vehicle with UNMIK licence plates to erect a barricade
for the sole purpose of preventing Kosovo police
from carrying out their mission. Kosovo police found
evidence that Mr. Krasnoshchekov used the United
Nations vehicle to transport a chainsaw to the location
where these events took place. This chainsaw was used
to cut down trees that were thrown onto the highway to
prevent the passage of Kosovo police to Zubin Potok.
Mr. Krasnoshchekov placed the United Nations vehicle
in front of the trees to bolster the barricades.
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

He indicated that he understood the request of
Kosovo police to leave the place. He refused to cooperate
or to provide identification. After Mr. Krasnoshchekov’s
repeated refusals to comply with the demands of the
police and his continued attempts to impede their
movement, the Kosovo police proceeded to detain this
individual. Mr. Krasnoshchekov was subsequently
escorted to the police station where he was held in
custody and offered medical treatment before being
transported to medical facilities. I have the report of the
hospital in Mitrovica where he was treated, which shows
nothing serious — nothing like what we have heard here
today, In the subsequent days, the Kosovo authorities
decided to deny Mr. Krasnoshchekov future entry into
the country. Upon his request, Mr. Krasnoshchekov
was released and transferred to Belgrade.
The NATO military presence in Kosovo — the
Kosovo Force — confirmed that the foregoing raids were
part of an operation executed exclusively by Kosovo
police and that all relevant authorities were informed.
Three Kosovo police officers were injured during the
efforts to remove the barricades used to obstruct this
operation. Despite the obstacles, our officers were able
to complete their mission.
I must admit that, in the light of these events,
we in Kosovo were appalled by the unending stream
of statements made in Belgrade and certain capitals
around the world with regard to this very successful
operation — an operation whose sole purpose was to
combat crime committed with remarkable coordination
of ethnicities, notwithstanding the efforts to portray
it as an operation with underlying ethnic motivations.
The sole intention of the police was to ensure the safety
and security of the people of Kosovo and protect them
from the gangs and criminal groups that make daily
living in our country very difficult.
Kosovo has hosted a countless number of United
Nations diplomats during the past two decades. They
are our friends, our mentors and our family. No UNMIK
employee has ever been in harm’s way in Kosovo.
They have never been targeted with threats, violence
or attacks of any kind. To hear claims that the Kosovo
police or Government deliberately targeted United
Nations employees in Kosovo is beyond comprehension
to those of us who live in Kosovo. Mr. Krasnoshchekov
obstructed law enforcement in Kosovo of his own
volition, or, to put it frankly, he willingly became a
shield to criminal gangs attempting to inhibit an ongoing
police operation. Furthermore, UNMIK personnel in

S/PV. 8541

northern municipalities was warned with an instruction
that advised them to work from home that day.
This episode is unheard of. It has nothing to do with
the mandate of Mr. Krasnoshchekov or the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo.
I would like to know what would happen if any
of us — accredited ambassadors and United Nations
diplomatic personnel alike, with full diplomatic
immunity — attempted to prevent an ongoing police
operation here in New York or in Moscow or in Berlin
or anywhere else, for that matter. The Government
of Kosovo and its agencies comply fully with all
international legislation regulating the status of
diplomats stationed in our territory and adhere to all
existing standards in terms of respecting the privileges of
diplomatic personnel. However, we do find it surprising
that a United Nations international civil servant, who
has undergone advanced training for security in the
field — mandatory training that is provided to every
deployed United Nations staff member — suddenly
finds himself barricading local roads in Kosovo with
his official United Nations-issued vehicle. Are we to
understand that the United Nations mandate in Kosovo
has been extended to include active engagement in
obstructing local law enforcement and preventing it
from fulfilling its constitutional mandates?
A member of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
put the lives of our police officers at risk. Given the
distressing nature of this incident, the institutions
of the Republic of Kosovo demand a United Nations
investigation into this unprecedented and dangerous
behaviour. Judging from the statements that we have
heard here today, it appears to us that law and order
are an inconvenience for the authorities in Belgrade.
What they desire is that chaos and fear will prevail.
War-mongering is their preferred instrument for the
manipulation of our citizens and the maintenance of
control. We have seen it all: from character assassination
to attempts at actual assassination. Allow me to remind
the Security Council that the main suspect for the
assassination of Mr. Oliver Ivanović found safe haven
in Serbia, of all places.
We also heard the Council’s references to the
dialogue. Kosovo wants dialogue, but we do not want a
conditioned process. It is Serbia that is conditioning the
dialogue with Kosovo. We have also heard that Kosovo
is not implementing the agreements. Kosovo has
implemented every agreement. The only reason why

19-1675613/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

the Association Agreement is not being implemented is
because local Serbs in Kosovo, who are supposed to be
part of the Working Group’s drafting of the Association
statute, are being controlled from Belgrade and told to
abandon Kosovo institutions. I will not even mention
the lack of implementation of the agreement on energy,
school diplomas, among others.
There is only one Government that exercises
pressure against local Serbs in Kosovo, and that is
the Government sitting in Belgrade. During just the
past couple of months, we witnessed the detention
of a member of the Kosovo Parliament, a Deputy
Minister, and a Kosovo Government official of Serbian
ethnicity by the Serbian Government. Their only crime
was daring to speak their mind and act on their own
free will.
The combination of a medieval mindset and modern
propaganda adopted by the Serbian Government and
State apparatus is a menace to peace. I cannot help but
acknowledge their ongoing campaign to dehumanize
the people of Kosovo, to portray us as inherently
inferior, less than human and akin to savages. As
despicable as that is, it is, unfortunately, no news to
me. That happened in the 1980s and 1990s, and those
are days that I remember well. But it also happened
for centuries.
In 1913, a former Prime Minister of Serbia, Vladan
Đorđević, characterized Albanians as blood-thirsty
animals that are so inconceivably ignorant that they
could not tell the difference between sugar and snow.
Among the Albanians, he said, there seemed to have
been humans with tails as late as the nineteenth century.
Here we are, over a century later, listening to Serbian
officials spewing hatred, continuing with the same
baseless racist claims, attempting to rewrite history.
Let me make a small digression. What Flora
Brovina, a member of the Kosovo Parliament, did was
condemned unanimously in Kosovo. I was one of those
who condemned it. But, unlike in Serbia, our media
and our judiciary do not become complicit in politics. It
was our media, our judiciary that stated the fact that the
photograph was false, but that does not take away from
the truth. It was the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, an American-based health organization,
that conducted the survey and came up with the number
of women that were raped in Kosovo. That was not my
number. And only a few months ago, right here in this
Chamber, the President of Serbia had the audacity to
14/28

10/06/2019

make a public plea to the Council for someone to tame
those people (see S/PV.8427). Tame them, he said; tame
them. Just last month, the Prime Minister of Serbia
publicly stated, in reference to people of Kosovo, that
those people literally just emerged from the woods.
I would love to hear them repeat those
unconscionable statements to the women and men
of Kosovo who make us proud every day with their
achievements in art, sports and innovation. Let them
unleash their vitriol before the families of the martyrs
who made the ultimate sacrifice to protect their loved
ones from the Serbian aggression. Let them unmask
their true motivation. Let them show us their crippling
fear of the ammunition of democracy: words and
thoughts — words that are spoken abroad and thoughts
stirring up at home. The people of Kosovo will not be
tamed. We will not be subjugated, and we will not be
ruled by Serbia ever again.
It is our hope that this Chamber will not lie abashed
and distracted before triumphant assertions of ethnic
hatred. The Republic of Kosovo will certainly never
waiver in its quest for peace and justice. However dim
the prospects may seem, we intend to fight. We will
fight with the power of our ideas and the courage of
our convictions, because surely that goal is sufficiently
important to deserve our devotion.
One day the professionalism of our institutions will
match the integrity of our media, the success of our
artists and athletes, the strength of our women and the
resilience of our civil society. On that day, we will have
built an even better Republic — one that is independent,
sovereign, integrated into the international community
and at peace with its neighbours, including Serbia.
The invitation stands. Come visit Kosovo, and the
Council can witness with its own eyes the progress that
it has made possible. As an extra treat, it will be able
to see the beautiful mountains from which we are so
proud to come, because as the famous expression by
Ernest Hemingway goes: mountaineering is the one
true sport; everything else is merely a game.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Security Council who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ferreira de Serpa Soares, for their
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

briefings. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also listened carefully to the statement of Ms. Çitaku.
Resolution 1244 (1999) sets an important legal
basis for the settlement of the Kosovo issue. Our
position on the Kosovo issue is consistent and clear. We
believe that within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions, the parties concerned should reach
a mutually acceptable solution through dialogue. We
see that as the best way to resolve the Kosovo issue.
China respects Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We understand its legitimate concerns with
regard to the Kosovo issue and commend its efforts to
find a political solution to it. Achieving accommodation,
reconciliation and harmonious coexistence across all
ethnicities in Kosovo is in the fundamental interest
of people from all ethnic backgrounds and would
meet their needs for development. We hope that all
the parties concerned will put the well-being of their
people first, refrain from any rhetoric or action that
could complicate or escalate the situation and build up
conditions for a proper solution to the Kosovo issue, so
as to jointly maintain peace, stability and development
in the Balkan region
As things currently stand, it is important for the
Security Council to remain seized of the Kosovo issue
and encourage the two parties to carry out genuine
dialogue with a view to facilitating a proper solution
to the Kosovo issue. China supports the leadership of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
in ensuring the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and constructive cooperation with
all parties.
Recently, UNMIK personnel were obstructed
in carrying out their mandated tasks. China is
deeply concerned in that regard and considers such
obstruction to be completely unacceptable. The
privileges, immunities, safety and security of United
Nations personnel must be fully respected. The parties
concerned should ensure the necessary conditions for
UNMIK to implement its mandate in line with the law.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), with
the support of the United Nations Kosovo team and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,

S/PV. 8541

Mr. Zahir Tanin, as well as the Secretary-General,
whose efforts are playing a significant role towards
creating an environment conducive to compromise,
reconciliation and stability in Kosovo, as outlined in
the most recent report of the Secretary-General, up to
14 May (S/2019/461). We also welcome the briefing
by Mr. De Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, and
the legal clarity and opinions provided concerning the
two United Nations staff members in Kosovo. We stand
in support of his unbiased legal view on the issue. We
would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, to this meeting and note the presence
of the representative of Kosovo.
We wish to reiterate that the presence of the United
Nations in Kosovo is critical to reaching a peaceful and
sustainable solution and to encouraging cooperation
among all parties and stakeholders in this situation,
which has been ongoing for 20 years. In that regard,
we wish to express our regret and concern about the
developments in northern Kosovo last week, including
the detention of two United Nations staff members by
the Kosovo police during the course of their duties. We
wish both staff members a speedy recovery as they are
treated for their injuries. We reiterate the importance
of all United Nations personnel across the world being
able to do their work in a safe environment and in
accordance with international law.
South Africa encourages Belgrade and Pristina to
continue their efforts towards normalizing relations
despite the challenges faced in finding a sustainable
and peaceful political solution. We wish to reiterate the
importance of the resumption of peace talks between
the parties in a spirit of cooperation and compromise
under the auspices of the European Union. Allow me to
make three brief points with regard to the peace process
in Kosovo in view of the persistent challenges to the
resumption of talks between the two parties.
First, the escalated tensions between the parties
and their differences regarding preconditions for
the resumption of dialogue risk undermining any
meaningful prospects for a successful dialogue and
reconciliation. Those factors also deepen the divide
and exacerbate the feelings of mistrust regarding the
political will to engage in good faith. In that regard, we
urge all parties to refrain from actions that further delay
the peace process and to allow for the normalization of
relations between them.

19-1675615/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

Secondly, South Africa wishes to echo the
sentiments of the Secretary-General in his report
regarding continued engagement with all stakeholders,
such as the relevant authorities, civil society and bilateral
and international partners. The peace process should
not only be led by the political leaders but be informed
by the local communities in Serbia and Kosovo, as both
parties represent a diverse people in language, culture,
heritage and history. That will play an important role
in ensuring active support for peacebuilding and
intercommunity trust-building efforts in Kosovo.
That brings me to my third and final point. The
conflict between the parties has a significant impact
on women and youth. We join the Secretary-General in
welcoming the efforts of the United Nations in Pristina,
in close cooperation with the European Union, to
emphasize the involvement of women across all levels
of political and decision-making processes during
the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security.
As indicated by Ulrika Richardson, United Nations
Development Coordinator for Kosovo, “[g]ender
equality is not only a fundamental human right; it is also
a necessary foundation for a just and peaceful world.”
It is also our considered view that responses to
address sexual violence in conflict situations must
include survivors in order for them to share their
experiences and possible solutions. In that respect,
we welcome the active involvement of survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence in finding solutions
towards addressing their legal, social and institutional
challenges, as reflected in the Pristina communiqué.
We also welcome the role of young people, whose
efforts illustrate the importance of an inclusive peace
process. The third annual Kosovo Youth Assembly,
in collaboration with the United Nations country
team in Kosovo, identified ways of empowering
youth leadership across Kosovo. Those much-needed
initiatives can contribute to long-term solutions for
peace for all.
In conclusion, we hope that a spirit of compromise
will be the foundation for negotiations towards an
inclusive and fair settlement that is acceptable to
both parties.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): As
members of the Security Council, we must ensure
that we use the time and resources of the Council
wisely and where the needs are greatest. In the light
of last week’s open debate on working methods of the
16/28

10/06/2019

Security Council (see S/PV.8539), today’s very lengthy
relitigations of historical grievances, which do nothing
to move things forward in Kosovo, only underscored
the wisdom of our strong support for a reduced number
of Council meetings on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). While
the United Nations continues to have a useful role to
play in Kosovo, that can be carried out through the
United Nations country team. The United States would
welcome a clear path to phase out UNMIK, which has
achieved its original mandate, and a transition of its
activities to a country team.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the heightened tensions between Belgrade and Pristina.
The priority of both sides should be to lower tensions,
remove barriers and immediately return to dialogue
negotiations. For Kosovo, that means suspending tariffs
on Serbian imports. For Serbia, that means avoiding
provocative actions and words and ceasing its campaign
against Kosovo’s international standing — an effort
that runs counter to normalization.
Kosovo’s independence is a reality. Both parties
need to advance on their respective European paths,
which will take courageous leadership and flexibility.
The twentieth anniversary of the end of the conflict
in Kosovo should remind us all that it is time to move
beyond the past and commit to a durable lasting
peace for the future. Among the reforms necessary to
advance European integration and economic growth,
strengthening the rule of law is a top priority. The
United States supports Kosovo’s lawful efforts to
combat smuggling and corruption. The operation
carried out by the Kosovo police on 28 May took place
in various communities throughout Kosovo, targeted
corrupt officials and other individuals and led to the
arrest of suspects from multiple ethnicities.
It is deeply regrettable that Kosovo police officers
encountered roadblocks, came under fire and were
wounded during the operation. It is unacceptable to
obstruct a legitimate law enforcement operation. The
alleged involvement of two UNMIK personnel and an
UNMIK vehicle is an issue of serious concern that we
are following closely as the facts present themselves.
As in any such operation, it is imperative that proper
after-action investigations establish the facts, and we
understand that those are ongoing.
Suspending the legitimate exercise of law
enforcement is not in the interests of peace and stability
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

in the region or of any of the people of Kosovo, regardless
of ethnicity. Such events once again demonstrate how
critical it is for the parties to immediately return to
dialogue negotiations to achieve a normalization deal.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the Under-Secretary-General for their
briefings today. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative and his team for their continued
dedication to Kosovo.
Since the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) was authorized by the
Security Council in 1999, Kosovo’s development from
a conflict zone into a democratic country has been
significant, and UNMIK has played an important role
in achieving that progress. Due to the change in the
situation on the ground in these past 20 years, the United
Kingdom supports a strategic review of the Mission to
ensure that UNMIK’s efforts are properly tailored to
the current needs and addresses the challenges that
Kosovo still faces. We continue to call on Kosovo to
implement the necessary reforms that would allow it
to strengthen further the rule of law, good governance,
reconciliation and security.
The United Kingdom echoes the concern expressed
by the Special Representative about the prolonged
disengagement by both Pristina and Belgrade from the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU). We
welcome the recent efforts of Germany and France to
reinvigorate the process. Progress on the normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia is in the
interests of both countries, including in respect of their
EU aspirations.
But the provocative language and actions of both
Governments risks future progress. We call on the
leaders to react in a measured, proportionate fashion
that is reflective of the standing of their offices and
to focus on reaching a comprehensive, sustainable
agreement that enjoys domestic support. It is also
important for both sides to implement all agreements
already reached in order to build confidence between
the parties.
We welcome the progress noted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/461) on the common
border crossing points and call for the resumption of
coordination to enable the full implementation of the
integrated border management technical protocol.

S/PV. 8541

We welcome the important work done by UNMIK
and the Government of Kosovo to address legacy issues,
including by overseeing returns of displaced persons,
verifying survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
and investigated cases of missing persons. Justice for all
victims and their families is crucial to future stability.
We cannot allow a culture of impunity to exist. We call
on both Pristina and Belgrade to provide all necessary
support to existing domestic war crimes courts so as
to ensure that outstanding war crimes cases are heard.
Corruption and organized crime negatively affect
the people of Kosovo and those across Europe. We
welcome Kosovo’s efforts so far to tackle this scourge
and urge that these efforts continue and, indeed, be
increased and developed further. The Kosovo police
operation on 28 May was a legitimate operation carried
out in accordance with the law, which resulted in the
arrest of 19 police officers suspected of involvement in
smuggling and organized crime and targeted multiple
ethnicities across a number of municipalities. It is with
regret that we note the injuries sustained.
We are aware of the detention of two UNMIK
officials during the course of the police operation.
International personnel acting in the course of their
duties must be treated in accordance with international
law, just as they too must follow their missions’ mandates
and codes of conduct. It would be inappropriate for
me and other members of the Council to comment
further on that specific incident without clarification
of the facts, and so we look forward to the outcome of
UNMIK’s internal review before commenting further.
The United Kingdom welcomes the establishment
of the Anti-fraud Unit, progress on legal reforms
to increase transparency in political parties and the
recent convictions in several high-profile corruption
cases. However, despite some progress on the rule
of law, stronger, more consistent implementation of
the rule of law and good governance structures are
needed and will help Kosovo’s integration into the
international community.
The United Kingdom will continue to support
Kosovo as it moves forward with its efforts to develop
as a stable, prosperous, multi-ethnic State, including
through our support of UNMIK. We strongly urge the
Governments of Kosovo and Serbia to desist from the
divisive rhetoric that has become all too common and
to return to the EU-facilitated dialogue, in the interests
of their peoples and European stability.

19-1675617/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany feels that this
is a welcome opportunity to discuss forward-looking
solutions. We are concerned that the Council should not
be used or abused in attempts to rewrite or reinterpret
history. We should try to come up with solutions in a
concrete way.
In that spirit, Germany affirms its commitment to
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU)
and normalization between Pristina and Belgrade. Also
in that spirit, Chancellor Merkel and President Macron
hosted a meeting in Berlin on 29 April and will continue
their efforts to support the EU-facilitated process and
to restore the trust of both sides in the normalization
dialogue. To that end, Chancellor Merkel also received
Kosovo’s Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj on 6 June
in Berlin.
Pristina and Belgrade share the goal of EU
membership and both sides share the responsibility to
reduce tensions and continue the dialogue — “dialogue”
meaning “real dialogue”. Too often, this seems to be
based on a belief in an equation that says monologue
plus monologue equals dialogue. That seems to be a real
problem. We need true, genuine and honest dialogue. We
want to use our good offices to support that wherever
we can. Good relations between both sides are in the
interests of the people of Kosovo and Serbia.
We call upon the Kosovo Government to revoke
the tariffs on products from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Those tariffs contravene the Central
European Free Trade Agreement and are a clear
contradiction of Kosovo’s regional integration efforts.
In that context, the vision of a greater Albania is
counterproductive, and all the more so when it is uttered
by leading politicians. We likewise urge the Serbian
Government to refrain from actions that undermine an
environment conducive to negotiations. This concerns,
for example, efforts to persuade other countries to
withdraw their recognition of Kosovo. Both parties
need to tone down the rhetoric and communicate
more clearly to their respective constituencies why
comprehensive and sustainable agreement is in the
mutual interest. Increased stability in both countries
and the region brought about by such an agreement is
clearly in the interest of all. Our position is well known.
We remain convinced that border changes along ethnic
lines do not contribute to such a solution.
Let me just briefly refer to the police operation on
28 May. Let me be clear regarding our views on this
18/28

10/06/2019

operation in general. Kosovo has every right to combat
corruption and organized crime with determination and
in accordance with the rule of law. We welcome efforts
to combat criminal activities throughout Kosovo. These
efforts should not be limited to but also include the
north. At the same time, international personnel must
be treated strictly in accordance with international law.
We look forward to a swift and thorough investigation
into the treatment of the personnel of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
on 28 May.
Let me say in general that the immunity accorded
to United Nations officials is very important. We
discussed this in a different case about an expert on the
Panel of Experts for Libya a few weeks ago. That was
very important, and it is equally important here that the
immunity of United Nations personnel in each case be
respected. I say that without prejudging any results of
the ongoing investigation, obviously.
With regard to the strategic review of UNMIK, we
have stated previously that we believe it is high time
for such a review. Since UNMIK was first mandated in
1999, the situation in Kosovo has changed drastically,
and we believe that the Mission needs to adapt to that
new reality. It is the Mission’s operating environment
that has changed, and it is time for a transition of many
of the tasks of UNMIK, either to Kosovar institutions
or to other international institutions that have taken
over UNMIK’s original role.
Before I conclude, let me cite two examples of
our efforts, together with our partners, to implement
Security Council decisions on the ground and to build
sustainable peace by supporting concrete measures
that meaningfully complement initiatives towards a
comprehensive and sustainable agreement.
The first example I would like to cite is that we
support the effort in Kosovo to adopt and implement
a survivor-centred approach to addressing conflictrelated sexual violence, in line with resolution 2467
(2019). As mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2019/461), the Jahjaga Foundation, the
Embassy of Germany and the United Nations Kosovo
team organized a conference on this topic on 8 March
that adopted the so-called Pristina communiqué,
focused on conflict-related sexual violence.
Let me conclude by citing another practical example
for the need and benefit of closer regional cooperation.
Together with our French partners, we have started an
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

initiative to better control small arms, which are all
too readily available in the region. Last week, the six
countries met in Sarajevo to take stock of the situation,
and we are encouraged by the progress achieved and
the commitment to the initiative shown by the countries
in the region.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
United Nations Legal Counsel, for their briefings. I
would also like to thank Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ms. Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United
States, for their statements.
With regard to working methods, and this goes
for all Council meetings, I would note the request,
repeated on many occasions, for briefers to limit their
presentations to 15 minutes.
Twenty years after the end of the conflict in Kosovo
and the deployment of NATO’s military force, the
Kosovo Force, Kosovo is living in peace. In the light of
the many ongoing intercommunal tensions, that peace
is, admittedly, fragile, but it should spur us to redouble
our efforts to meet the aspirations of the people there.
In the spirit of that objective, I would like to briefly
highlight three points.
First of all, I commend the role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in continuing to successfully promote security,
stability and human rights in Kosovo. In recognition
of the continuing stability challenges in the Western
Balkans, France recently adopted a national strategy
to increase its support for the sustainable stabilization
of the region, its economic and social development
and the strengthening of the rule of law. The strategy
sets out concrete measures for economic and social
development, with the participation of the French
Development Agency. It contemplates several actions
in the field of security, including a Franco-German
initiative to combat trafficking in small arms and light
weapons; and, in the fields of justice and defence, it
calls for enhanced cooperation. However, while we
must support the stabilization of the Western Balkans,
the main responsibility lies first and foremost with
the countries of the region — as Northern Macedonia
and Greece demonstrated with the historic Prespa
agreement, which I welcome once again.

S/PV. 8541

I now come to my second point — the regrettable
lack of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina since
November and the high level of tension between the
two parties, which is unsustainable. This stalemate
explains the approach of the President of the Republic
Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Angela
Merkel to invite Kosovo, Serbia, the countries of the
region and the European Union to a summit in Berlin
on 29 April, as the German representative has just
mentioned. The challenge was to convince both sides
to resume dialogue. Efforts to achieve that objective
are ongoing.
In order to achieve the resumption of genuine
dialogue, it is essential that each party refrain from
actions, declarations or measures that could exacerbate
tensions, as Mr. Schulz just explained. In that regard, I
reiterate our request that the 100 per cent tariff imposed
by the Kosovo Government on products from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina be lifted or, at the very
least, suspended.
The Kosovo police operation on 28 May has been
mentioned by several speakers, and I, too, will touch
upon it briefly. France, naturally, supports the fight
against organized crime and corruption in Kosovo, in
full respect of the rule of law, which we wish to see
consolidated. Given the local context, particularly in
the north of the country, it is nevertheless essential that
such operations be proportionate. Furthermore, as the
Legal Counsel pointed out, we highlight the importance
of respect for the privileges and immunities of all
United Nations personnel, including those of UNMIK,
as defined in the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations. We will carefully
review the results of UNMIK’s internal investigation.
Finally, I should like to highlight the role of the
European Union in the Western Balkans region. In our
view, the stability of the region is first and foremost a
European matter. The European Union is thus leading
a mediation process that will resume once both parties
are ready to relaunch the dialogue. Some progress has
already been made, for example the conclusion of many
technical agreements between Serbia and Kosovo in
the early 2010s, facilitated by the European Union. The
challenge now is to reach a comprehensive and legally
binding agreement between the two parties.
The European future of Serbia and Kosovo depends
largely on the conclusion of such an agreement. In
addition, there are many reforms to strengthen the rule

19-1675619/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

of law, which is at the heart of the European project.
The primary responsibility for the European prospects
of Serbia and Kosovo lies primarily with the political
leaders of those countries. Only the full normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade will make
it possible to achieve that European future, which is
a shared future. We encourage First Deputy Prime
Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku to redouble
their efforts to that end. They can always count on the
fraternal support of France.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, for their briefings on the recent situation in
Kosovo. I would also like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, to New York.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/461), and would like to join others in expressing
our deep concern about the recent situation in the field.
Today, I would like to bring three points to the attention
of the Council.
First, Indonesia calls for the cessation of political
hostilities in the region. We reiterate the call of
resolution 1244 (1999) for all parties to engage in
peaceful dialogue to resolve the political conflict. It is
imperative for the parties to refrain from provocations
and political hostilities, which are not constructive and
do not contribute to creating an environment that is
conducive to dialogue. Allegations and inflammatory
rhetoric can only add salt to the wounds. Ultimately, all
parties must fully commit to peaceful means, through
dialogue and negotiation. But we need more than good
will to start a dialogue; we need sincerity to build trust
instead of provocations and trade wars. Each party must
refrain from any action that could exacerbate tensions
and undermine efforts toward normalization, including
the imposition of import tariffs.
Secondly, the Government of Indonesia upholds
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia as a
Member of the United Nations, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Thirdly, I would like to once again reiterate
the important role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Indonesia
greatly appreciates UNMIK’s multipronged approach
to engaging grass-roots communities through various
20/28

10/06/2019

forums, conferences and trust-building projects. We
also welcome UNMIK’s support for the participation of
young people in decision-making processes and crosscommunity dialogue. Young people are the future.
We have to place our trust in the young generation
while maintaining a positive attitude and setting aside
political or ethnic interests. We also support trustbuilding efforts, as explained by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tanin. Town hall debates on
key issues, cross-community engagement, religious
tolerance programmes, languages, gender equality
and human rights programmes certainly contribute to
closer engagement.
Despite the positive progress made by UNMIK
in this area and many others, we are deeply saddened
by the fact that several UNMIK staff members have
been arrested and injured by the authorities in northern
Kosovo, as mentioned by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin and Under-Secretary-General
De Serpa Soares. Those actions are clearly a violation
of international law and the immunities granted to
international United Nations staff members.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about the
heightened tensions between Belgrade and Pristina, as
well as his view on the importance of resuming dialogue
between the parties under the auspices of the European
Union — as many have stated this morning — without
further delay in order to bring unity back to the region.
It has been many months and far too long since the last
meeting between the two parties, under the auspices
of the European Union. It should be clear that peace
will be sustained only if there is reconciliation, and
reconciliation will happen only if both parties sit
together, at the same table, with trust, confidence and
faith in the whole process of political dialogue.
We regret the use of inflammatory rhetoric and
statements, including in this Chamber, which certainly
does not help the situation. There is an urgent need and
hope to find durable peace for the peoples involved. I
share the view that it is important for all of us to find a
solution and to avoid any further statements that do not
contribute to creating a conducive environment.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and Mr. Miguel de Serpa
Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

S/PV. 8541

United Nations Legal Counsel, for their informative
briefings on the progress made in recent months in
Kosovo. I also thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and to Ms. Vlora
Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States, for
their statements.

extremism and support for initiatives to facilitate the
return of displaced persons throughout the region, as
well as other projects that are being carried out on the
ground, with the help of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, UNMIK and the United
Nations team, to foster dialogue and trust between
the parties.

Equatorial Guinea wishes to express its concern
and condemn the events that took place in the north of
Kosovo on 28 May, during which two United Nations
personnel were detained by the Kosovo police. We echo
the words of Mr. Tanin in highlighting the need for all
parties to commit themselves to respect the principles of
law and dignity for all, to work constructively together
with the United Nations and to refrain from any action
that could lead to the escalation of tensions in order to
maintain calm and security on the ground.

For these reasons, we call on the parties to intensify
their commitment and efforts to generate the conditions
conducive to a constructive dialogue and thereby the
resumption of relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
This would demonstrate their commitment to improving
and protecting the rule of law, as well as safeguarding
the good relations of trust among communities
throughout Kosovo, thereby promoting development,
peace and security in Kosovo.

As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/461) and Mr. Tanin’s briefing, the situation in
the Kosovo region is still worrying. The lack of progress
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and the
inflammatory rhetoric and provocative actions of the
parties are having a negative effect on the situation
on the ground and hindering initiatives to relaunch a
productive dialogue between the parties.
During our last briefing on Kosovo (see S/PV.8459),
several members of the Council expressed our concern
about the impact that the decision to increase tariffs on
the importation of Serbian and Bosnian products would
have on the normalization of dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. As reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report, this decision is resulting in an escalation
of tensions between the parties and undermining
diplomatic efforts to reach a final agreement on the
Kosovo issue.
Likewise, we are also concerned that, during the
reporting period, no meetings were held between
Belgrade and Pristina. In this regard, we remind the
parties that ensuring security and stability in Kosovo
requires the commitment of both parties to pursuing
the dialogue. We therefore encourage them to continue
these efforts with the aim of achieving stability on
the ground and respecting the implementation of the
agreements reached.
We also wish to highlight the fact that the reporting
period also saw some significant progress. In this
regard, we welcome the new measures taken in the fight
against corruption, progress in the prevention of violent

In conclusion, we believe that all parties should
continue to act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and within
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and existing
agreements so that, through dialogue, they can find a
peaceful and lasting solution that benefits everyone.
Once again, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia,
and appreciates its continued efforts to facilitate
an inclusive, peaceful and political solution to the
situation. We encourage UNMIK to continue to achieve
its goals and priorities to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo. We also commend
the support it provides to all communities in Kosovo
and all regional and international actors.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I too
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), and Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, for their
enlightening briefings. I also welcome the participation
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia in this meeting, as well as that of the
Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States of America.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with concern the lack of
significant progress in the dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. This dialogue should pave the way
towards a definitive settlement of the Kosovo issue and
lead to reconciliation between the two countries. We are
therefore worried by the persistence of tensions that are
further exacerbating the climate of mistrust between

19-1675621/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

Serbia and Kosovo and could even serve to catalyse the
deterioration of the sociopolitical and security situation
between the two countries and in the Balkans more
generally. My country therefore calls on the Serbian
and Kosovar parties to work responsibly and in good
faith to preserve the gains made by pursuing dialogue,
especially under the auspices of the European Union.
In this connection, we believe that the issues of import
tariffs and the immunity of United Nations officials
need to be urgently addressed.
Maintaining and even strengthening stability as
it stands must be a top priority for the international
community. It must justify the tireless efforts of
the United Nations and other institutional actors to
normalize the situation between Belgrade and Pristina.
That is why my country is satisfied to note the desire
expressed by Presidents Aleksandar Vučić and Hashim
Thaçi to pursue this critical dialogue in Paris in
July 2019.
Côte d’Ivoire is convinced that no obstacle, no
matter how complex, is impossible to overcome in the
dispute between Kosovo and Serbia so long as both
parties engage, resolutely and in good faith, in dialogue
to reach bold compromises that will guarantee peace
and stability for their peoples and for the Balkans.
We commend the European Union for its mediation
efforts and believe that it should continue to play
a leading role concerning the issue, as it pertains
in particular to preventive diplomacy efforts to be
undertaken with a view to normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia.
With regard to the comprehensive implementation
of the Brussels Agreement, my country takes this
opportunity to reiterate its appreciation for the
excellent work done by UNMIK personnel in support
of the Government of Kosovo. We also reiterate our
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, given his remarkable
personal commitment. The support of UNMIK is
crucial as it could become a genuine catalyst of efforts
geared towards reconciliation among the various
communities, which is a prerequisite for restoring
peaceful coexistence between Kosovo and Serbia. To
that end, it is worth noting and acknowledging the
initiative to promote the learning of the Albanian and
Serbian languages in both communities, as well as the
holding of the third annual Kosovo Youth Assembly.
22/28

10/06/2019

Various other initiatives aimed at women and young
people, among others, also deserve to be commended.
Côte d’Ivoire also encourages the authorities of
Kosovo to pursue their efforts to entrench the rule of
law and combat corruption and impunity. Similarly, we
welcome the outstanding contribution of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which has helped
to build transparent, democratic and multi-ethnic
institutions in the country since 2008.
Like the memory of peoples and States emerging
from particularly violent conflicts, such as that which
rocked the Balkans in the 1990s, deep stigmas and
divergences have been slow to fade, and relations
between Serbia and Kosovo are the perfect illustration
of that. However, those two sovereign entities must
agree to maintain good-neighbourly relations and
should create the conditions for lasting peace and
stability between their countries in particular, and in
the Balkans in general, to ensure the happiness of their
respective peoples.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting.
We thank Mr. Tanin for the commendable work done
by him and his team. We also thank Mr. João Miguel
Ferreira de Serpa Soares; Mr. Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia; and Ambassador Çitaku for being
with us today.
The Dominican Republic notes with concern the
continuing tensions between Belgrade and Pristina.
In this situation, it is vital that the parties honour the
commitments made in the Brussels Agreement and
in the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We
urge them to be more flexible in their positions and
to work to resume negotiations for the normalization
of relations between the parties. We also urge that
those negotiations continue under the auspices of the
European Union, which, as facilitator, continues to play
a fundamental role in the process. We acknowledge the
crucial role played by the United Nations in support
of peace and the strengthening of institutions on the
ground, mainly through the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We join the Secretary-General in calling on the
parties to refrain from engaging in inflammatory
rhetoric and provocative actions that could hinder the
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

continuation of dialogue. The Dominican Republic
encourages Kosovar and Serb leaders to take action
in favour of the ongoing process, since decisive
political will is required in order to accelerate the
negotiations. That includes refraining from taking
unilateral measures that could slow progress in the
implementation of commitments. In that context, we
believe that maintaining the increase in tariffs on
products from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina not
only obstructs trade but also harms peace talks.
We applaud the meeting held on 29 April in
Berlin, in the framework of the summit of Western
Balkan leaders, convened by Germany and France.
It is encouraging that, on that occasion, Pristina and
Belgrade agreed on their intention to move forward
with the implementation of existing agreements and to
participate constructively in the process of normalizing
relations in the current format. We take note of and
support the initiative to hold another meeting in Paris
in early July.
We stress the need to pursue efforts to incorporate
the various sectors of society into the current political
process. In that regard, we commend the initiatives
and events organized by UNMIK, in collaboration
with UN-Women and the European Union, to enable
and promote greater participation and women’s
empowerment, in line with the women and peace and
security agenda. We also welcome activities to promote
the integration of young people into the dynamics of
confidence-building and the promotion of peace. In
that regard, we congratulate UNMIK and UNICEF on
the holding of the third annual Kosovo Youth Assembly
in April, in the framework of the Mission’s strategy
on youth, peace and security. We would also like to
highlight the support of the United Nations team, the
Special Representative and all those working together
to involve young people in decision-making processes,
initiatives for inter-community dialogue and the
promotion of political and social reconciliation.
The Dominican Republic recognizes the positive
impact of achieving impartial justice in Kosovo, as it
effectively helps to build the people’s trust in official
institutions. In that context, we believe it necessary
to pursue efforts to create mechanisms that guarantee
respect for and the full exercise of the rights of citizens.
That means that justice can provide timely and effective
responses to the victims of gender-based violence and
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.

S/PV. 8541

With regard to the events of 28 May, in which two
UNMIK employees were detained during a police
operation, we hope that the facts will be clarified in a
timely manner and that the truth will be uncovered so
that relevant action may be taken.
We stress the importance of strengthening the
rule of law in Kosovo. We therefore welcome actions
and provisions that guarantee full respect for and the
protection of human rights. We take this opportunity
to acknowledge the work of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, through its monitoring and
operational pillars. In that regard, we welcome the
efforts made by the Mission to facilitate agreements
pertaining to freedom of movement and support for
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office and the Specialist
Chambers. We welcome the resumption of the search
for missing persons cases and condemn any attempt to
obstruct such tasks.
Lastly, we reiterate our support and appreciation
for the work conducted by UNMIK, the Kosovo Force,
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe to build sustainable peace
in Kosovo.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): We have followed the most recent developments
in northern Kosovo with some concern. We fully support
the need to combat corruption and organized crime,
which is part of Kosovo’s reform agenda. We reiterate
the importance of both sides respecting the rule of law
in those efforts. It is important that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
be able to continue its work in line with its mandate,
without constraints and with complete independence.
We await the results of UNMIK’s internal
investigation in order to clarify the 28 May incident.
I would like to thank Legal Counsel Miguel de Serpa
Soares for reminding us of the rules governing the
immunity of United Nations staff.
These developments unfortunately reveal a climate
of mistrust between the two parties. It is important that
the parties refrain from any action or statement that
may cause tensions. In this context, we reiterate our
call to the Kosovo authorities to eliminate the 100 per
cent customs duties on products from Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The future of Serbia and Kosovo lies within the
European Union and will be attained through dialogue.

19-1675623/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

We welcome the meeting between leaders of Serbia and
Kosovo in Berlin, and we call on both sides to seize
the opportunity offered by the next meeting in July in
Paris to resume the dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union. We hope that the Serbian and Kosovar
leaders will show the necessary political courage.
It is important that the parties implement all the
commitments they undertook in the dialogue in order
to create a climate conducive to the normalization of
their relations. The conclusion of a comprehensive
and legally binding agreement on the normalization of
relations is the only way to achieve a lasting settlement
of the dispute between the two parties and to guarantee
regional stability. Such an agreement is also a condition
for the European integration of Serbia and Kosovo.
We encourage the participation of women both in
the process of normalizing relations between Belgrade
and Pristina and in the Kosovar political process. It
is important to include women in the various stages
of the decision-making process and also to take their
needs into account. Their participation is essential to
achieving a just and lasting peace and reconciliation.
We welcome the efforts of UNMIK and UN-Women in
this regard.
Since the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999) 20
years ago, Kosovo has made considerable progress,
thanks to the presence of the international community.
The United Nations and UNMIK in particular have
played a key role in this regard. The European Union,
which Serbia and Kosovo aspire to join, has also made
a significant contribution through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. We believe that it is
important for the international community to contribute
to creating the conditions for the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tanin and Under-Secretary-General De Serpa Soares
for their briefings today. I would also like to thank
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku
for their statements before the Security Council.
As this is the second of three meetings we will
have this year on this subject, with next year seeing
only two, let me say that in our view this welcome
reduction reflects the fact that the situation on the
ground is stable, thus allowing the Council to turn its
attention elsewhere.
24/28

10/06/2019

As concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, let me repeat our
call for a strategic review of the Mission. Eleven years
have passed since the last strategic review. A fresh
reassessment of the Mission’s comparative advantage
is obviously needed. At this point, we would like to
also express our appreciation and support for the role
of the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo as well as other international
organizations in Kosovo for their efforts aimed at
fostering a safe and secure environment and the rule
of law.
Looking at the overall picture in Kosovo, let me
make the following remarks.
Most important of the issues by far is the
normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. This is the key not only to unlocking the
potential of both countries on their way to European
integration, but also to the stability of the whole
region. We strongly urge Kosovo and Serbia to take
cues from Greece and North Macedonia, which settled
their long-standing dispute by way of negotiations. We
would like to see the meaningful resumption of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue and call on both
sides to show commitment towards reaching a legally
binding agreement on comprehensive normalization
of relations. In this context, we encourage Kosovo
to remove punitive tariffs on goods from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina and equally encourage Serbia
to halt its actions aimed at undermining Kosovo’s
international position. We call on both to show goodwill
and openness.
With respect to the situation in Kosovo, we commend
progress on the way of reform and in strengthening
the rule of law. We also note with appreciation efforts
aimed at fighting corruption, organized crime and
violent extremism.
A lot has already been achieved, but still more
needs to be done. Improvements in the legal framework
need to be matched by changes in the political culture.
It is incumbent upon political elites to continue their
efforts to create a just and inclusive environment and
lay a solid foundation for the future prosperity of
all citizens.
Let me conclude by saying that Poland regards
Kosovo as being fully capable of managing its own
future, and we stand ready to extend our assistance in
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

this effort and share our experience as we have done
so far.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings by Mr. Zahir Tanin, and by
Mr. João Miguel Ferreira de Serpa Soares, UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel. We also welcome the presence
of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku.
Peru recognizes the important progress made in
strengthening the situation in Kosovo over the past
11 years. However, its real progress and prosperity
transcend political and economic reforms, requiring
mechanisms for dialogue and reconciliation. In this
regard, we are concerned about the serious exacerbation
of tensions among the various strata of the political
class, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/461), which has regrettable repercussions in
unfortunate social incidents. Political leaders are called
upon to set an example of prioritizing the interests of
the wider public, thereby contributing to strengthening
trust and good-neighbourly relations.
In this regard, we consider the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina to be imperative.
To that end, we invoke the commitment of the parties
to resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement,
and we call on them to take, in a constructive manner
and in good faith, the necessary steps to resume the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union.
We also believe that it is essential to respect
and strengthen the rule of law and the legitimacy of
institutions. We therefore highlight the work of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, as
well as the role of the Specialist Chambers in support
of this task. Along those lines, we welcome the pending
judicial hearings and the entry into force of the new
penal code and the initiatives aimed at combating
corruption and organized crime, in accordance with
the law, human rights and international agreements
and standards. In that regard, we regret the incident on
28 May involving a staff member of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and hope that the facts will soon be clarified. Peru
reaffirms the responsibility of Governments to respect
the immunity of United Nations officials and of those
officials to act impartially in carrying out their duties.

S/PV. 8541

However, we also want to recognize the initiatives
undertaken by UNMIK, in coordination with United
Nations system entities, to promote human rights, the
empowerment of young people, gender equality and
the protection of children and intercommunal dialogue.
All of that must be accompanied by the full recognition
and establishment of guarantees for the population’s
ethnic, religious and cultural diversity, including full
respect for the linguistic rights of minorities, a safe and
dignified return for internally displaced persons, and
the protection of historical and cultural heritage.
We would like to conclude by reiterating our
appreciation of the work of undertaken by UNMIK, the
Kosovo Force, the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
international bodies committed to the shared task of
building sustainable peace in Kosovo.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and share
his serious concerns about the situation in Kosovo. We
are grateful to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), for his informative briefing on the situation
in Kosovo. In general we share his assessments. We
also thank Mr. De Serpa Soares, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal
Counsel, for the clarifications he provided. We also
listened attentively to Ms. Vlora Çitaku’s statement,
but frankly there is nothing to thank her for other than
for being an eloquent exemplar of lies, insinuations and
historical fantasies inciting hatred that are not worthy
of the Security Council Chamber. And that is instead
of simply apologizing for the marauding acts of her
compatriots, which to be honest is what many of us
were expecting.
In spite of the fact that the events of 28 May in
northern Kosovo were not included in the SecretaryGeneral’s report under consideration on the situation
in Kosovo (S/2019/461), we believe it would have
been entirely logical to make them a priority focus
for today’s meeting considering the all too blatant
illegality of the Kosovo authorities’ outrageous actions.
Under the unlikely watchword of combating organized
crime, Kosovo Albanian special forces invaded Serb
municipalities in northern Kosovo. As a result, 28
people were arrested, mostly Serbian police officers.

19-1675625/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, a citizen of the Russian
Federation and staff member of UNMIK, was beaten
and detained while carrying out his duties. Ms. Çitaku
has just provided us with a completely absurd version
of the actions of Mr. Krasnoshchekov, whose last name
Pristina did not even bother to write down correctly.
Apparently he was felling trees for barricades, put his
chainsaw carefully in the trunk, stood in front of the
barricades and then refused to provide his identification
as an UNMIK staffer. Does she even believe such
rubbish herself? An investigation is understandably
under way, but I have two questions for Mr. Tanin.
Did Mr. Krasnoshchekov produce his UNMIK staff
identification, and was he beaten? Ms. Çitaku just
claimed that none of that happened. However, we
have a large number of photographs that confirm the
opposite. Incidentally, there are quite a lot of videos
on the Internet showing the Kosovo special forces’
thuggish and unpunished actions. I would be grateful
for answers.
I would like to remind the Council that during
the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina with the
participation and support of the West, an understanding
was reached that the Kosovo Special Police Unit, who
are armed with long guns, would not enter the northern
areas where Serbs live. It was an unwritten gentleman’s
agreement of sorts. However, in the past few years
such incursions have happened again and again with
the full connivance of the Kosovo Force, which is
mandated by the Security Council to ensure peace
and security in Kosovo. We believe that those actions
were intentional, deliberate and meant to provoke.
Such zealous crime-fighting has not previously been
typical of the Pristina authorities, and the timing of the
attack was not accidental. As it happened, on the eve
of the events President Aleksandar Vučić of Serbia had
indicated in a statement in Parliament his willingness
to work on a compromise solution to the Kosovo issue.
However, the Kosovo Albanian authorities nevertheless
decided to show that they were already the boss in the
north. Incidentally, just the week before, the Serbian
parties had had a major win over Albanian parties in
the municipal elections. The attempt to take control
of the north legally had failed, so they switched to the
second option of doing it by force.
People in the Balkans remember the events of the
1990s very well. One careless word or gesture is enough
to lead to new bloodshed and for simmering conflict to
catch fire with renewed force. Why was it necessary
26/28

10/06/2019

to consciously provoke such a situation? Kosovo’s
Western backers have all but ignored this aggressive
action, including a crude, premeditated violation of
a United Nations staff member’s immunity. Today
our United States colleagues could not even manage
a few words in defence of United Nations staffers’
immunity. While Pristina, through Ms. Çitaku, had
just made it unambiguously clear that it does not intend
to respect United Nations immunity going forward.
Its erosion is likely to have serious consequences for
both the Organization and its members. I think we all
understand that perfectly well. If we let things slide
now, United Nations personnel in other parts of the
world could find themselves in a similar situation in the
future, and then it will be too late to appeal to universal
diplomatic norms.
Pristina has launched a propaganda campaign
against both the United Nations and Russia. Its motives
are clear — first, discredit UNMIK and get it closed
down, and secondly, affirm its so-called statehood at
any cost. The so-called Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo has declared Mr. Krasnoshchekov persona non
grata. As was already emphasized today, that procedure
is not applicable to United Nations staff and can be used
by States only in the context of their bilateral relations.
Yet even in those cases the Kosovars have no right to
take such a step because they do not have international
legal standing as a subject. Clearly, an understanding
of the finer points of international law is not Kosovo
officials’ strong point.
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
has advised us to entrust the investigation of the incident
to the very Kosovo police who as we understand it were
responsible for it. Proposing to seek the truth from the
Kosovo’s outlaw police force, who knowingly violated
all written and unwritten norms in beating up a United
Nations staff member and then began creating a false
picture of the events with the support and participation
of Kosovo’s highest authorities, is an absurd mockery.
It devalues the European Union’s role in Kosovo and
its claims to be helping to ensure the rule of law there.
I would like to point out that this is not the first time
that there has been a provocation involving a Russian
staff member working for UNMIK. A Russian UNMIK
volunteer was previously detained by the Kosovo police
under false pretences. And now the so-called Foreign
Ministry of Kosovo is asking the Secretary-General to
reduce the United Nations presence, which is supposedly
discrediting itself, and to conduct the much-discussed
19-16756

10/06/2019

Kosovo

review of the Mission. These are all links in the same
chain. Representatives of some States, permanent
members of the Security Council, are cultivating the
same behind-the-scenes tactics as the Secretariat, and
we are aware of that. Fabricated stories, with no basis in
reality, about so-called Russian spies are now becoming
a trend in the West. We firmly reject such unscrupulous
manoeuvres. The mandates of peacekeeping missions
should be considered at the Security Council table, not
rewritten in the corridors.
The years of indulgence that the Pristina authorities
have had from the West have resulted in their deliberate
defiance of their patrons. The so-called Kosovo Albanian
Government, led by Ramush Haradinaj, is keeping
to its course of exacerbating the crisis and is clearly
unwilling to hold a substantive dialogue. The calls from
Brussels for normalizing relations, which for some
reason are addressed to both parties, only strengthen
one party’s feeling that everything is permitted,
pushing it to take maximalist approaches with no room
for compromise outcomes. The 100 per cent tariffs on
goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina that
Kosovo imposed in November are still in force, and
we view the so-called Kosovo Assembly’s resolution
on Serbian genocide, adopted on 16 May, in the same
context, something that serves only to incite hatred
between the two peoples. This entire flurry of anti-Serb
actions is designed to overcome Kosovo’s permanent
internal political impasse in Kosovo and is a reflection
of the fractured relations between clans in Pristina,
which the representatives of various Kosovo Albanian
political forces have themselves spoken about frankly.
We continue to insist that the decision made on
14 December 2018 by the so-called Parliament to
transform the Kosovo Security Force into a fully fledged
army is a flagrant violation of resolution 1244 (1999),
which includes a totally clear requirement that any
armed Kosovo Albanian groups must be demilitarized
and permits only international forces to have a presence
on Kosovan territory. We would like to point to the lack
of transparency in the activities of the NATO Bondsteel
military facility in Kosovo. What is the true reason for
that base’s existence? Could it be a stealthy way to pull
Kosovo into NATO?
Russia’s position on the Kosovo settlement is well
known. We support Belgrade and Pristina in arriving at
a viable and mutually acceptable solution on the basis of
resolution 1244 (1999). In our view, forcing a so-called
final normalization between Belgrade and Pristina

S/PV. 8541

and tying it to any artificial deadlines is destructive.
A sustainable solution to the Kosovo problem is not
possible without the endorsement not only of the parties
concerned but also of the Security Council, as this is
a matter related to the maintenance of international
peace and security. There is no alternative to dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. In that connection, we
would like to remind the Council of a key agreement
reached within that framework on the formation
of a community of Serb-majority municipalities in
Kosovo, which the Kosovo Albanian authorities have
been sabotaging for the past six years. Implementing
that key element of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations between
Kosovo and Serbia, signed in Brussels on 19 April
2013, is a crucial indicator for the possibility of any
future substantive discussions. We want to draw the
Secretariat’s attention to the importance of carefully
monitoring developments in the situation, which, as the
facts I have stated show, requires a close watch on the
part of the international community.
It is also clear to us after today’s meeting that
those who fly in the face of common sense and the
deteriorating situation on the ground by insisting
on reducing the time allocated to discussion of the
Kosovo issue in the Security Council have been utterly
shamed. Our discussion has once again affirmed that
without the Security Council’s close attention, the
Kosovo Albanian authorities will end up having total
faith in their impunity and ability to do as they please,
which risks driving the region into a new bloody
clash, something that neither Council members nor the
leadership of Serbia and its neighbours want.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.
At the outset, I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his
briefing and Mr. De Serpa Soares for his clarifications
regarding the incident in northern Kosovo on 28 May.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku,
Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States, and thank
them for their statements.
We are following with concern the increasing
tensions between Belgrade and Pristina, which could
affect the prospects for the resumption of a productive
dialogue between them. We urge them to refrain from

19-1675627/28

S/PV.8541

Kosovo

10/06/2019

inflammatory statements and provocative actions that
could hinder the progress that has been made. We
call on Belgrade and Pristina to show restraint, take
all necessary measures to calm the situation, defuse
tensions and overcome obstacles while demonstrating
the political will necessary to reach a comprehensive
agreement, which could ensure the conditions conducive
to a resumption of dialogue and fully normalized
relations between both sides.

overcome their differences and reach consensus-based,
just and lasting solutions acceptable to both sides,
which will help to establish the foundations for peace,
security and stability in the region.

We have also been following the latest developments
in northern Kosovo with concern, especially in
the municipality of Zubin Potok, related to the
implementation of a court order by the Kosovo police
to search and monitor a number of locations throughout
Kosovo in order to combat corruption and organized
crime. That led to the arrest of a staff member of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). The Government in Kosovo has
declared that the United Nations staff member is now
persona non grata. We emphasize in that regard the
importance of respecting the diplomatic immunity
of United Nations personnel in accordance with the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. We also
emphasize the importance of the neutrality of United
Nations mission personnel and their commitment to
implementing their mandate.

Mr. Tanin: Before I answer the question, let me
thank all those members of the Council who expressed
their support for the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and its staff at this
difficult time. I really appreciate it.

The European Union-facilitated dialogue in
Brussels between Belgrade and Pristina remains the
most appropriate framework for settling all outstanding
issues between both sides. It is the right way to reach
just and lasting consensus solutions. We also welcome
the Berlin Summit convened in April by Germany and
France with the aim of urging both sides to resume
dialogue and implement all existing agreements.
We welcome the recent steps taken by the Kosovo
authorities to combat corruption, especially by
establishing an anti-fraud unit to promote the effective
prosecution of corruption and organized crime. We also
welcome the ongoing efforts of UNMIK, in cooperation
with the United Nations country team in Kosovo and
in partnership with local and international actors, to
implement the recommendations of the United Nations
Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, held in May 2018 in
support of building confidence among the communities.
It is important that the international community
continue its efforts to urge Pristina and Belgrade to

28/28

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Tanin to respond to the question
raised by the representative of the Russian Federation.

Secondly, I would like to express my appreciation
for the presence of Under-Secretary-General De Serpa
Soares and the decision to request his participation,
which is very important from my point of view because it
sets out the framework from which our status emanates.
It can be very helpful, not in this context but in others,
for all the members of the Security Council to look at
such issues as immunity and others that he discussed.
In relation to the question posed by the representative
of the Russian Federation, let me reiterate that while the
fact-finding process is ongoing, we will not comment
on the details of an ongoing investigation. That is
something I have to respect. However, I would like
to assure the representative of the Russian Federation
and the other members of the Council that this factfinding review or internal investigation — whatever
one chooses to call it — will be comprehensive and allencompassing.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Germany has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I should just like to
comment very briefly on a statement made by our
Russian colleague. I want to register the fact that I
found his remarks on the European Union, NATO and
States that support Kosovo, as well as on the history
of the conflict in 1998 and 1999, to be unfortunate,
particularly unhelpful and partially insulting. I do not
want to descend to that level and will therefore refrain
from commenting in detail.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

19-16756
