150

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

W elcoming the Ministers' expressed readiness to
work towards the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 32/130 through the United Nations system,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the progress
report on the over-all analysis 59 which was submitted
to the General Assembly by the Commission on
Human Rights, through the Economic and Social
Council, in accordance with Assembly resolution
32/130;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue with high priority this over-all analysis, which
will contribute to the implementation of resolution
32/130;
3. Expresses the hope that all Member States, the
specialized agencies concemed and United Nations
organs in the field of human rights will continue to
support the ongoing process of over-all analysis being
carried out by the Commission on Human Rights;
4. Looks forward to discussing at its thirty-fourth
session the conclusions and recommendations of the
Commission on Human Rights which will result from
its over-all analysis;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the specialized agencies concerned
and all United Nations organs in the field of human
rights;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an ítem entitled "Alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system far improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/105.

Alternative approaches and ways and
means within the United Nations system
for promoting the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the creation of a post
of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 32/130 of 16 December 1977, in which it requested an over-all analysis
of the United Nations approach to human rights in
the light of the concepts enumerated in that resolution,
Recalling the decision of the Third Committee at
the thirty-second session of the General Assembly to
refer the proposal far the establishment of a post of
United Nations High Commissioner far Human Rights
for consideration by the Commission on Human Rights
at its thirty-fourth session in the context of the over-all
analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means far improving the effective enjoyment of human
Iights and fundamental freedoms, 60
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 26 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978,61 in which
59 Ofjicial

Records of the Economic and Social Coun-

cil, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. IX.
60 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 76, document A/32/423,
para. 23.
6 1 See Ofjicial Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supp/ement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.

the Commission considered advisable the establishment, which the Economic and Social Council authorized on 5 May 1978 in its decision 1978/20, of an
open-ended working group of the Commission that
would meet far one week befare its thirty-fifth session
to undertake the necessary work relating to the over-all
analysis,
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
take into account, in continuing its work on the overall analysis mentioned above, the views expressed on
the various proposals during the general debate on the
present ítem at the current session, as well as during
the thirty-second session of the General Assembly,
including a post of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights;
2. Decides to consider these questions again after
the Commission on Human Rights has completed
and/or reported on the over-all analysis.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/106.

Elimination of ali forms of religious
intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 62 proclaiming that everyone has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Noting that during the thirty years of its existence
many portions of the Declaration have been expanded
into various intemational instruments, while article 18
has thus far not been so elaborated,
Still desirous to see article 18 followed by a declaration on the elimination of all forros of religious
intolerance,
Recalling its resolution 3027 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, in which it decided to accord priority
to the completion of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forros of Religious Intolerance befare
resuming consideration of the draft intemational convention on this subject,
Recalling also its resolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10
December 1974, in which it requested the Commission
on Human Rights to submit to the General Assembly,
through the Economic and Social Council, a single
draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forros of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion
or Belief, and its resolutions 31/138 of 16 December
1976 and 32/143 of 16 December 1977, in which it
urged the Commission to speed up its work so that
the draft Declaration might be finalized,
Noting with regret that the Commission on Human
Rights has reported, through the Economic and Social
Council, that it has as yet not completed the draft
Declaration,
Noting further the efforts undertaken by the informal
working group set up by the Commission on Human
Rights in elaborating a generally acceptable text of
the Declaration, taking into account the relevant
United Nations documents,
Taking account of the fact that, since the Commission on Human Rights has undertaken to draft the
62 Resolution

217 A (III).
