S/2021/682

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 July 2021
Original: English

Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 1 (ISIL, hereinafter referred to as “Da’esh”) 2 and
associated individuals and groups and requested that I provide an initial strategiclevel report on the threat, followed by updates every four months. In its resolution
2368 (2017), the Council requested that the Secretary-General continues to provide,
every six months, strategic-level reports that reflect the gravity of the threat posed by
Da’esh to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat.
2.
The present report is the thirteenth such report. 3 It was prepared by the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team 4 and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in close collaboration with the Office of Counter Terrorism and other United Nations entities and international organizations.
3.
During the first half of 2021, the threat posed by Da’esh to international peace
and security continued to rise along the trends observed in the previous report. The
threat has further expanded in Africa through the group’s regional affiliates, while the
Da’esh core has remained focused on regrouping in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic. In areas that experienced lockdowns related to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, especially outside conflict zones, Da’esh has incited attacks
that might have conceivably been deferred or planned for execution when restrictions
ease. Against that background, the international community reaffirmed during the
second Counter-Terrorism Week held at the United Nations in June its resolve to fight
Da’esh and address the broader terrorism threat. The forward-looking seventh review
__________________

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
In line with General Assembly resolution 75/291.
3
See S/2016/92, S/2016/501, S/2016/830, S/2017/97, S/2017/467, S/2018/80, S/2018/770,
S/2019/103, S/2019/612, S/2020/95, S/2020/774 and S/2021/98.
4
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities. The present threat assessment is based in part on the Team’s twenty -eighth report
(S/2021/655).
1
2

21-09834 (E)

300721

*2109834*

S/2021/682

of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly
resolution 75/291), adopted by consensus on 30 June, is a testament to the
commitment of Member States to a comprehensive and multilateral response to the
evolving scourge of terrorism, during and after the pandemic, with the support of
the United Nations system.

II. Threat assessment
A.

Overview of threat
4.
The threat from Da’esh has remained steady, continuing to raise serious
international concern during the reporting period. While the group continued to
exploit the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Member States, it has taken no
apparent steps to weaponize the virus. The pandemic has continued to have an impact
on terrorist activity in non-conflict zones where the threat remains suppressed by
limitations on the ability of operatives to travel, meet, fundraise and id entify viable
targets. Lockdowns in many areas were more comprehensive in early 2021 than in
2020, and it is conceivable that attacks have been planned for when restrictions ease
at those locations. In conflict zones, however, where pandemic -related restrictions
have less impact, the threat has already increased.
5.
The leader of Da’esh, Amir Muhammad Sa’id Abdal-Rahman al-Mawla
(QDi.426), remains reluctant to communicate directly with supporters. The group’s
command and control over its global affiliates has loosened, even though it continues
to provide guidance and some financial support. The autonomy of regional affiliates
has been further strengthened, especially in West Africa and the Sahel, East and
Central Africa, Afghanistan and South Asia. Member States judge that the success of
this evolution will be an important determinant of the extent of the future global
impact of Da’esh. They also assess that the group will continue to prioritize
regrouping and seeking resurgence in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Re public as its core
area of operations.
6.
The most striking development of the period has been the expansion of Da’esh
in Africa, which is also where groups designated as terrorist by the Security Council
have inflicted the largest number of casualties. Some of the most effective Da’esh
affiliates are spreading their influence and activities on the continent, including across
national borders. Spillover from Mali into Burkina Faso and the Niger, incursions
from Nigeria into the Niger, Chad and Cameroon, and from Mozambique into the
United Republic of Tanzania, are all very concerning. One of the most troubling
events of early 2021 was the deterioration of the security situation in Cabo Delgado
Province, Mozambique, where the local Da’esh affiliate stormed an d briefly held a
strategic port near the Tanzanian border before withdrawing with spoils.

1.

Da’esh fighters and their family members in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
7.
The human tragedy resulting from the Da’esh so-called “caliphate” continues to
complicate the global outlook and level of threat posed by the group, with thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters, other Da’esh fighters and their dependants, including tens
of thousands of women and children perceived to be associated with terrorism,
stranded in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Many of those individuals continue to
be housed in camps for internally displaced persons or detention facilities in the north east of the Syrian Arab Republic. Aside from the urgent need to address that issue on
humanitarian and human rights grounds, the lack of a comprehensive solution to the
situation could shape the future global terrorist threat landscape over the medium to
long term.

2/16

21-09834

S/2021/682

8.
The risk of COVID-19 outbreaks in overcrowded facilities has not yet
manifested as seriously as was initially feared, yet it has prompted unrest and
breakout attempts. In addition to escapes from those facilities, Member States expect
Da’esh to orchestrate larger operations to release more detainees, some of whom will
then join Da’esh-aligned groups in Idlib or be able to relocate to third countries.
Reports indicate that Da’esh has stayed in contact with individuals in camps or
prisons and is actively raising funds for them online.
9.
Several Member States cite detention centres in the north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Hawl camp, located 13 kilometres from the Iraqi border, as security
concerns owing to the visible presence of Da’esh and ongoing indoctrination of
residents, including children. The Hawl camp continu es to house a large population
of displaced persons, mostly children, which is being gradually reduced but remains
at around 60,000. Violence has increased in the camp, with more than 60 people
reportedly killed since the beginning of 2021. The de facto lo cal authorities that
control the camp launched a major operation in March to arrest active Da’esh fighters
and supporters. They announced the capture of 70 Da’esh members in that operation
and the rate of killings fell in April, before increasing again in May to a rate that
remains, however, lower than the period from January to March.
2.

Da’esh finances
10. Several Member States revised downwards their assessment of the financial
reserves available to Da’esh in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, with es timates
currently ranging between $25 million and $50 million. One Member State assessed
that most of those funds are in Iraq, making the group’s Syrian network partially
dependent on their counterparts in Iraq for financial support. Da’esh fighters in the
Syrian Arab Republic are believed to have received several million United States
dollars from Da’esh in Iraq in 2020. In mid-April 2021, Iraqi officials announced the
discovery in Mosul of a sum equivalent to $1.7 million in buried United States dollar
and Iraqi dinar bank notes, as well as gold and silver. The gold appears to have been
intended for production of Da’esh currency. The discovery underscores the extent of
Da’esh cash reserves that may remain hidden.
11. One of the largest ongoing expenditure for Da’esh remains salaries to fighters
and payments to families of imprisoned or deceased fighters. Da’esh also draws on
its reserves to secure the release of its fighters and family members from prisons and
camps for internally displaced persons in the region.
12. The Monitoring Team has previously highlighted flows of funds to Da’esh
fighters and their families in detention facilities or camps for internally displaced
persons in the Syrian Arab Republic through financial institutions, money service
businesses and cash couriers in neighbouring States. Member States cite this as a
persistent means of financing Da’esh and its supporters in the conflict zone. One
Member State reported multiple instances of funds transferred from a European countr y
through money service businesses to pay for the smuggling of women and children out
of facilities in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. According to that Member
State, one individual has facilitated the travel of women with links to Belgium, Bra zil,
Finland, the Netherlands, the Russian Federation, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago and
Uzbekistan from camps in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic to the north-west
and neighbouring countries, and in some cases to their countries of origin.
13. Member States also highlighted concerns about growth in the use of
cryptocurrencies by terrorists and an evolution in tactics resulting from experience
and training in how to send funds using methods with enhanced privacy. The case
prosecuted in France and cited by the Monitoring Team in its report issued on
3 February 2021 (S/2021/68, para. 81) is one of the first successful prosecutions of a

21-09834

3/16

S/2021/682

terrorism finance case involving the use of cryptocurrencies. One Member State also
cited the recent case of an Al-Qaida bounty offered for the killing of police officers
with the reward to be paid in bitcoin.

B.

Regional developments

1.

Africa
West Africa
14. The reported death in May 2021 of Abubakar Mohammed Shekau (QDi.322),
the leader of Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad (Boko Haram) (QDE.138),
during an assault by Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP) (QDe.162), has left
Boko Haram significantly weakened. Although some Member States believe that
Shekau may have escaped the assault alive, the group remains under heavy pressure.
Its losses are assessed to likely strengthen ISWAP, which has 3,000 to 5,000 fighters
in the Lake Chad basin and is seeking to extend its area of operations towards
Maiduguri, Nigeria. Abu Musab al-Barnawi (not listed) was reportedly reinstated as
the ISWAP leader before the attack on Shekau’s base. ISWAP launched repeated
attacks on towns and military camps between February and May 2021, challenging
the Nigerian security forces, as well as confronting Boko Haram. In the Diffa region
of Niger bordering Nigeria, ISWAP commander Abba Gana (not listed) is specifically
targeting foreign interests.
15. Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (QDe.163) killed several hundred civili ans
in large-scale attacks in Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger in early 2021. In May, the
Da’esh core released lengthy propaganda materials on the activities of its affiliate in
the Niger to justify the killings on the ground that the victims had supported local
authorities. The group remains at war with Al-Qaida-affiliated Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam
wa al-Muslimin (QDe.159), and the death of its deputy commander, Salama Mohamed
Fadhil, aka Abdelhakim al-Sahraoui (not listed), is unconfirmed.
East and Central Africa
16. Da’esh remains present in Somalia, primarily in Puntland and, to a lesser extent,
in Mogadishu. The group values its presence in the country mainly for its Al -Karrar
office, which supervises and supports the activities of its Central Africa “ province”
in Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
17. In northern Mozambique, Cabo Delgado Province became in March 2021
emblematic of the influence of Da’esh in Africa, following the brief occupation of
Palma by its affiliate, close to a major gas project led by a multinational company.
Local authorities were unable to defend the city and provide security, as was also the
case in Mocimboa da Praia, further south in Cabo Delgado, which has been occupied
by Da’esh affiliates since August 2020. These developments could have far-reaching
implications for peace and security in the region and need to be addressed through a
coherent, regional approach as a matter of priority.
18. Da’esh in Central Africa attracts new recruits with promises of emplo yment and
a sense of belonging. Its leadership consists primarily of Tanzanian nationals, as well
as individuals from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Kenya. 5 Cabo
Delgado Province, as a destination for economic migrants, is an easy trans it area for
Da’esh fighters. The region hosts numerous trafficking activities and is an entry point
for drugs from Asia. As in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Mozambican

__________________
5

4/16

Information provided by Member States.
21-09834

S/2021/682

branch of Da’esh benefits from the informal economy. Members live clandestin ely
and extort local populations.
19. Da’esh in Central Africa looted as much as $2 million from banks in the area,
as well as identity cards and related documents. They also demonstrated an ability to
operate at sea in the vicinity of Matemo, Vamizi and Makalowe islands, Mozambique,
where they engaged in kidnappings and extortion raids. The autonomy delegated by
the Da’esh core, the large number of small operational cells and the absence of
significant counter-terrorism measures have effectively turned the regional affiliate
into a major threat with the potential to develop further, possibly towards
neighbouring countries. It remains supported by a focused propaganda campaign from
the Da’esh core.
20. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Da’esh in Central Africa extended its
area of operation in early 2021 outside Beni, in North Kivu Province, and the southern
part of Ituri Province. It also appeared in South Kivu and Tanganyika Provinces,
attacking military and civilian targets. Women and children were reportedly used as
human shields to prevent counter-attacks. Musa Baluku (not listed), who leads the
Da’esh affiliate in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, diverted the group’s
resources for his own profit, before murdering the son of his main oppo nent to
eliminate competition within the group.
21. In its attempt to expand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Da’esh in
Central Africa has to navigate other armed groups active in the region, possibly
instrumentalize intercommunal disputes, and attract additional foreign terrorist
fighters. Its insurgent model will also require more revenues and possible connections
with criminal groups that have control over extractive industries and illegal mining
activities in the area. The extent of the relation ship between Da’esh affiliates in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mozambique remains unclear.
North Africa
22. Da’esh in the Maghreb region is assessed to have a limited presence, with
supporters generally inspired rather than directed to act in the name of Da’esh,
although there remain examples of local actors taking direction from the group’s core.
In Morocco, authorities disrupted a cell in April 2021 that was directed to target
Moroccan forces on the country’s eastern border. The security of Algeria is threatened
by instability across its borders with Mali and the Niger. Hassan Naamoudi, the leader
of Da’esh affiliate Jund al-Khilafah in Algeria (QDe.151), was killed with four others
in an area west of Algiers in January 2021.
23. In Libya, six Da’esh members were arrested in early March 2021 as a result of a
counter-terrorism operation coordinated by the then Government of National Accord in
southern Tripoli. Members of that cell, and other Da’esh elements from southern Libya,
reportedly fled to various coastal towns, including Tripoli. Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant – Libya (QDe.165) lost its leadership and is greatly diminished in the country,
even though Da’esh continued to claim responsibility for attacks, including in Sabha on
6 June and near Haruj al-Aswad, south-east of Jufrah, on 14 June. One Member State
noted that the Da’esh core supplied its affiliate in Libya with funding couriered by
returnees. One Member State reported that 200 Da’esh fighters had travelled from Libya
to the Sahel region at the end of April 2021. The decline of Da’esh in Libya contrasts
with the past appeal of the country to foreign terrorist fighters.
24. In Egypt, Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, which pledged allegiance to Da’esh in 2014, is
assessed to be resilient, with 800 to 1,200 fighters, notwithstanding ongoing Egyptian
military pressure. One of its leaders, Salim al-Hamadin, was killed in a security
operation south of Rafah in March 2021. He is believed to be one of the people
responsible for the attack on the Rawda mosque in November 2017.
21-09834

5/16

S/2021/682

2.

Middle East
25. Da’esh remains active in wide swathes of the Syrian Arab Republic, where the
group seeks to rebuild its combat capabilities while expanding its insurgency. Da’esh
wages hit-and-run operations against checkpoints from hideouts on both sides of the
Euphrates River in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate. It continues to target convoys and foot
and mobile patrols with roadside improvised explosive devices. Its operations against
Syrian government forces extend to Hama and Homs Governorates. East of the
Euphrates and “white desert” area, its reach extends well into Raqqah and Hasakah
Governorates. Da’esh maintains a significant presence in the desert area that extends
from southern Aleppo to northern Hama Governorates, in particular between the
villages of Khanasir and Athriya. Member States assess that the group has the intent
and capability to sustain a long-term insurgency in the Syrian desert.
26. In Iraq, Da’esh remains active, albeit under constant counter-terrorism pressure.
Although active Da’esh cells persist in remote areas of the country, the group’s
leadership has designated all of Iraq as a single “province”. They carry out hit-andrun operations seeking to undermine critical infrastructure projects, inflame sectarian
divisions and communal grievances and generate media coverage. Repeated roadside
bomb attacks have occurred on the roads linking Kirkuk, Tikrit and Tuz Khurmatu
and against checkpoints near those cities. Such attacks indicate that some Da’esh
fighters remain sheltered in the Hamrin mountain range and continue to exploit
security gaps in some areas of those governorates.
27. Da’esh carried out two attacks in Baghdad after a long gap in such operations.
On 21 January, two suicide bombers killed more than 30 people in a crowded
marketplace. On 15 April, Da’esh detonated a vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device in Sadr City. The group is likely to continue to attack civilians and other soft
targets in the capital whenever possible in order to garner media attention and
undermine the Government of Iraq.
28. In late January, the Government of Iraq announced the killing of Da’esh deputy
leader Jabir Salman Saleh Al-Isawi (aka Abu Yasir). In February, the leader of Da’esh
in southern Iraq, Jabbar Ali Fayadh (aka Abu Hasan Al-Gharibawy), was killed, along
with Ghanem Sabbah, who had trained the suicide bombers responsible for the
January attack in Baghdad.
29. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant – Yemen (QDe.166) has suffered losses in
fighting with rival groups. It has been in decline for an extended period and is
assessed to be preoccupied with stabilizing itself and regrouping. One Member State
estimated its fighting strength at just a few hundred. Its most likely future attacks are
expected to take place in the south of Yemen, especially against government figures
located in or moving to Aden.

3.

Europe
30. The first half of 2021 saw a reduced threat level in Europe with fewer terrorist
attacks. Member States, however, do not expect that trend to continue, as the threat
from organized individuals planning complex attacks remains. In February 2021, 14
people were arrested in Denmark and Germany for planning attacks with explosive
chemicals. Authorities in France arrested individuals of foreign origin with profiles
similar to those who had perpetrated or planned attacks in France in 2020. They were
not found to be acting under direct orders from Da’esh or Al-Qaida leadership, but
were inspired by propaganda and local community members who promoted violent
ideology. Two cells consisting of individuals of Chechen background were dismantled
in eastern France in April and May 2021, respectively.
31. Authorities in Europe highlighted the challenge posed by teenagers, who are
particularly vulnerable to online propaganda. There have been cases involving teens

6/16

21-09834

S/2021/682

as young as 14 years of age who expressed willingness to conduct or facilitate terrorist
attacks. Such individuals are susceptible to incitement to violence in cases of
perceived instances of blasphemy. False information and accusations are also used
online to pressure individuals or entities that are considered enemies.
32. Terrorist radicalization in European prisons remains a serious challenge. The
isolation of terrorist inmates is often not sustainable for practical reasons and there
are resource limitations to post-incarceration monitoring. In some cases, prisoners
reported approaching detention as an ordeal that enabled them to deepen their
commitment to their beliefs. Some reportedly profile and recruit impressionable soon to-be released prisoners, who will then have more freedom of action to plan and carry
out attacks independently.
4.

Asia
Central and South Asia
33. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant – Khorasan (QDe.161) has expanded its
presence in several provinces of Afghanistan, despite leadership, human and financial
losses during 2020. The group has strengthened its positions in and around Kabul,
where it targets most of its attacks against minorities, civil society actors, government
employees and personnel of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. Most
recently, Da’esh claimed responsibility for the brutal attack of 8 June in which 10
humanitarian deminers were killed and 16 injured in Baghlan Province. One of the
main risks identified by Member States is that militants in Afghanistan, from the
Taliban or other groups, may join the Da’esh affiliate if they feel alienated or
threatened by developments in the Afghan peace process.
34. In its efforts to regroup and rebuild, Da’esh in Afghanistan has prioritized the
recruitment and training of new supporters. Its leaders also hope to attract intransigent
Taliban and other militants who reject the agreement between the United States and
the Taliban and to recruit fighters from Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and other
conflict zones. Estimates of the affiliate’s strength range widely, with one Member
State reporting between 500 and 1,500 fighters, and another stating that it may rise to
as many as 10,000 in the medium term. One Member State reported that Da’esh in
Afghanistan is largely underground and clandestine.
35. On 6 May, in Maldives, the Speaker of Parliament and former President was
severely injured by a motorcycle-borne improvised explosive device. The blast also
injured three other people. The sixteenth issue of the Da’esh English -language
magazine Sawt al-Hind 6 (Voice of Hind), dated 16 May 2021, introduced a regular
column entitled “From the Brothers in Maldives”, urging supporters to break
prisoners out of jail or support them in other ways.
South-East Asia
36. Da’esh affiliates in South-East Asia continue to disturb counter-terrorism
operations with a steady pace of attacks. Women in the region continue to play a role
in both the planning and the execution of terrorist acts. A young couple, both
supporters of Jamaah Ansharut Daulah (QDe.164), attacked a church in Makassar,
Indonesia, on Palm Sunday, on 28 March 2021, killing themselves and injuring 20
people. This is the most recent in a series of attacks attributed to Da’esh affiliates in
South-East Asia targeting churchgoers.
37. On 20 March 2021, Philippine security forces succeeded in rescuing a group of
hostages held by the Abu Sayyaf Group (QDe.001) for approximately one year.

__________________
6

21-09834

See S/2021/68, para. 69.
7/16

S/2021/682

During the intervention, they killed a key leader and tactician of the group who was
known for maritime kidnap-for-ransom operations in the region. In April, two of the
Group’s members were killed in a clash with Philippine soldiers in Patikul.
Nevertheless, despite attrition, it remains resilient; with only approximately 100
fighters, it is estimated to be responsible for 75 per cent of the terror attacks in the
region. In February 2021, Philippine security forces arrested nine women on Jolo
Island who were reportedly preparing suicide bomb attacks targeted at soldiers. Three
of those women are the daughters of the late Group leader, Hatib Hajan Sawadjaan,
who had planned the attack carried out against the Jolo cathedral in January 2019.

III. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
A.

Overview
38. Since the previous report, the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to dominate
the geopolitical landscape and hamper efforts to prevent and counter terrorism and
the underlying spread of violent extremism in full compliance with international law.
Member States and United Nations experts have continued to raise concerns that
pandemic-related social restrictions, economic challenges and political tensions risk
exacerbating existing grievances, which terrorist groups, including Da’esh, seek to
exploit. The pandemic has also aggravated challenging humanitarian situations in
many parts of the world.
39. The evolution of Da’esh and its affiliates, including their regional expansion in
West, East and Central Africa, continued violent action in Afghanistan and an
increasing online presence, highlights the need for Member States to adopt
comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism approaches. Strengthened national,
regional and international counter-terrorism efforts are essential, in particular in view
of the similar vulnerabilities of some States in those regions.
40. In order to address the differentiated impact of the threats that Da’esh and its
affiliates pose to women and girls, a gender perspective is required. The United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) partnered with Burkina Faso, Kenya, the
African Union Commission, the Economic Community of West African States and
the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding to develop a toolkit on how to generate
gender-disaggregated data to inform gender-sensitive responses to threats posed by
Da’esh and its affiliates.
41. From 28 to 30 June, more than 2,000 participants representing 147 Member States,
28 international and regional organizations, 88 civil society and private sector
organizations and 38 United Nations entities attended the second United Nations High level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States. In
addition, some 10,000 participants took part in 36 side events held by the United Nations
system in partnership with Member States, regional organizations and civil society.
42. The development of advanced technologies to assist Member State s in
identifying foreign terrorist fighters and other individuals linked to terrorism is
encouraging, as showcased during the second United Nations High -level Conference
on Counter-Terrorism, during which the impact of transformative technologies on
terrorism and counter-terrorism was discussed. However, many challenges remain,
including ensuring comprehensive, human rights-compliant and gender-sensitive
border management strategies and the responsible use of new technologies. Member
States should also improve their efforts to identify female foreign terrorist fighters
and make better use of information collected from conflict zones and made available
to their law enforcement officials through the International Criminal Police
Organization channels.

8/16

21-09834

S/2021/682

43. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has made notable
progress in developing new analytical tools to help to monitor the implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions by Member States. On 3 March, the Counter Terrorism Committee approved the revised overview of implementation assessment
and the electronic detailed implementation survey, developed by the Executive
Directorate in accordance with resolution 2395 (2017), to streamline the latter’s
assessments, improve their utility for the design of technical assistance and facilitate
the real-time production of analysis and reports.

B.

Suspected Da’esh fighters and their family members in
conflict zones

1.

Current situation
44. The dire situation faced by individuals with alleged links to United Nations designated terrorist groups continues to be a significant concern. Thousands of such
individuals, mainly women and children with presumed family links to foreign
terrorist fighters, remain stranded in crowded camps in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic, with limited access to basic humanitarian and essential services, due
process and fair trial, and subject to other violations of their fundamental rights and
freedoms. Those concerns have grown only more acute with the restrictions imposed
to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Individuals associated with terrorist groups are
suspected of being responsible for an increase in violence in the camps, including
enforced disappearances and other human rights abuses.
45. Forced returns, the prevention of return and the discriminatory treatment of
families with a perceived link to Da’esh also remain significant concerns and could
have an impact on reconciliation and social cohesion efforts and result in secondary
displacement. Further efforts are needed to create conditions under which Da’esh
violence can be prevented, its appeal dampened and respect for human rights and the
rule of law promoted.
46. The United Nations system has made progress in operationalizing the Global
Framework led by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Children’s
Fund to provide coordinated, “all-of-United Nations” support to requesting Member
States on the protection, voluntary repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of individuals with suspected links to United Nations -designated
terrorist groups returning from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Deployment of the
support mechanism has begun in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan,
while a scoping exercise has been undertaken to support Iraq.

2.

Repatriation efforts
47. United Nations entities have continued to engage with Member States to
promote the safe, voluntary and human rights-compliant repatriation of their nationals
from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Although some States have proactively
repatriated hundreds of their nationals, predominantly women and children, the pace
of repatriation from the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic remains slow, and
many States continue to conduct repatriation on an ad hoc rather than comprehensive
basis and to limit repatriation to orphaned or unaccompanied children. The consent
of relevant Governments for any activity to be undertaken in territories under thei r
control is a paramount importance in all repatriation efforts.

3.

Investigation and prosecution
48. Violations of the right to a fair trial remain a serious concern. They include
ineffective legal representation, overreliance on confessions and allega tions of the

21-09834

9/16

S/2021/682

use of torture in prosecutions, including to obtain statements, under counter-terrorism
legal frameworks. The use of the death penalty in cases not reaching the threshold of
most serious crimes required by applicable international human rights law 7 is also a
matter of significant concern.
49. United Nations entities have continued to work with relevant stakeholders to
address gaps in national legislation and strengthen criminal justice responses. In
sub-Saharan Africa, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate continued to promote
effective cooperation in investigations and prosecutions at the national and local
levels in Nigeria and the Lake Chad basin. UNODC launched a new p roject to assist
stakeholders in Morocco in conducting human rights-compliant investigations and
ensuring appropriate trial management standards for young people, women and
family members suspected of involvement in terrorist activities, including in relat ion
to the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. UNODC also concluded a regional
project on strengthening criminal justice responses against foreign terrorist fighters
in the Middle East, North Africa and South-Eastern Europe and assisted the Kurdistan
Regional Government in Iraq by reviewing the compliance of a counter-terrorism law
with international legal standards and international human rights law.
50. The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) finalized its
initial case briefs addressing the attacks against the Yazidi community in the Sinjar
region and the mass killings perpetrated at Tikrit Air Academy in 2014. The Team
also increased its examination of internal Da’esh documentation extracted from
digital devices formerly used by Da’esh, obtained through cooperation with the Iraqi
authorities. UNITAD reached an agreement with the Supreme Judicial Council of Iraq
to support Iraqi investigative judges in developing case files for the prosecution of
Da’esh members for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
4.

Rehabilitation and reintegration
51. United Nations entities have continued to promote comprehensive and tailored
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies. In March, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and UNODC held a regional
workshop in that regard, in cooperation with the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
emphasizing the importance of gender-responsive approaches. Participants
recommended that coordination be strengthened between criminal justice and
non-criminal justice authorities, as well as between national and local authorities.
52. In January, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) released a
report on “The Right to Education in Iraq, Part Two: Obstacles to Girls’ Education
after ISIL” to assist the efforts of the Government of Iraq and the United Nations
country team to strengthen child protection. The United Nations Interregional Crime
and Justice Research Institute and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, through its United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, began the initial phase of a project on the
management of violent extremist prisoners in Iraq. In March, the Institute delivered
a training in Mali on the use of risk assessment tools for such prisoners, within the
framework of a project on disengagement and reintegration.
53. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) provided assistance on
reintegration to Member States, including the Government of Iraq, in the developme nt
and implementation of national action plans and a pilot project to promote the
reintegration of returnees. IOM notably supported awareness-raising and registration
efforts for families in need of tribal reconciliation, in partnership with the Tribal

__________________
7

10/16

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, art. 6 (2).
21-09834

S/2021/682

Affairs Directorate of the Government of Iraq. It also supported the Lake Chad Basin
countries with developing and implementing disengagement, rehabilitation and
reintegration processes for men and women exiting terrorist groups, using virtual or
hybrid workshops and training sessions.
54. There remain a significant need for mental health and psychosocial
rehabilitation and reintegration support to address, inter alia, gaps in national capacity
and a lack of comprehensive strategies, effective programmatic par tnership and
evidence-based methodologies, as well as challenges in ensuring compliance with
international law and conformity with applicable international standards.

C.

Criminal justice and international legal cooperation
55. Since the previous report, Member States and United Nations entities have
continued to demonstrate progress and develop good practices in international and
regional counter-terrorism cooperation. It is encouraging that some Member States
have continued to share information relating to judicial cooperation, including
guidelines on domestic laws and procedures relating to mutual legal assistance and
extradition in terrorism cases.
56. UNODC and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate held a
series of workshops to strengthen international cooperation on investigations,
following a request by the Lake Chad Basin Commission. The nexus between
organized crime and terrorism remains an issue of concern. In that regard, UNODC
delivered online trainings to criminal justice officials from the Middle East, East
Africa and Nigeria on the international law frameworks for countering the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, based on its new publication entitled
Counter-Terrorism in the International Law Context. UNODC produced several other
publications, including Foreign Terrorist Fighters: Manual for Judicial Training
Institutes – Middle East and North Africa, and a research study entitled “Strengthening
the Capacity of Women Professionals Working in the Counter-Terrorism Sector in
Iraq”. UNODC continued to strengthen gender mainstreaming and women’s rights in
counter-terrorism, jointly with the Executive Directorate, the Office of CounterTerrorism and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. In partnership with the N ational
Association of Women Judges of Nigeria, UNODC delivered training to 51 Nigerian
female judges on strengthening accountability for sexual and gender-based violence
in the context of terrorism.
57. In February, the Office of Counter-Terrorism launched with the Sudan and the
European Union the United Nations-European Union Counter-Terrorism Partnership for
the Sudan, which is aimed at helping the Sudanese authorities and civil society to
develop knowledge and capacity to prevent and counter terrorism in accordance with
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions and international
human rights law. The Office deployed a project team to Khartoum, in consultation with
the Resident Coordinator and at the request of the Sudanese authorities, to facilitate
engagement with national stakeholders and United Nations entities in the country.
58. In March, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Office of Counter-Terrorism provided technical assistance to Maldives on enhancin g
the use of the Internet and social media in counter-terrorism investigations. The
Executive Directorate and UNODC also continued to tailor their South Asia Regional
Toolkit for Judges to the national contexts of Maldives and Pakistan.
59. The United Nations entities have continued to actively disseminate the
Guidelines to facilitate the use and admissibility as evidence in national criminal
courts of information collected, handled, preserved and shared by the military to
prosecute terrorist offences. There continues to be significant practical challenges,

21-09834

11/16

S/2021/682

especially in the Sahel, in increasing cooperation among military, investigative and
criminal justice institutions, which can be instrumental to bring terrorists to justice.

D.

Supporting victims of Da’esh
60. Ensuring holistic approaches to transitional justice remain essential to
upholding the rights of victims of terrorism in conflict settings, including through a
focus on strengthening intercommunal initiatives, in particular in areas with mixed
populations. To that end, the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary -General
on the Prevention of Genocide and UNITAD launched an interfaith dialogue series,
which is aimed at providing a forum for Iraqi religious communities to rebuild trust
and understanding and address the challenges faced by survivors.
61. As part of its efforts to enhance psychosocial support to witnesses, UNITAD
collaborated with Sesame Workshop, a psychoeducational resource and therapeutic
material provider, to use storytelling in its engagement with vulnerable children.
UNITAD also supported the establishment of the Witness Protection Department of
the Government of Iraq and launched in May the Trauma-Informed Investigations
Field Guide to promote a trauma-informed approach.
62. Children continue to be targeted by Da’esh in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
and suffer from the impact of landmines left in areas previously occupied by Da’esh
and the consequences of the atrocities committed by Da’esh, including abduction and
sexual violence. The action plan signed between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the de facto authorities in the
north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic has facilitated dialogue on several issues,
including improving access to children in displacement camps. UNODC assisted the
authorities in Indonesia, Iraq and Nigeria with preventing and responding to terrorist
violence committed against children, and also launched projects to enhance the
capacity of the Iraqi authorities to support the right of victims of terrorism during
criminal proceedings.
63. Iraqi nationals returning from the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including Yazidi survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, have left behind children
born from rape by Da’esh fighters, owing to stigma and the difficulty of obtaining
identity documents. This challenge requires a coordinated and sustained response based
on human rights and the best interest of the child, and should include health care,
psychosocial support, socioeconomic reintegration measures and legal support.
64. The enactment of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law by the Federal Parliament
of Iraq on 1 March, following the engagement of and support from UNAMI, IOM and
the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, is a major step in addressing the gender-specific needs of survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence. Further efforts are now needed to ensure the effective
implementation of the law in a non-discriminatory and survivor-centred manner. In
those efforts, Iraq would benefit from the international community support.
65. Finding missing persons, including individuals trafficked across borders,
continues to be a significant concern. The lack of accountability for the enforced
disappearances of individuals suspected of Da’esh affiliation from screening centres,
at checkpoints and in displacement camps undermines protection and counterterrorism efforts. UNAMI has worked closely with the United Nations treaty body
mechanisms, including the Committee on Enforced Disappearances and the Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, to support the efforts of the
Government of Iraq to meet its international human rights obligations in t hat area.

12/16

21-09834

S/2021/682

E.

Countering the financing of terrorism
66. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate’s analysis suggests
that the impact of counter-pandemic measures on money-transfer networks may push
terrorists and terrorist groups, including Da’esh, into exploring alternative methods
of moving funds. 8 The use of social media crowdfunding campaigns for Da’esh
fighters and, ostensibly, their relatives in camps in the Syrian Arab Republic also
remains an ongoing challenge (see S/2021/68).
67. Given concerns that the tightening of measures by some Member States for
anti-money-laundering and combating the financing of terrorism during the pandemic
could have a negative impact on non-profit organizations and emergency
humanitarian aid, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact entities continued to cooperate on a joint initiative co -led by the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the Global Counterterrorism Forum to identify and
disseminate good practices for combating the financing of terrorism while
safeguarding civic space.
68. Relevant United Nations entities also continued to cooperate under the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre Global Coordinated Programme on Detecting,
Preventing and Countering the Financing of Terrorism launched in response to
Security Council resolution 2462 (2019). The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and other United Nations entities continue to cooperate with
the Financial Action Task Force and Financial Action Task Force-style regional
bodies on global and regional anti-money-laundering/combating the financing of
terrorism trends; investigating and prosecuting the financing of terrorism; the
digitalization of anti-money-laundering/combating the financing of terrorism efforts
and addressing the subsequent data-protection concerns; links between terrorism
financing and illicit arms trafficking; and mitigating unin tended consequences of
Financial Action Task Force standards implementation.
69. Addressing terrorism financing through the illicit trade in natural resources in
Africa remains a priority issue. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate supported the Eastern and
Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group in implementing its regional
operational plan for combating the financing of terrorism by delivering workshops
and contributing to its meetings. The Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money
Laundering Group notably launched a typologies project on illicit dealings in gold,
diamond and rubies and associated money-laundering/terrorist financing in the
Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group region. The Executive
Directorate participated in the Technical Commission/plenary meeting of the
Intergovernmental Action Group against Money Laundering in West Africa.
70. UNODC launched a new project on the disruption of terrorism financing and
targeted financial sanctions against terrorist entities in Mozambique and produced a
manual for Morocco on effective financial investigations in terrorism financing cases.
UNITAD has completed an initial case brief identifying entities that facilitated crimes by
providing financial services to Da’esh, and it continues to investigate the group’s
“treasury department” through its analysis of Da’esh revenue generation from illicit
markets.

__________________
8

21-09834

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, “The impact of the COVID -19 pandemic
on terrorism, counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism”, June 2020, December 2021
(update) and June 2021 (update).
13/16

S/2021/682

F.

Border management and law enforcement
71. United Nations entities continued to support efforts to increase the border
management capacity of Member States. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in partnership
with relevant international and regional organizations and the private sector, have
developed a joint initiative on maritime security, which will explore challenges posed
by crimes committed at sea, including in relation to international and cross -border
cooperation, national coordination, information-sharing and linkages between
terrorism and transnational organized crime.
72. The multi-agency United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme led
by the Office of Counter-Terrorism continued to assist the implementation by Member
States of advance passenger information and passenger name record systems, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482
(2019), relevant international standards and human rights and privacy safeguards. The
Programme held three comprehensive virtual assessments for Djibouti, Mongolia and
South Africa and interactive online trainings for Sierra Leone, the Gambia and
Member States of the Southern African Development Community (SADC). Since
January, Nigeria, Norway, the Republic of Moldova and South Africa have joined the
programme, bringing the number of beneficiaries to 42, includin g Iraq, where
engagement started on the basis of the findings of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate assessment that was carried out in 2018 on behalf of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. IOM also assisted Iraq in its efforts to modernize its
border infrastructure by equipping it with the Migration Information and Data
Analysis System for identity verification and biometric collection.
73. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and its partners continued,
through outreach and capacity-building activities, to support Member States in
preventing terrorists from acquiring both conventional and non -conventional
weapons. The Centre, together with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Office for Disarmament Affairs and UN ODC, continued to analyse
the capacities of Central Asian States to prevent and combat the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons and their illicit supply to terrorists, while also delivering
related tailored workshops and training.
74. Within the framework of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
continued to develop technical guidelines for Member States to facilitate the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2370 (2017) and related international
standards and good practices on preventing terrorists from acquiring weap ons.
75. In January, the Office of Counter-Terrorism launched the Global Programme on
Countering Terrorist Threats against Vulnerable Targets, in partnership with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations. The Programme will develop guidance materials and update the
Compendium of good practices on the protection of critical infrastructures against
terrorist attacks.
76. The global Programme on National-level Interagency Coordination
Mechanisms (commonly known as “Fusion Cells”) of the Office of Counter-Terrorism
completed a series of virtual study visits during which experts from counter-terrorism
centres in Belgium, Colombia, Norway, the Russian Federation and Spain, as well as
the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation and the Norwegian
Centre for Human Rights, delivered lectures to programme beneficiaries. The

14/16

21-09834

S/2021/682

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate also conducted virtual missions
to Botswana, Ghana, Uganda and SADC. In Nigeria, UNODC and the Executive
Directorate trained law enforcement officers in the application of international best
practices regarding intelligence collection and analysis.
77. In Iraq, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre conducted a virtual tabletop exercise on a bioterrorism incident for Iraqi authorities and a training workshop
using virtual reality exercises on countering clandestine chemical and biological threats.

G.

Countering terrorist narratives and engaging communities to
prevent and counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism
78. United Nations entities continued to provide Member States with a range of
capacity-building and technical assistance to prevent and counter violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. In June, UNDP organized the Oslo III virtual conference on
the prevention of violent extremism to distil lessons for future research, policy and
programming and to develop new prevention approaches. In Central Asia, South-East
Asia, South Asia, Iraq and Mozambique, UNODC delivered a number of programmes
on preventing and countering violent extremism, including on strengthening gender
mainstreaming and women’s rights and empowerment in preventing and cou ntering
violent extremism and counter-terrorism efforts. In Africa, UNODC partnered in
those efforts with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
79. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre provided vocational training to
young people in Fallujah, Iraq, as part of efforts to strengthen resilience to Da’esh
ideology and recruitment attempts. In March, UNODC launched “STRIVE Juvenile”,
a technical assistance project to increase the resilience of children, families,
communities and civil society to violent extremism and terrorist recruitment attempts
in Indonesia, Iraq and Nigeria. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) continued to implement its “Reviving the spirit of
Mosul” initiative and launched a project entitled “Gendered approach to preventing
violent extremism in Iraq through education”.
80. In Africa, UNESCO continued to support Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger in
preventing violent extremism through teacher development and initiated a study to
identify mechanisms that could enable young people to act as peace agents in their
communities. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali established networks of local civil society organizations to enhance the
protection of international human rights and humanitarian law issues through training
and capacity-building.
81. To address the increased risks, especially among young people, of exposure to
online content inciting hatred or violence, UNDP provided support on the use of
technology to identify hate speech content in Bangladesh, Georgia, Maldives,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka, the Sudan and Tunisia, assisting the authorities to adopt targeted
and human rights-compliant responses to the risk.
82. In June, United Nations entities, in partnership with Member States and other
stakeholders, hosted a range of side events on countering terrorist narratives,
preventing and countering violent extremism and new technologies during the second
Counter-Terrorism Week held at the United Nations, exploring such issues as
transparency in content moderation and online and artificial intelligence tools for
preventing and countering violent extremism, addressing and countering hate speech
and violent extremism through education in a digital world and preventing the misuse
of new communication platforms.

21-09834

15/16

S/2021/682

IV. Observations
83. The three reports issued since the outbreak of COVID-19 on the threat posed by
Da’esh, the reports of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and the
analytical papers from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate 9 have
illustrated how Da’esh and other terrorist groups have taken advantage of the
disruption, grievances and development setbacks caused by the unprecedented global
crisis, both online and on the ground. The further expansion of Da’esh in many
regions of Africa since the beginning of 2021 is alarming. It highlights that the
interplay between terrorism, fragility and conflict has grown stronger, and
underscores the need for an urgent, global response to support African countries and
regional organizations. Member States had already warned that Da’esh could regain
the ability to orchestrate international attacks if either its core or one of its regional
affiliates became strong enough. This scenario has only become more plausible.
84. I remain deeply concerned about the untenable situation in camps and detention
facilities in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, which hold individuals with
suspected links to Da’esh and other terrorist groups designated by the Security Council.
While recent actions by a few Governments to repatriate some affected children are
welcome, I reiterate my call upon Member States for the volunta ry repatriation of all
concerned individuals, with a particular focus on women and children, in line with
international law and with the consent of relevant Governments as a paramount
consideration in all such efforts. The increase in violence in the camps, reported terrorist
radicalization efforts and the risk of large, orchestrated escapes are a reminder that
inaction is not an option to ensure either human rights, security or accountability.
85. Moreover, as pandemic-related restrictions gradually ease, there is an elevated,
near-term threat of Da’esh-inspired attacks outside conflict zones by lone actors or
small groups that have been radicalized, incited and possibly directed remotely
online. This exemplifies the wider and evolving risks associated with the digital
transition, which has accelerated during the pandemic, and the potential for new and
emerging technologies to be used for terrorist purposes. Cybersecurity needs a robust
reboot to face the next iteration of digitally enabled terrorism. Intern ational
cooperation, effective governance in line with international law and innovative
partnerships with the private sector and civil society will be decisive considerations
to prevent and counter terrorism in the digital era. Rising to that challenge was the
focus of the second United Nations High-level Conference on Counter-Terrorism.
86. I am encouraged by the adoption by consensus of General Assembly resolution
75/291, concluding the seventh review of the United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy. I welcome the comprehensive and forward-looking nature of that
review, which took into consideration previous reports, 10 and the updated Strategy on
its fifteenth anniversary. The United Nations system, through the Global Counter Terrorism Coordination Compact, will continue to support Member States in their
efforts to tackle the scourge of Da’esh, guided by the upd ated Strategy and relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

__________________
9
10

16/16

Ibid.
A/74/677, A/75/729 and A/75/729/Corr.1.
21-09834
