General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

22

(c) To continue to examine the compliance of Member
States with the Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
Namibia;
(a) To continue to pay particular attention to the small
Territories, including the sending of visiting missions
thereto, as appropriate, and to recommend to the General
Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise their right to
self-determination, freedom and independence;
(e) To take all necessary steps to enlist world-wide support among Governments, as well as national and international organizations having a special interest in decolonization.
in the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and
in the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, particularly as concerns the oppressed people of Namibia;
13. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue
to co-operate with the Special Committee in the discharge
of its mandate and, in particular, to permit the access of
visiting missions to the Territories to secure first-hand information and ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their
inhabitants;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for
the implementation of the present resolution, as well as of
the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization
adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee.
79th plenary meeting
I December /98/

36/69.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question
of publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field
of decolonization,3 5
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 35/120 of 11 December 1980,
Reiterating the imj)Ortance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration and
mindful of the continuing pressing need for taking all possible steps to acquaint world public opinion with all aspects
of the problems of decolonization with a view to assisting
effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories to achieve
self-determination, freedom and independence,
Aware of the increasingly important role being played in
the widespread dissemination of relevant information by a
number of non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in decolonization,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question
of publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field
of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest possible dissemination of information on the evils and dangers
35

Ibid., chap. II.

of colonialism, on the determined efforts of the colonial
peoples to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence and on the assistance being provided by the international community towards the elimination of the
remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to the
suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take
concrete measures through all the media at his disposal,
including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic material,
studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical
Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles
and studies, including the Decolonization series, and to
select from them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering
Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks referred to
above;
(c) To intensify the activities of all information centres,
particularly those located in western Europe and the
Americas;
(<i) To maintain a close working relationship with the
Organization of African Unity by holding periodic consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization;
(e) To enlist the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization in the
dissemination of the relevant information;
(f) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities
and services in this regard;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures
taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Invites all States. the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to undertake or intensify, in co-operation with the
Secretary-General and within their respective spheres of
competence, the large-scale dissemination of the information referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
79th plenary meeting
I December /981

36/78.

United Nations Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/4 of 2 November 1978, 34/
63 of 29 November I 979 and 35/1 12 of 5 December 1980,
in which it decided to convene in 1983 the United Nations
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy,
Reaffirming the principles and provisions of its resolution
32/50 of 8 December 1977 on the peaceful use of nuclear
energy for economic and social development,
Stressing, in particular, the relevance of the principles
set forth in paragraph I of resolution 32/50 for the preparation of the Conference and for the Conference itself,
Recalling also the relevant paragraphs of the Final Doc-

II.

ument of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 36 the first special session devott:d to disarmament,
Recalling further the role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency set out in General Assembly resolution
34/63,
Recognizing the increasing significance of the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy for economic and social development, in particular its important role in accelerating the
development of the developing countries,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States that are advanced
in the nuclear field to promote the legitimate nuclear energy
needs of the developing countries by participating in the
fullest possible transfer of nuclear equipment, materials and
technology under agreed and appropriate international safeguards applied through the International Atomic Energy
Agency on a non-discriminatory basis in order to prevent
effectively the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Expressing its conviction that the Confere,1ce, through
the promotion of international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, should contribute greatly to meeting
the increasing energy and other requirements of many countries, particularly developing ones.
Further expressing its conviction that progress in the work
of the Committee on Assurances of Supply, established by
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency in June 1980, will greatly contribute to the success
of the Conference,
Stressing the need for timely and adequate preparations
for the Conference,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference, 37
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference
for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy;
2. Endorses the recommendations of the Preparatory
Committee contained in the annex to its report;
3. Decides that the Conference shall be held at Geneva
from 29 August to 9 September 1983;
4. Considers that the outcome of the Conference should
be embodied in appropriate documents, in a suitable format,
pertaining, inter alia, to ways and means of promoting
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear

energy;
5. Recognizes that the Preparatory Committee, in order
to advance its work, including as appropriate the preparation
of the documents referred to in paragraph 4 above for submission to and approval by the Conference, may need to
extend the duration of its second session, to be held at
Vienna in 1982, and also to hold a further session of appropriate duration in 1982;
6. Reaffirms its decision, as contained in paragraph 2
of General Assembly resolution 35/112, to take account of
the results of the work of the Committee on Assurances of

Supply;
7. Requests the President of the General Assembly to
finaliz~ the appointment of the members of the Preparatory
Committee, m accordance with the principle of equitable
geographical representation, not later than 30 April 1982;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the establishment,· at the appropriate
time, of a small secretariat for the Conference. to be headed
by a Secretary-General of the Conference;
9. Urges all States to contribute to the successful prep36

23

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Resolution S- I0/2.
Official Records of the General Assemhlv, Thirtv-sixth Sessum, Supplement No. 48 (A/36/48).

aration of the Conference by, inter alia, making available,
in conformity with international obligations, information on
their scientific and technological achievements and practical
experiences in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy;
IO. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so
to communicate to the Secretary-General, not later than 30
April 1982, their views on the matters relevant to the preparation and organization of the Conference;
11. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency to
fulfil its appropriate role within the scope of its responsibilities at all stages of preparation of the Conference, and
during the Conference itself, by contributing to the discussion of relevant issues, by providing technical data and
documentation as needed, particularly in relation to the
progress of the work of the Committee on Assurances of
Supply, and by participating in the secretariat of the
Conference;
I 2. Further invites specialized agencies and other relevant organizations of the United Nations system to contribute effectively to the preparations for the Conference by,
inter alia, making available studies, reports and other appropriate documents concerning the applications of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. as well as the results and
future prospects of such applications;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Preparatory Committee all the communications received
from Member States and to assist the Committee by providing it with all necessary facilities for its work;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "Preparation of the
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy:
report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".
90th plenary meeting
9 December 1981
*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequemly inf,mned rhe
Secretar_v-General" that. in ac, ordance with ,wragraph 7 of' the ahove
resolution, he had appointed Ireland, the frory Coast, the Niger. Nigeria.
Senegal and the United Republic <if Cameroon as members of the Prt'paratory Committee for the Uni1ed Nwions Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in !he Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energ1·.
As a resul!, the Preparatorv Committee is composed of !he fo/lowinK
Member States: ALGERIA, ARGF.NTINA, AUSTRALIA. AUSTRIA, BELGIUM,
BRAZIL. BULGARIA, BYELORUSSIAN SOVIET SonALIST REPUBLIC, CANADA, CHIU., CHINA, COLOMBIA, COSTA RICA, CUBA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA,
DENMARK, ECUADOR, EGYPT, FINLAND, FRANCE, GERMAN OEM<X'RA flC
REPUBLIC. GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONESIA, [RAQ, IRELAND, fTALY, [V0RY
COASl. JAPAN, LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, MAURITANIA, MOROCCO, NETHERLANDS, NIGER. NIGERIA, NORWAY, PAKISTAN, f>ERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, SPAIN, SRI
LANKA, SWEDEN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, THAILAND, TURKEY. UKRAINIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC. UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON, UNITED STAfES
OF AMERICA, URUGUAY. YENEZl'ELA, YtJGOSLAVIA and ZAIRE.

'36/79.

Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea

The General Assembly.
Recal!ini ib resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November
1973. 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974. 3483 (XXX) of

37

"Al36/880
