1
TWENTY-EIGHTH
nd

I

MEETING:

NEW

j:

YEAR

18 JULY

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page,

Provisional

. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
(n) Application
of the Commonwe&h
of the Bahamas for admission to membership
in the United Nations:
Telegram dated 10 July 1973 from the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas to the Secretary-General (S/10966);
(b) Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Commonwealth of #the Bahamas for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/10968)
. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/1732)

S/PI’.1732

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a
United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indica,tes the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resodutions and Decisions of
the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to
resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965’, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-SECOND

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 18 July 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. K. JAMIESON
(United Kingdom
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

of

of the Security Council, The report of the Committee
on the Admission of New Members is now before the
Council in document S/10968. Members will see that
in its report the Committee recommends to the Council
the adoption of a draft resolution whereby the Security Council would recommend to the General Assembly that the Commonwealth of the Bahamas be admitted to membership of the United Nations,

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Yugoslavia.
Provisional

agenda

2. Since no member of the Council wishes to speak at
this stage, I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution recommended in paragraph 3 of the Committee’s
report.

(§/Agenda/1732)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

Admission of new Members:
of the Commonwealth
of the
(a) Application
Bahamas for admission to membership in the
United Nations :
Telegram dated 10 July 1973 from the
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas to the Secretary-General (S/10966);
(b) Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of
the Commonwe,alth of the Bahamas for admission to membership in the United Nations S/
10968).
Adoption

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimous1y.l

3. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on the representatives who have asked to be allowed to speak following the vote on the draft resolution.
4. Mr. FAKIH (Kenya) : Mr. President, I take this
opportunity to greet you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July, I am
confident that like the previous occupier of this high
office, the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, whom I also congratulate for the
manner in which he conducted our discussions, you will
guide our work with distinction and wisdom, My delegation stands ready to co-operate with you in the
discharge of your duties. I am happy to note that the
first question to come before the Council during your
presidency is the consideration of the admission of a
new Member, the Commonwealth of the Bahamas,
a former British colony, inbo the United Nations.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Aclmission of new members :
Application
of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas for admission to membership in
the United Nations :
Telegram dated 10 July 1973 from the
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas
to the Secretary-General
w
10966) ;
Report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members concerning the application
of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas for
admission to membership
in the United
Nations (,5/10968)

5. It is once again a happy occasion for me on behalf
of the Government and people of Kenya, less than
one month after my delegation made a statement of
welcome on the admission of the two Germanys, to
welcome a sister Commonwealth country, the B.ahamas,
and greet it as a new nation.
6. Kenya takes pride in the accession of the Bahamas
to independence on 10 July. We share in the joyous
moments of the people and Government of the Bahamas, It is a welcome coincidence to recall that in a
few months, during the tenth anniversary of independence on 12 December of this year, my own country will be renewing its ideals towards being a nation.
As a young nation, therefore, the Bahamas should feel
in the good company of many friendly countries from
all oontinents. For Kenya, there are certain definite

1. The PRESIDENT:
At our 1731st meeting, yesterday morning,
we referred the application of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas for membership of the
United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members for examination and report in accordance with rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure

1 Seeresolution 336 (1973).
1

tinities
between the two countries. Both know the
taste of imperial rule, both share deeply felt cultural
ties, both are in the commonwealth of nations? and
both are struggling to improve the quality of hfe of
their peoples in the economic, social and other fields. I
may also recall that both countries get enormous revenue
from tourism.
7. Although a small Caribbean country, with a population of about 190,000 on a land area of 5,382 square
miles, &the Bahamas will, my delegation is confident,
make an effective contribution in the affairs of Caribbean
countries and to the changing international
order
through its participation in the work of the United
Nations. We welcome it especially as an ally in our
crusading task against imperialism and coloniaIism in
Africa and elsewhere.
8. In our endeavours to devise a new order and
create worth-whiile conditions for men, Kenya will filly
co-operate with the Bahamas. It is therefore with JOY
that we have just voted to recommend the admission
of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas to the family of
nations in the United Nations, and we in Kenya look
forward to our countries making the bonds stronger
between us. For Kenya and the Bahamas, let us, in
the words of the latter’s nati,onad anthem: “March On”
to evolve and strengthen an international order for all
mankind.
9. And, for the United Kingdom, let us hope that
this happy example will encourage a redoubling of
efforts ,on the part of the United Kingdom and the rebel
authorities in Salisbury bo hasten the liquidation
of
rebellion and effect a peaceful transfer of independence to the majority of the people in Zimbabwe.
10. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Kenya for the kind remarks he addressed to me.
11. Mr. MOJSOV
(Yugoslavia):
Mr. President, I
should like first of all to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. My delegation will render all its assistance and
co-operation to you in the discharge of your important
task as President of the Security Council in the work
before us.
12. It gives me genuine pleasure to welcome, on
behalf of my country, the unanimous decision of the
Security Council to recommend to the General Assetw
bly the admission of a new State, the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas, to the United Nations, an important
event both for the people of the Bahamas and for our
Organization.
13. We .are actually welcoming on this occasion two
events: the proclamation of the independence of the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas and its entry into the
community of independent and sovereign States of the
world as well as the Security Council’s positive decision
to admit the Bahamas to membership of our Organization. Both those events constitute ,a further assertion of
the inalienable right of every people to self-determination and independence in general, and in particular in
a region where foreign domination had reigned supreme
for a very Zong time.
14. Even today, 13 years #after the adoption of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colo2

nial Countries and Peoples, a close look at the map 01
the Caribbean still reveals a multitude of colonial and
neo-colonial situations. Nevertheless, the struggle for
emancipation and independence has never ceased in
that part of the world. Significant successes have been
achieved, especiaPy in the last decade or so. Today
many countries of this region are independent States
Members of the United Nations which decide their
fate freely .and which, together with other countries,
participate on an equal footing in the taking of de&
sions of importance to the international
community,
15. We are gratified that the Bahamas, after a long
period of fore& domination, is joining- the ranks (of
these countries. Its independence constitutes a ne
step forward along the path of decolonization and stru:
gle of peoples for liberation. Its admission to the Uniti ed
Nations means the further strengthening of the role
1
of the Caribbean and, generally speaking, the Lat in
American countries in world affairs. The long proce sg
of national emancipation of the Bahamas has be{:n
completed-the
road leading from colonial subordin ation through relative autonomy to independence RI:Id
admission to the world Organization.
16. The decision of the Bahamas that its first in
portant step among the independent countries of fE
world should be its request to be admitted to Unite
Nations membership has confirmed once again th;
our Organization has become an irreplaceable instn
ment of international relations and co-operation an
an essential factor of democratization
of internation;
relations. Hardly a month has elapsed since the reconImendation for the admission of the Federal Republi ic
of Germany and the German Democratic
Republit
and the Security Council is again in the positio
warmly to recommend and welcome the admission a
yet another country to the United Nations, This i
really yet another tribute to our Organization, anothe
sign of its stability and strength, and a further stel
conducive to its full universality.
One can rightl;
expect that other States too which may express I
desire will be admitted to the United Nations in thi
near future. Full universaIity of the United Nalia~
is a goal <the attainment of which seems to be close,
than ever before.
17. By its request to be admitted to the Unitet
Nations the Commonwealth of the Bahamas has opted
for a constructive role in the present-day world
My country is convinced that the Bahamas will mab
a significant contribution towards the solving of the
problems with which our Organization is faced today,
18. Yugoslavia,, as an independent, sociaIist and nonaligned country, has always been interested in and
sympathetic to the advance of the forces of progrzss
everywhere. One of the basic tenets of its foreign
policy is precisely resistance to any form of exploitation, domination
or discrimination,
YugosIavia has
always supported and expressed its solidarity wid
every genuine struggle for national liberation, That is
why we shall whole-heartedIy
support and welcome
the independent Commonwealth
of the Bahamas as
a new member of the international
community and
of the United Nations,

19. Besides, Yugoslavia has been consistently aware
of the role of Caribbean and Latin American countries and peoples in world affairs because of its feeling
of affinity with some of the basic preoccupations ,and
problems of these countries and of the necessity to
establish strong and friendly ties with the countries
of that region. As a matter of fact, we share the same
supreme concerns for peace and peaceful coexistence,
for national independence and sovereignty and, especially, for equitable international political and economic
relations. That is the reason why we follow with particular sympathy the struggle for progress and for the
political and economic emancipation of ‘these countries
and that is why we are gratified to see the removal
of the remnants of colonialism and foreign domination
from that area, leading finally to their disappearance.
Every country in the Caribbean and in Latin America,
as well as every country in the world, has the right
to be the only sovereign owner and user of all of
its natural resources and to take decisions independently concerning their utilization for its own economic and social development.
20. I am proud to say that the links between my
country and the countries of that region are well
developed and very active indeed and I am personally
very happy that I have the honour to represent my
country as the accredited Ambassador in independent
Caribbean
countries. Yugoslavia has been constantly
developing
fruitful co-operation with them on the
basis of equality and mutual benefit. I am confident
that this co-operation will soon be developed with ,t.he
independent Bahamas too-co-operation
for which we
are fully prepared.
21. In conclusion, may I recall the role that the
non-aligned
movement has always played in lending
support to and achieving conditions for decolonization
and for the national emancipation of every country,,
particularly
small and medium-sized ones, including, of
course, the Caribbean countries? In this connexion
may I quote a passage from the Georgetown Declaration, which was adopted at the Conference of Foreign
Ministers
of Non-Aligned
Countries held in Georgetown, Guyana, in August 1972:
“Meeting
for the first time in the Caribbean
area, the Conference expressed full solidarity with
the peoples of that region who are still subject to
colonialism,
and demanded that their sacred and
inalienable
right to national independence be recognized.”
22. We hope that the other, still dependent Caribbean countries will soon follow the road taken by the
Bahamas-the
road leading to the achievement of full
independence and to integration into ,the family of the
United Nations.
I thank the representative of
23. The PRESIDENT:
Yugoslavia for the kind remarks he addressed to me.
I particularly
welcome the assurance of his co-operation in the future work of the Council this month,
knowing that his delegation has a significant contribution to make.
24. Mr, LA (Sudan) : Mr. President, my delegation
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate

you on the assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We are confident that under your stewardship
the Council will ‘conduct its business. We also assure
you of our co-operation during the remainder of your
term. May I take this opportunity also to thank
your predecessor, Ambassador Malik of the Soviet
Union, for the skilful manner in which he conducted
the business of the Council during the last term?
25. My delegation voted with particular pleasure
in support of the application of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas for membership of the United Nations.
The felicitations of the Sudan will be expressed later
this year at a higher level. Suffice it for me to say that
my delegation very much welcomes the contribution
that the Commonwealth of the Bahamas has solemnly
undertaken to make in joining the family of nations,
and my delegation looks forward to co-operating with
the delegation of the Bahamas,
26. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of Sudan for <the remarks he addressed to me and
welcome his assurance of co-operation.
27. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia) : Mr. President,
allow me to join previous speakers in offering you my
delegation’s sincere felicitations on your accession to
the presidency of the Council. My delegation is convinced that the success of our deliberations is assured
in your competent and experienced hands.
28. I should also like to express my delegation’s congratulations and thanks to the Council’s President for
the month of June, Ambassador Malik of the Soviet
Union, whose wise and firm guidance contributed so
much to the success of our work last month.
29. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity
to extend to the Government and people of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas Indonesia’s warm congratulations upon their attainment of independence on
10 July 1973. Independence for the Bahamas marks
the culmination of a long and orderly process. We
rejoice with the people of the Bahamas on the achievement of their independence.
30. As a sponsor of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) containing the DeclaratSon on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
as one of the members of the Special Committee
related to it,2 my delegation has closely followed the
developments which have finally led to the independence of the Bahamas. The endeavours of the
Government of the Bahamas to achieve progress for
its people in all walks of life are well known. We are
sure that independence wixll lead to f@her progress.
31. My delegation would also like to congratulate
the United Kingdom in successfully fulfilling its international obligation by granting independence to the
Bahamas,, thus acting in accordance with the wishes
of the people of the Bahamas.
32. This example of the United Kingdom is worthy
of emulation by those nations which continuously
2 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Indcpendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

3

39. For the Members of our Organization,
and in
parmticular for the permanent missions in New York,
the Bahamas is certainly not a distant and unknown
land. Furthermore, for the French and the British,
and also for the Dutch, <the attraction whiclr we fetl
towards the Bahamas is not a new thing, nor is ir
inspired soIeIy by publicity in the press. It all gm
back to the heroic age when the sailors of our countries plied the Caribbean for purposes not precizly
touristic in nature, nor, it must be confessed, ncec+
sarily connected with the maintenance of international
peace and security.

choose to defy the demands of the international community that they respect, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the right
of self-determination and independence of the peoples
in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories under thier
administration.
33. It was with great pleasure that my delegation
supported the application of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas, a sister archipelagic State, to membership
in the United Nations and voted for the draft resolution. All of us are aware that ,the presence of each
additional Member committed to peace and ,to the
principles of the Charter strengthens the fabric of
international order. Each new membership brings us
one step closer to the goal of universality.
34. My delegation hopes to welcome the Government and people of the Bahamas to the family of the
United Nations in an appropriate manner at the
coming session of the ,General Assembly. We look
forward to a fruitful co-operation with the Bahamas
in the United Nations and all its bodies.
35. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Indonesia for the kind remarks he addressed to me.
As representative of the United Kingdom, I also thank
him for his congratulations to my Government on
this occasion.
36. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation from French) : First of all I should like to convey
the gratitude of my delegation to Ambassador Malik,
who presided with ,the great authority and competence
of one of our leaders, over the difficult and important
debates which the Council held in the month of June.
This meeting, however, Mr. President, affords me the
first opportunity to address to you the congratulations
of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency,
which you have exercised since the beginning of this
month. If you have not had occasion to convene
meetings very often during the 18 days you have been
presiding, everyone here knows that nonetheless your
burden has not been as light as it might appear.
You may be assured that my delegation and I have
appreciated your ability and wisdom and the efforts
that you have undertaken during these three weeks
to prepare the work of nthe Council for the rest of
this month.
37. My delegation welcomes most warmly the application for admission to membership of the United
Nations submitted
by the Commonwealth
of the
Bahamas.
38. In achieving independence on 10 July last,, after
an evolutionary course conducted with wisdom and
vision by the United Kingdom, the administering
Power, the new State immediately expressed its wish
to join the 132 other Members of the international
community which form our Organization. The Government of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas announced at the same time that it accepted the obligations of the Charter and was ready to comply with
them. The French delegation has no doubt that that
Government is determined to fulfil that solemn undertaking. We therefore were only too willing to favour
the admission of the new State.

40. But these few reflections, prompted both by thy
physical and climatic characteristics of the Bahamx
and also the subject of our meeting, which for ~3~s
is neither grave nor troublesome, but, on the contrq,
happy and smiling, should not prevent us from
standing the fundamental
economic: and up
facts.
41. First of all, the people of the Bahamas has hat!
long experience in conducting their own off&~
aa
elected assembly has existed there since 1841; in
1963, a governmental type of executive was es&%.
lished, while broad powers were transferred to &e
elected representatives of the people-powers
Tuzla
were expanded even further in 1969.
42. At ,the same time, a remarkable Prime Minitia?
Mr. Lynden Pindling, has, for some years, been tJ-z
driving force behind an experiment
yielding
%m
concrete and direct benefits to all the population
&
terms of rapid economic development of the terrimy.
By significant reforms wisely and carefuhy implemen:&,
that experiment has made possible the creation oI z
homogeneous and prosperous society clearly capabfc d
taking charge of its own destiny and of conslitu?i:g
a new fully f?edged Member of the international
m,~munity.
43. My delegation therefore would like to exFrEhr
its most sincere wishes for the new State, for i:s
leaders and its people. We have no doubt that bi&
upon the unanimous recommendation
just adopted $
the Council, the General Assembly will decide :::
admit the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas to men&eship of the United Nations,
44. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the represent&z
of France for the very warm, if undeserved, CIpressions of regard he addressed to me.
4.5. Mr. HUANG
(China)
(tralrsZ&ecl Irurtr. r&nese): On 10 July 1973 the Bahamas proclaimA
iz
independence. On the same day, the Commonw$Z
of the Bahamas applied for membership in the Un:r:C
Nations and declared its acceptance of the obli@~.-z<
contained in ,the Charter of the United Nations. ffcr::
Chinese delegation is of the opinion that, in nczz:$
ante with the relevant provisions of the Charter, c5:
Commonwealth of the Bahamas is qualified far m:zbership in the United Nations. We therefore au~~x
its application and agree that the Security Con:,::
should recommend to the General Assembly thi: ~5
mission of the Commonwealth
of the Bahama.5 I:
membership in the United Nations. It is the h
d
4

the Chinese delegation that upon the approval by
the Genera1 Assembly of the above-mentioned application, the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, together with
the other Members of the United Nations, will make due
contributions
to the realization of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter.
46. The Chinese people have long cherished friendly
feelings towards the people of the Bahamas. On the
occasion of the proclamation of the independence of
the Bahamas on 10 July, Chou En-lai, Premier of the
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, sent
a message of congratulations to Lynden 0. Pindling,
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas,
announcing
the Chinese Government’s
decision to
recognize the Commonwealth
of #the Bahamas. The
Chinese Government and people wish the Bahamas
prosperity
and its peop1.e happiness and believe that
the friendship between the peoples of China and the
Bahamas will develop continuously.
Laurence
MCINTYRE
(Australia) :
47.
Sir
Mr. President, let me first of all welcome you to
the presidency for this month and also record our
appreciation
of the skilful and experienced manner in
which
your predecessor, Ambassador Malik,
discharged his duties throughout the month of June.
48.
Coming
now to our ,agenda, my delegation,
speaking on behalf of the Australian Government, has
been very happy to endorse the recommendation
of
the Committee
on ,the Admission of New Members
that the Council should recommend to the General
Assembly that the Commonwealth of the Bahamas be
admitted
to membership of the United Nations.

in Australia. The House of Assembly was established
in 1728, and there has been a continuity which
Bahamians are understandably proud of. A number of
past and present members of the Legislatures of both
our countries are already well known to one another
through the meetings and activities of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I believe that the
first international
meeting where this newly independent State will be represented in its own right
will be the meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers
which is to begin in Ottawa on 2 August. Prime
Minister Pindling will represent his country there, and
the Australian Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, has
already indicated that he is looking forward to meeting
him in Ottawa and so establishing from the outset
personal contact at the highest level between our two
Governments and countries. The Australian Govemment had the honour and pleasure of having a special
representative in the Bahamas for the celebrations of
independence on 10 July.
52. It is particularly gratifying that the Bahamas
has achieved its independence in a peaceful manner
which has preserved in full measure the friendship
and goodwill of the United Kingdom, the former administering Power. The United Kingdom to its great
credit has consistently declared that it would not stand
in the way of independence for the Bahamas once it
had been made clear ,that this was the wish of the
majority of the people.
53. We also note with satisfaction that Mr. Pindling’s
Government intends to participate fully in hemispheric
and regional associations and to work for close relations with its neighbours and particularly the Commonwealth Caribbean countries.

49.
The Committee
has examined the application
for membership
submitted by the Prime Minister of
the Bahamas, Mr. Lynden Pindling, and has agreed
unanimously
that the Commonwealth of the Bahamas
is well qualified for admission to membership, In this
connexion we have taken note of the Prime Minister’s
solemn undertaking to accept ,the obligations contained
in the Charter and <to fulfil them.

54. Though independence has been achieved peacefully,, it has not come about without work and planning and sometimes personal sacrifices on the part of
many people. Prime Minister Pindling can take personal pleasure from the part he has played over many
years in the political evolution of his country and the
achievement of its independence.

My delegation has followed with interest and
50.
great goodwill the progress of the Bahamas to selfgovernment in 1969,, and more recently, as a member
of the Special Committee on decolonization, we have
kept abreast of the steps leading to the attainment of
full independence on 10 July last. We were satified
then, as we are now, that the decision taken by the
Bahamian
Legislature in November of last year to
proceed to independence during 1973 olearly reflected
the wishes of the majority
of the people of ,the
Bahamas.

5.5. Let me conclude by repeating that on behalf of
my delegation and of the Australian Government,
I have been happy to support the recommendation
that the Commonwealth of the Bahamas be admitted
to membership of the United Nations and I wish it
well for the future. We look forward with confidence
to seeing it take its seat in the forthcoming session of
the General Assembly.
56. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of Australia for his words of welcome ,to me.

51.
On its accession to independence the Bahamas
becomes a fellow member of the commonwealth of
nations. We in Australia feel that special sense of
association with the people of the Bahamas that comes
from having to a certain degree a shared background
of tradition
and experience. I do not make that remark
out of mere politeness. I am thinking, for example,
of parliamentary
democracy, and of the fact that the
LegisIature in the Bahamas is older than the government

57. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): Mr. President,
first of all it is my agreeable duty to offer you the
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of the presidency for the current month. We wish to
express to you on this occasion the full co-operation
of my delegation in the performance of your difficult
tasks.
58. It is an equally pleasant duty for me to offer
to the President for the month of June, Ambassador.

‘4
5
I
‘>I
4

the successful exploitation of an important natural: !i;1
resource- the natural beauty and climate of countries.: !‘i
That is what Austria shares with the Bahamas. It< ,‘,)
would indeed be difficult to find common features’ 1
between my country, land-locked in the heart of’ “4
Europe, and the Bahamas,, a group of 700 islands:&;(
close to the American continent. But we feel a corn- A
mu&y of purpose with this new nation in its en-:$
deavour to develop tourism as a principal natural ;,$I
resource and an important industry and source of ,;;,
revenue.
L,l

Malik, the sincere thanks of my delegation for his
experienced and skilful handling of the work of our
Council during that month.
S9. The Council meets today with an important item
OII its agenda and a happy purpose-to
recommend a
newly independent
nation for membership in the
United Nations. It is gratifying to know that one of
the first acts of sovereignty of the Government of the
Commonwealth
of the Bahamas was to apply for
membership in the United Nations. That act is recorded in the telegram which the Prime Minister,
Mr. Pindling, sent to the Secretary-General.

65. The United Nations has been dealing with the8
Territory of the Bahamas since 1964 and we are
happy to note that, after nine years, the principles
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence 1
co Colonial Countries and Peoples have been successfully implemented there. Indeed, as far back as 1965’
and 1966, Mr. Pindling, then Leader of the Opposition and of the Progressive Liberal Party in the
Bahamas, appeared with his colleagues before the
Special Committee of Twenty-Four. And it shows the
significant role of the United Nations in the process
of independence of countries now its Members that
in this case too the Committee of Twenty-Four and
other United Nations organs have played an important part in the course of the Bahamas towards
full independence and sovereignty.

60. Austria, which has always-both
in ,the League
of Nations and in the United Nations--supported
the
principle of universality of international organizations,
welcomes with deep satisfaction the new State which
wants to join our Organization.
In that wish my
delegation sees a happy and fortunate sign for the
political health of our Organization
and the continuing strong attraction it exercises on the nations of
the world, old and new.
61. The evolution of the Bahamas towards independence proceeded speedily, peacefully and with the
full participation
of the administering
Power. That
gives us an opportunity
to offer our congratulations
fo the Government
of the United Kingdom on its
excellent contribution
and loyal help in the events
marking the birth of the new, free and sovereign
nation.

66. In 1967 Prime Minister Pindling and his party
were elected to power by the people of the Bahamas,
In the general elections of September 1972 a clear
majority of the population of the Bahamas opted for
independence. Accordingly, the Government
of the
United Kingdom arranged for a constitutional conference in December of last year in London which
formulated the constitution appropriate to the Commonwealth of the Bahamas as an independent and
sovereign State. Thus, the small but industrious people
of the Bahamas took the last step in their song struggle for freedom, independence and human dignity.
We cannot refrain from expressing our respect and
admiration for this splendid achievement, which has
led another people out of ancient bonds of slavery
into a new era of dignity.

62. The Government and people of Austria welcome
most warmly this new State of the Americas. With
the Council’s permission, I should like to read at this
juncture the telegram of congratulations
from the
Federal President of Austria, Mr. Franz Jonas, ,to the
Governor-General
of the Commonwealth of the B&amas, Mr. Milo Butler, on the occasion of the celebration of independence by the Bahamas on 10 July
1973. Federal President Jonas said:
“On behalf of. the people of Austria and in my
own name, I take great pleasure in extending to
Your Excellency my warmest congratulations on
the occasion of the declaration of independence of
the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas.
“I seize this opportunity to express my best wishes
for Your Excellency’s personal well being, as well
as for the peaceful and prosperous future of the
people of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas.”

67. In welcoming the Bahamas,, we greet a new
country which, like other members of the growing
family of independent Caribbean nations, owes it!
particular cultural and intellectual personality to I
unique blend of the civilizations of Africa-the
ancestra
home of most of its people-Europe
and the Amerm
icas. This happy synthesis of the cultures and civiliza
tions of three continents augurs well for the futurl
development of this new nation. It is a reminder o
the fact-so well know in this Organization-that
ou
of diversity unity and harmony, with all the hums:1
benefits involved, can grow.

63. The history of the Bahamas goes far back
through the centuries. It has always been a meetingplace for peoples of different races and origins. And
it was perhaps not by accident that on the shores of that
island group Christopher Columbus many centuries ago
established the tist contacts between Europe and the
Americas.

68. In supporting warmly the application of tb
Commonwealth of the Bahamas for membership i
the United Nations, my Government is also givi0
aenewed expression to its firm policy of suppo:
for newly independent nations and its deep sympath
for the causes of their struggle.

64. Apart from possessing many other qualities that
have already been mentioned here this morning, the
Bahamas have developed, above all, one of the most
significant and most advancd tourist industries in the
Wes,tern Hemisphere and have thus set an example for
6

69. It only remains for my delegation ,again to wish
the Bahamas prosperity and happiness in its new life
as an independent nation.
70.
The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Austria for his congratulations and assurance of cooperation.
Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR
(Peru) (interpreta71.
tion fmm Spanish): Mr. President, may I extend my
congratulations
to you and express my personal happiness at seeing you presiding over the Council’s
work, to which you have already brought your wellknown ability and experience. I wish also ,to extend
my congratulations
and thanks to the representative
of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Malik, for the able
way in which he presided over our important and
difficult
debates last month.
72.
Peru, which was particularly gratified to greet
the recent independence of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas,
has now been able to give full support to
the Security Council’s resolution recommending tha,t
the General Assembly admit the Bahamas to membership of the United Nations.
My country and all the other countries of
73.
America
have ancient and historic ties with this new
State, because when Columbus first set foot on the soil
of one of those islands, on 12 October 1492, he
started the discovery and conquest of America. I am
convinced
that that fact will be the favourable symbol
governing
our co-operation with the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas within the United Nations.
Furthermore,
in the independence achieved by
74.
the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas, my country sees
a new and significant step towards the progressive,
though slow, disappearance of all colonial dependencies
front our continent. May I take this opportunity to
recall that in resolutions adopted by the Tenth InterAmerican
Conference held in Caracas in 1954 the
Latin
American
nations declared ,that nations possessing colonies on American soil should hasten to
adopt measures that, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,, would allow those people fully
to exercise their right to self-determination
and thus
completely
to end colonialism in America. Now the
United
Kingdom is giving us a new example, which
does it honour, and one that we trust will be generally
and rapidly emulated by others.
Finally,
the recommendation
to the General
75.
Assembly
which we have just approved, and which
foliows very closely the one on the admission to the
United
Nations of the two German States, not only
further strengthens ,the universality of the Organization,
but also goes to ratify the principle of the sovereign
equality
of States, irrespective of size or population.
I do believe that the practice is now solidly gaining
ground
that to belong to the United Nations is the
inevitabIe
step that follows the achievement of independence
by any State; so that daily the United
Nations
will become a clearer reflection of the international
community.
Peru is convinced that this new sister-nation of
76.
America
will contribute valuably to our achievement

of the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter,
and we look forward to greeting its forthcoming entry
into the United Nations.
77. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Peru for the congratulations he addressed to me,
78. Mr. RIOS
(Panama)
(interpretation
from
Spanish) : Mr. President, at the outset my delegation
wishes to congratulate you on occupying the Chair of
the Secnrity Council. Your experience and wisdom
promise the best of results for our work. May we also
take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Malik of the Soviet Union on ,the wise and responsible
way in which he directed OUI: work during the month
of June?
79. Because we believe that all the conditions set
forth in the Charter have been met, we wish to state
that we enthusiastically support the application for
membership submitted by the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas to become a Member of the United Nations.
It is always a reason for rejoicing when a people
becomes free of colonial ties and freely exercises its
right to self-determination. Whenever that occurs, it
renews our faith that the United Nations is truly
fulfilling the duties entrusted to it in ensuring the
equality of States,, great and small. Moreover, when a
new State becomes a Member of our Organization
the latter becomes revitalized and confirms the universalist nature which was and must remain the ultimate goal of mankind.
80. Most warmly and happily we celebrate the independence of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas,
since it is always pleasant for us to recall how our
own people and the other peoples of the Antilles
united their efforts at the time of ,the building of the
Panama Canal. It is also interesting, I think, to note
that the very name “Bahamas” has historical content
of great importance: it is an archipelago which was
the spearhead for the conquest of the American continent; and among the Bahamas-or
Lucaya Islandslies Watling Island, which was the first American soil
on which Christopher Columbus landed during his
famous first voyage of 12 October 1492. Watliig is the
island that the aborigines had called Guanani and
which the Spaniards christened San Salvador-“The
Holy Saviour”.
8 1. That nation now comes to us as a s;overeign
State, having gone through a long and difficult history
of colonialism, We welcome it most warmly and offer
our co-operation in all that might help it to achieve
the ideals that link all of us in the great United
Nations family. I trust that we will very soon be able
to hold further meetings of this nature in order to
welcome among us all the peoples of Africa and
other parts of the world that still struggle for their
independence.
82. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Panama for the remarks he addressed to me.
83. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
Mr. President, in expressing appreciation for the experienced handling of the affairs of this Council during the month of June of Ambassador Malik, I

priate opportunity to speak about your qualificaticaa
or indeed about Indo-British
relations. The latter are
so intimate, so detailed and so long-standing
that
only the historians can discuss them adequately. * a
representative of the United Kingdom and as President
of the Council, you can expect
to receive full cooperation from #the delegation of India, and I ;LSZUE
you that we shald extend it most willingly and v&h
the greatest of pleasure. We made a similar prom&
of co-operation to the outgoing President,
Am&sador Malik of the Soviet Union, who conducted &e
business of the Council in June with remarkable
skZl
and understanding, and we hope that he found m
co-operation useful in the smooth ,and eflicient carryicg
out of his complex and delicate tasks.

naturally would want to extend to you the warmest
good wishes of the United States as you assume the
presidency. Your own thorough experience with this
body and your own high sense of purpose will, I have
no doubt, combine to make you a distinguished
president of our Security Council, and you may be
sure that you may count on the full co-operation of
the United States.
84. The United States has a long history of warm
and cordial relations with its closest overseas neighbour,, the Bahamas. We have maintained
official
representation in Nassau for more than 150 years
-since 1821. But even before that date, the peoples,
of the United States and the Bahamas had begun to
develop strong cultural and economic ties with each
other, These ties derived not only from the proximity
of the Bahama Islands to our shores but also from
our common heritage ‘of concern for human dignity
and self-determination.
85. Under the experienced leadership #of Prime
Minister Pindling, the people of the Bahamas have
demonstrated a sincere desire to be masters of their
own national destiny and to assume the considerable
responsibilities
of independence.
My Government
therefore has welcomed the decision of the United
Kingdom and applauds its readiness, in response to
the request of the Government of the Bahamas, to
grant complete independence to the Bahamas on
10 July of this year.
86. On 10 July, the date of independence, the Government of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas announced its adherence to all the international
commitments which the United Kingdom had previously
undertaken on its behalf. Simultaneously the Government of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas announced its support for the principles of the United
Nations Charter and applied for membership in the
United Nations. My delegation has been pleased to
support the application
of the Commonwealth
of
the Bahamas for membership in the United Nations
and concurred whole-heartedly in the recommendation
of this Council’s Committee on the Admission of New
Members, and we welcome the unanimous decision
taken today by the Council to recommend the admission of the Bahamas.

90. We have this morning decided to recomnend
ti
application of the Commonwealth
of ,the Bahama
fa
admission to the United Nations as a full Mem
In doing so we have fulflled a part of our resp&
bility for bringing about freedom for as many coiatid
countries and peoples as possible and with as gti
a speed as is feasible. In a resolution adopted a~ &:
last session of the General Assembly [2984 (XXtf!1S]
the question of American Samoa, .the Bahamas, I&zmuda and various other islands was discussed. h
taking note of the recent independence of the I3&.
mas and in recommending its admission to the UI$:Z~
Nations, we see a process, beginning with the Baham~f,
which should eventually lead to the freedom of d
these Territories.
91. Our special felicitations go to the people a&
Government of the Bahamas on this occasion. T&r$;
decision should give particular
satisfaction
to
Bahamas as much as it will to the general. nlem
ship of ,the United Nations. Today’s action by &
Council will also bring faith and comfort conec,rz%:~
the United Nations to many countries and pe+&
that are still unfortunately outside this great Orgas&.
tion: they can now confidently hope that thci,r PZ~
will also come soon,
92. The Bahamas enjoys stable government
freedom of speech and movement
and has m
traordinarily good record of lack of violence ia :z
political affairs. The Government
is led by a &&g
Minister who not only has full command
c;f 52
affairs of the islands but who is an outstanding waz+
man in the region. His political party, the Procres,.r;;;l;~:
Liberal Party, has done much for the achi&&
cr:”
independence,, and his foresight is clearly reflwa& ti
a statement he made in February 1971 in which B;
said that his country would be independent
i~ *&
course of the next two years, This pledge har blew
kept, and we look forward ,to close co-operat
the Bahamas in the United Nations and el
We are confident that, irrespective of its ne~~tn~~~.B
a Member, it will contribute significantly to oup coperative endeavours.

87. My delegation is confident that the Commonwealth of the Bahamas will play a valuable and
constructive role as a Member of the United Nations.
The United States looks forward to welcoming the
Bahamian delegation to the twenty-eighth session of
the Genera1 Assembly this fall and to working closely
with the Bahamas at subsequent sessions.
88. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
the United States for his good wishes and assurances
of co-operation.
89. Mr. SEN (India):
The formal action we have
taken this morning should invite a few comments
from the delegation of India. However, before making
them, Mr. President, I should like to offer you our
congratulations on your assuming the presidency of
the Council. I do not ‘think that this is the appro-

93. Finally, it is appropriate that we should erp=z
our appreciation to the Government
of the c-22
Kingdom for its understanding of the spirit of fte&c
that prevails in these islands and that Govemz:~
acceptance of the objective of the United Natiea t13
8

ensure the independence of these Territories at the
earliest possible moment. We hope that this policy will
be continued
in respect of all other Terriitories in
which the United Kingdom still rules as a colonial
Power. The Bahamas can be expected to become a
member of the Commonwearlth, whose Prime Ministers
will be meeting in Ottawa in a few days’ time. We are
sure ;&at at that forum the Bahamas will receive as
warm a welcome as we are giving it today on its application for membership in the United Nations. The
fact that several authoritative statements indicate that
the people of the Bahamas do not believe in joining
military
blocs and will adopt the general attitude of
non-alignment
gives us much pleasure.

Council. I accept Ithose remarks noit on my own behalf,
but on behalf of my country, the peace-loving Soviet
Union,
101. I should also like to take this oppo&nity
to
welcome and congratulate the representative of the
United Kingdom on his assumption of the high responsibilities of President of the Security Council, and to
wish him success in carrying out his duties in that
post. I should Iike to assure him that the Soviet delegation will co-operate fuuy with rthe new President and
the other members of the Council in ensuring that the
Security Council’s work is successful, productive and,
above all, effective in attaining a peaceful political settlement in the Middle East which in no way harms the
interests of the victims of the aggression,

94. For all those reasons we shall indeed be happy
lo welcome and cheer the admission of ;rhe Bahamas
as a full and equal Member of the United Nations at
the next session of the General Assembly, beginning
on 18 September.
9s. The PRESIDENT:
I ,&thank the representative of
India for his congratulations and assurances of cooperation.
I now call on the representative of the
Soviet Union to whom I should like to renew personally the expression of thanks for his conduct of
business during the month of June.
96. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(trunic;lated frolm &&an)
: Mr. President,
allow me first of all to thank the members of the Security Council who have spoken here for the kind
words addressed to me as President for last month.

102. The Soviet delegation supponted the application
of the Commonweakh of the Bahamas for admission
to membership in the United Nations. Our position is
based on ‘the consistent policy of the Soviet Union bequeathed to us by ,the great Lenin and recently reaffirmed by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union when approving a
programme of peace and friendship among peoples.
The essence of this policy was and remains all-round
support for the struggle of peoples to liberate themselves from #the colonial yoke and that of young States
to strengthen their independence and sovereignty and
guarantee their independent and free development.
103. The General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid
Ilyich Brezhnev, speaking a few days ago when he was
being presented with the International Lenin Prize “for
the strengthening of peace among peoples”, solemnly
stated:

97. As has been pointed out, June was one of the
Security Council’s active and very busy months this
year. The Council dealt with questions which are of
great importance
for the United Nations and for the
cause of peace and security. The Council carried out
the first stage of its examination of the situation in the
Middle East. As we al1 know, this question, which is
extremely
impor,tant for international
peace and security, will be considered further by the Council in
July. We should like to wish the new President of the
Security Council, and the Council as a whole, success
in the continuing
consideration of :this problem. We
should like to express the hope that the results of the
discussion
will promote a political s&tlement in the
Middle East at an early date and !the elimination of the
consequences
of the Israeli aggression against Arab
countries.
During June, the Council also took a decision to
98.
extend the stationing of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus for a further six months:
Lastly, the Council #took a decision of historic
99.
importance,
both wkh regard to the realization of the
principle
of lthe universality of the United Nations and
lvith regard to )the strengthening of peace in @rope
and .throughout
the world: I refer to the decision to
recommend
*to the General Assembly that the two
sovereign German Sta&s, the German Democratic Re~utrlic and the Federal Republic of Germany, should
be admitted
to membership in the United Nations.
I should like once again to thank my disain100.
guished colleagues in the Security Counc,il for their
friadly
com.ments abouut my work as, President of the

“We have always believed, and we believe today,
that i’t is our bounden duty, arising out of our communist conviotions and our socialist morality, rto
provide the broadest support to peoples struggling
for the freedom which is their right. Thus has it
always been, and thus it will be in the future.”
104. In welcoming the young independent State of
the Commonwealth of the Bahamas <today as a new
Member of the United Nations, one cannot but recall
the fact that, over many centuries of colonial rule, its
people endured many grave tribulations. Long ago the
islands were seized by foreign conquistadores, who
either annihilated the indigenous inhabitants or forced
them to leave the islands. A succession of foreign
masters and oppressors plundered the riches of the
islands and ederminated their population. As has been
the case for many peoples, the road of the Bahamas
to freedom and independence has been long and difficult. Ajt last, the struggle has been crowned with success.
105. In admibting to the United Nations this new
State which has come into being as a result of the
disintegration of the colonial system of imperialism,
whose downfall began with the great October socialist
revolution in Russia and was accelerated by the triumphant defeat of fascism, that most evil enemy of
humanity, we cannolt forget that in our time, in the
9

Minister of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, Mr;’
Lynden Pindling, we read:
qr,
8;“:
“Accept, Mr. Prime Minister, our sincere COQ,~,
gratulations on the occasion of the proclamatiol$
of the independence of the Commonwealth of .thei
Bahamas and our wishes of prosperity and progresd
for the people of your country along the road ofil
: 4,
independent development.
$ji
“The Soviet Government, in the light of it$j!
unchangeable policy, based on the principles d[!
equality and the self-determination
of peoples a@
aimed at developing friendship and co-operatioi
among al1 countries, hereby states that it recogn&
the Commonwealth of the Bahamas as an indepen.,
dent and sovereign State and expresses a readiness
to establish diplomatic relations with it.”

last #third of the highly civilized twentieth century,
many peoples still remain under colonial rule. At the
same time, some of the colonial Powers resort to the
most barbaric methods of bloody terror and genocide
in order to keep peoples seeking freedom and independence under colonial rule by force. As an example,
I might cite the recently exposed monstrous crimes of
the Portuguese colonialists in Africa, in Mozambique.
In the face of such crimes lthe United Nations and its
Members cannot remain silent.
106. The position of the Soviet Union has been based
and is based on the view that colonial racist rkgimes
everywhere shouId be eliminated without delay. This
principle should become the criterion guiding all States
in adopting an honest attitude to tie struggle of peoples who are still under ithe colonial yoke.
107. In that connexion, in view of the fact that the
colonial flag of Qe United Kingdom has at last been
lowered over its former colony of the Bahamas, <the
Security Council has a right to express the hope that
the United Kingdom will give good advice to its old
ally, Portugal, and counsel it Ito cease its vain opposition to the irreversible historical process of the liberation of colonial peoples. It would thus bring closer the
moment, which is inevitable and so much desire: by
and Gumea
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique
(B&au),
when they will be rid of colonial tyranny.
We, the Soviet people; are firmly convinced /that the
time will come when today’s colonial Territories will
become independent States and be admitted to membership in tie United Nations.

111. The Soviet delegation, in supporting the applica.
tion of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas for a&
mission to membership in the United Nations,, wishes
to express its ,conviction that that State will, upon the
recommendation of the Council, be admitted to mem.
bership in the United Nations by the General Assembly,
and that its official delegation will take its lawful pIace
among the delegations of all other States Members,
of the United Nations at the forthcoming twenty-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
112. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative:
of the Soviet Union for his expression of good wishes,
113.

Mr. MADDY
(Guinea)
(interpretation
froni
Mr. President, may I at the outset congrat,’
ulate you on behalf of my delegation on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for the month 01
July? May I assure you of our full co-operation\
French):

108. In welcoming the young independent State of
the CommonweaLth of the Bahamas today, the Soviet
delegation would like to stress with the greatest firmness that the Soviet Union and all its peoples support
and will continue to suppont ;the peoples of Asia,
Africa and Latin America who are still in the olutches
of colonialism
in their just and heroic struggle for
freedom, independence, democracy and social progress.
It is for that reason that, from the first days of the
October revolution in Russia up to the present, we
have been the object of such anger on the part of the
imperialists
and colonialists and, at the same time,
such gratitude from those who are struggling to achieve
freedom and independence for colonial peoples. In
that connexion, I am reminded of the words of <that
outstanding African statesman and freedom-fighter, the
distinguished President of Zambia, Mr. Kaunda. When
I told him of the huge losses borne by the Soviet Union
and its peoples during the great patriotic war of 19411945, he said that the colonial peoples should be
eternally grateful to the Soviet Union for its victory
in that struggle for its own and their freedom: for, if
it had not won, the peoples of the Soviet Union would
have become colonial slaves, and the colonial deoples
would have remained in colonial slavery.

114. In supporting the application of the Bahama;
for membership of the United Nations? we are honour’
ing the Charter by restoring the Iegltimate rights o
a people. Thus the international
community that wn
represent should be able to create other opportunitie;
of redress, so that in the next few years we can ensure
that the desires of all peoples be met and that thq
be allowed to enjoy the same fraternal rights.
115. When talking of redress it is to Africa thaw
instinctively and spontaneously our eyes must turn sine
on that continent the flag of colonialism still flies anI
peace and security are jeopardized and threatener
We think of Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique,
Angolr
South Africa, Namibia,, Southern Rhodesia, whe1
our brothers are still oppressed in the interests of irrl
peridist oligarchies.
116. The joy that we feel at the accession of th
Bahamas to independence is also in keeping with LX
own experience, since we have also known coloni;
occupation and suffered from it. There is nothing ma1
marvellous for a people than to recover its freed01
and independence.
117. On behalf of the people and Government of tl
Republic of Guinea, we address our sincere con@
ulations to the people and Government of the Baham:
and wish them happiness and prosperity.

109. The Soviet Union has recognized the Commonwealth of the Bahamas as an independent and sovereign
State.
1 IO. In a ,caMe dated 10 July of this year from the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR,
Aleksei Nikolaevich
Kosygin, addressed to the Prime
10

an elected House of Assembly with 33 seats. TWO
hundred years later, in 1964,, a new Constitution providing for a ministerial system of government and
allowing the Bahamas a wide degree of self-government was introduced; and in 1969 yet further powers
were transferred to the local government.

118. I should not like to conclude my statement
without reiterating the congratulations of my delegation to Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union, the
President of the Security Council for the month of
June.
119. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of Guinea for the congratulations he addressed ,to me.

125. There have indeed been many changes in #the
Bahamas since the introduction of that first Constitution in 1729. The steady evolution of the Bahamas’
Constitution has been maintained. The Prime Minister,
Mr. Lynden Pindling, was returned to power in September 1972 in a general election fought largely on
the issue of independence. My Government, whose
policy was to put no obstacle in the way of such a
step once a clear desire for it had been expressed by
a majority of the people of the Bahamas, forthwith
convened ,the Bahamas Independence Conference. This
was held in London in December last year, and at
that Conference it was decided that the Bahamas would
become independent on 10 July 1973 and agreement
was reached on the final constitutional changes appropriate to the status of the Bahamas as an independent sovereign State.

120. There being no further names inscribed on the
list of sneakers. I should now like to make a statement
in my &capacity as representative of the UNITED
KINGDOM.
121. It gives my delegation the greatest pleasure
to welcome the application for membership of the
United Nations by the Commonwealth of the Bahamas,
and we have gladly joined in the adoption by unanimous vote of #the draft resolution before the Council.
122. This occasion has not perhaps had the drama
of the last occasion on which the Security Council
considered applications for membership of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, it too has its own significance.
That is what the principle of sovereign equality is all
about; and when we think in terms of indivrdual people
-as indeed the United Nations must think-the
size
and the power of Member States cannot be the only
criteria.

126. Seven months later-a week ago yesterdaythe Bahamas became the thirty-third independent member of the Commonwealth family of which we too,
,as well as three other Governments represented around
this table, are proud to be members. My delegation
has no doubt that the Bahamas, which has unhesitatingly sought to undertake the duties and rights of membership of the United Nations by sending its application for membership to us on the very day of inde
pendence, will be able and willing to fuhil conscientiously its obligations under the Charter.

123. My country’s association with the Bahamas is
a long one. In the early seventeenth century the islands
were well known to British sailors. In 1648 about 70
British settlers, known as the Company of Eleutherian
Adventurers, sailed for the Bahamas and founded a
settlement on Eleuthera. Since then it has not been
only British sailors who have been back again and
again. It is perhaps hardly fair, as we scuttle, perspiring, from one air conditioner to another, to remind
my fellow representatives that in the Bahamas summer
temperatures rarely exceed 90 degrees while in winter
70 degrees is the average. The blue lagoons, the coral
reefs, the golden beaches and, above all, the warm
hospitality of the Bahamians every year bring thousands
of my fellow countrymen to the Bahama Islands,
refugees from the British winter.

127.

It is thus with warm congratulations on this
of our long and mutually rewarding relationship that my delegation joins in recommending the admission of the Commonwealth of
the Bahamas to the United Nations and looks forward
to extending a warm welcome to its representatives
when they take their seats in the General Assembly.
most happy fulfilment

128. Speaking now as PRESIDENT
of ,the Council
I should like to indicate that, in accordance with the
provisions of rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure,, I shall immediately request the Secretary-General to transmit to the General Assembly the text of
the resolution adopted this morning by the Council
together with the verbatim records of the meetings at
which the application of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas has been considered by ,the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

124. But Britain’s association with the Bahamas has
been much more substantial than that. In 1671 those
early settlers established a regular system of government. In 1729 the Bahamas’ first Constitution was
instituted, and it may be fairly said that the country’s
development towards independence began at that time.
The legislature
introduced by the 1729 Constitution,
which is among the oldest in the British Commonwealth,
comprised a Legislative Council of 11 members and

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nofions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unies
sont en vonte
dons
les librairies
et les agences
deposit&es
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
de votre libroirie
ou adressez-vous
a:
Nations
Unies, Section
dea veotes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

llOflY’-fMfb

MBAAHMR

OPrAHM3AHMM

OGbEAklHEHHblX

HAHClti

~%3AElIlllII
opra1111~a~m1
O~ZC~IIIICIIIILIXIbqnfi
MOlIiBO 1igIU1Tb B liHIliIilILlX
iUlUEl3llII~X
II
BITIITCTBBX
BO DCCX paiimas
mps. H~~OAIITC cnpanrw 06 n~gm~nx
B namox IWR;I;IIO~I
lElra3IIIIe
llJIn IIIIIUIITC
II0 tl)QCCy
: @‘aIIIf3a~EUI
06ZOJ(~IlOlIIILIX
&qlIir,
CCI(yHfI
II0
npo~a.iItc
najp1mir,
&IO-Hopa
Imi E~o11ena.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de ias Naciones
Unidas
ertdn
en todos
partes
del mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Printed in U.S.A.

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidorar
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Section

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

82241-August

1973 -2,050
