United Nations

A/RES/64/175

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 69 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/439/Add.3)]

64/175. Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that States Members of the United Nations have an obligation to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the
obligations that they have undertaken under the various international instruments,
Mindful that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,1 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 2
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 3
0F

0H

1F

2F

Noting the constructive dialogue with the Committee on the Rights of the
Child during the consideration of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
combined third and fourth periodic reports on the implementation of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child as a sign of engagement in international cooperative
efforts in the field of human rights, and hoping that the enhanced dialogue will
contribute to improving the situation of children in the country,
Taking note of the concluding observations of the treaty-monitoring bodies
under the four treaties to which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a
party, the most recent of which were given by the Committee on the Rights of the
Child in January 2009, 4
3F

Noting with appreciation the collaboration established between the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization in order to improve the health
situation in the country, and the collaboration established with the United Nations
Children’s Fund in order to improve the quality of education for children,
_______________
1

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
3
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
4
See CRC/C/PRK/CO/4.
2

09-47233

*0947233*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/175

Noting the decision on the resumption, on a modest scale, of the activities of
the United Nations Development Programme in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, and encouraging the engagement of the Government with the international
community to ensure that the programmes benefit the persons in need of assistance,
Recalling its resolutions 60/173 of 16 December 2005, 61/174 of 19 December
2006, 62/167 of 18 December 2007 and 63/190 of 18 December 2008, Commission
on Human Rights resolutions 2003/10 of 16 April 2003, 5 2004/13 of 15 April 2004 6
and 2005/11 of 14 April 2005, 7 Human Rights Council decision 1/102 of 30 June
2006 8 and Council resolutions 7/15 of 27 March 2008 9 and 10/16 of 26 March
2009, 10 and mindful of the need for the international community to strengthen its
coordinated efforts aimed at achieving the implementation of those resolutions,
4F

5F

6F

7F

8F

9F

Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, 11 regretting that he still has not
been allowed to visit the country and that he received no cooperation from the
authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and taking note also of
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea submitted in accordance with
resolution 63/190, 12
10F

1F

Noting the importance of the inter-Korean dialogue, which could contribute to
the improvement of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country,
Welcoming the recent resumption of the reunion of separated families across
the border, which is an urgent humanitarian concern of the entire Korean people,
1.

Expresses its very serious concern at:

(a) The persistence of continuing reports of systematic, widespread and
grave violations of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including:
(i) Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including inhuman conditions of detention, public executions, extrajudicial
and arbitrary detention; the absence of due process and the rule of law,
including fair trial guarantees and an independent judiciary; the imposition of
the death penalty for political and religious reasons; collective punishments;
and the existence of a large number of prison camps and the extensive use of
forced labour;
(ii) Limitations imposed on every person who wishes to move freely within
the country and travel abroad, including the punishment of those who leave or
try to leave the country without permission, or their families, as well as
punishment of persons who are returned;
_______________
5
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
6
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
7
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/61/53), chap. II,
sect. B.
9
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
10
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/64/53), chap. II, sect. A.
11
See A/64/224.
12
A/64/319 and Corr.1.

2

A/RES/64/175

(iii) The situation of refugees and asylum-seekers expelled or returned to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and sanctions imposed on citizens of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who have been repatriated from
abroad, leading to punishments of internment, torture, cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or the death penalty, and, in this regard, urges all States to
respect the fundamental principle of non-refoulement, to treat those who seek
refuge humanely and to ensure unhindered access to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and his Office, with a view to improving the
situation of those who seek refuge, and once again urges States parties to
comply with their obligations under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees 13 and the 1967 Protocol thereto 14 in relation to refugees from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who are covered by those instruments;
12F

13F

(iv) All-pervasive and severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought,
conscience, religion, opinion and expression, peaceful assembly and
association, the right to privacy and equal access to information, by such
means as the persecution of individuals exercising their freedom of opinion
and expression, and their families, and on the right of everyone to take part in
the conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives,
of his or her country;
(v) The violations of economic, social and cultural rights, which have led to
severe malnutrition, widespread health problems and other hardship for the
population in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in particular for
persons belonging to particularly exposed groups, inter alia, women, children
and the elderly;
(vi) Continuing violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
women, in particular the trafficking of women for the purpose of prostitution
or forced marriage and the subjection of women to human smuggling, forced
abortions, gender-based discrimination, including in the economic sphere, and
gender-based violence;
(vii) Continuing reports of violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of children, in particular the continued lack of access to basic
economic, social and cultural rights for many children, and in this regard notes
the particularly vulnerable situation faced by, inter alia, returned or repatriated
children, street children, children with disabilities, children whose parents are
detained, children living in detention or in institutions and children in conflict
with the law;4
1H

(viii) Continuing reports of violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of persons with disabilities, especially on the use of collective camps
and of coercive measures that target the rights of persons with disabilities to
decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children;
(ix) Violations of workers’ rights, including the right to freedom of
association and collective bargaining, the right to strike as defined by the
obligations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea under the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,1 and the
prohibition of the economic exploitation of children and of any harmful or
2H

_______________
13
14

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

3

A/RES/64/175

hazardous work of children as defined by the obligations of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea under the Convention on the Rights of the Child; 2
3H

(b) The continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to recognize the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or to extend
cooperation to him, despite the renewal of the mandate by the Human Rights
Council in its resolutions 7/159 and 10/16;10
4H

5H

2.
Reiterates its very serious concern at unresolved questions of
international concern relating to abductions in the form of enforced disappearance,
which violates the human rights of nationals of other sovereign countries, and in this
regard strongly calls upon the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea urgently to resolve these questions, including through existing channels, in a
transparent manner, including by ensuring the immediate return of abductees;
Expresses its very deep concern at the precarious humanitarian situation
3.
in the country, partly as a result of frequent natural disasters, compounded by the
misallocation of resources away from the satisfaction of basic needs, and the
increasing State restrictions on the cultivation and trade in foodstuffs, as well as the
prevalence of maternal malnutrition and of infant malnutrition, which, despite some
progress, continues to affect the physical and mental development of a significant
proportion of children, and urges the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in this regard, to take preventive and remedial action;
Commends the Special Rapporteur for the activities undertaken so far and
4.
for his continued efforts in the conduct of his mandate despite the limited access to
information;
Strongly urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
5.
Korea to respect fully all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, in this
regard:
(a) To immediately put an end to the systematic, widespread and grave
violations of human rights mentioned above, inter alia, by implementing fully the
measures set out in the above-mentioned resolutions of the General Assembly, the
Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, and the
recommendations addressed to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the
United Nations special procedures and treaty bodies;
(b) To protect its inhabitants, address the issue of impunity and ensure that
those responsible for violations of human rights are brought to justice before an
independent judiciary;
(c) To tackle the root causes leading to refugee outflows and prosecute those
who exploit refugees by human smuggling, trafficking and extortion, while not
criminalizing the victims, and to ensure that citizens of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea expelled or returned to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea are able to return in safety and dignity, are humanely treated and are not
subjected to any kind of punishment;
(d) To extend its full cooperation to the Special Rapporteur, including by
granting him full, free and unimpeded access to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, and to other United Nations human rights mechanisms;
(e) To engage in technical cooperation activities in the field of human rights
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and her Office, as
pursued by the High Commissioner in recent years, with a view to improving the
4

A/RES/64/175

situation of human rights in the country, and in the universal periodic review by the
Human Rights Council;
(f) To engage in cooperation with the International Labour Organization
with a view to significantly improving workers’ rights;
(g) To continue and reinforce its cooperation with United Nations
humanitarian agencies;
(h) To ensure full, safe and unhindered access to humanitarian aid and take
measures to allow humanitarian agencies to secure its impartial delivery to all parts
of the country on the basis of need in accordance with humanitarian principles, as it
pledged to do, and to ensure access to adequate food and implement food security
policies, including through sustainable agriculture;
Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in
6.
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at its sixty-fifth session, and to this end
requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Special Rapporteur to continue
to report his findings and recommendations.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

5
