S/2016/1072

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 23 December 2013 (S/2013/759), the Security Council
extended the mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa until
31 December 2016 and requested me to submit a report every six months on the
implementation of its mandate. Following my letter to the Council dated 14 January
2016 (S/2016/88) on the strategic review of the Office of my Special Envoy for the
Sahel, the Council requested me, on 28 January 2016, to proceed with the merger of
the two offices into the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and asked me to provide an update on the implementation of the
mandate of UNOWAS in my next report (see S/2016/89). The present report covers
the period from 30 July to 31 December 2016 and provides an overview of
developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel. It also outlines the activities
of UNOWAS and the progress made in the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel (S/2015/866).

II. Developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
A.

Political and governance trends
2.
Since my most recent report (S/2016/566), efforts to consolidate democracy
and stability continued in the region. Noticeable progress was made in the political
dialogue process in Guinea and in the development and implementation of key
political, institutional and constitutional reforms in a number of countries, including
Benin and Senegal. Elections were held in Cabo Verde, the Gambia and Ghana.
3.
Cabo Verde successfully conducted peaceful local elections on 4 September
and a presidential election on 2 October. Observers from the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union applauded the elections as
professional, fair, inclusive and transparent. With a 35 per cent turnout, incumbent
President Jorge Carlos De Almeida Fonseca secured 74 per cent of ballots cast,
while the opposition Movement for Democracy party reversed the 15 -year
dominance of the African Party for the Independence of Cabo Verde by winning the
majority of seats in Parliament.

16-21376 (E)

201216

*1621376*

S/2016/1072

4.
In the Gambia, an ECOWAS mission in July, an African Union mission in
September and a mission from the European Parliament Subcommittee on Human
Rights in September expressed concern about the absence of conditions for a free
and fair election. Subsequent requests by the European Union and ECOWAS to
deploy electoral experts were rejected by the Government. The pre -electoral period
was marked by cabinet reshuffles and the prosecution of senior officials for
corruption and other offences. On 11 November, the Independent Electoral
Commission announced the nomination of three presidential candidates: Adama
Barrow of the Gambia Opposition for Electoral Reform; Mamma Kandeh of the
Gambia Democratic Congress; and incumbent President, Yahya A. J. J. Jamm eh
Babil Mansa, representing the Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation. The Gambia
Opposition for Electoral Reform is a coalition of seven opposition parties and an
independent female presidential candidate who agreed to put forward a common
presidential candidate. On 2 December, the Commission announced Adama Barrow
as the winner of the election. The same day, President Jammeh gave a concession
speech and called Mr. Barrow to congratulate him. On 5 December, the Commission
issued a statement revising the number of votes received by each candidate and
stating that the errors had not affected the final outcome of the election. The
Commission also reported that representatives of all three candidates had accepted
the results during a meeting at Commission headq uarters earlier that day. On
9 December, to the dismay of many Gambians and the international community,
President Jammeh stated that he rejected the result of the election and called for a
new election when resources would allow it. Since then, political tension has been
very high in the Gambia, with security officers placed on standby throughout the
country and a heightened sense of anxiety among the population.
5.
In Ghana, seven political parties and their presidential candidates competed in
the presidential and legislative elections that took place on 7 December. Nana
Akufo-Addo won the presidential election, and incumbent President John Dramani
Mahama conceded defeat on 9 December, when the Electoral Commission of Ghana
announced the results. The voting was generally peaceful and orderly, as confirmed
by a number of international observation missions that had been deployed, including
from the African Union, ECOWAS, European Union, the Commonwealth and the
National Democratic Institute for International Affairs. The peace accord signed on
1 December by all seven political parties helped to lower political tensions and to
prevent election-related violence.
6.
In Guinea, following prolonged talks, the political parties agreed on 12 October
to hold the long-overdue local elections in February 2017. During the talks, which
took place against the backdrop of a recent rapprochement between President Alpha
Condé and opposition leader Cellou Dalein Diallo, political actors reviewed the
implementation of previous dialogue agreements and decided to, inter alia, reform
the Independent National Electoral Commission and revise the electoral code to
enhance the impartiality and credibility of future elections. The parties also agreed
to provide compensation to victims of electoral violence.
7.
In Benin, the Technical Commission appointed by President Talon to propose
constitutional reforms finalized its report on 28 June, and preparations began for a
referendum on the reform proposals to take place in early 2017. In Burk ina Faso,
members of the new Independent National Electoral Commission were sworn in on
27 July. On 21 October, the Government stated that an attempted coup d’état by

2/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

former members of the presidential guard was foiled by security forces. Meanwhile,
the High Council for Reconciliation and National Unity, which was established in
March to assist in creating conditions conducive to reconciliation and national unity
and to examine human rights violations committed by State authorities between
1960 and 2015, has yet to become fully operational. With respect to investigations
into the “popular uprising” in October 2014 and the failed coup d’état in September
2015, the High Court reported on 30 September that 24 ministers under the former
regime had been indicted.
8.
In Côte d’Ivoire, a constitutional amendment establishing a Senate and the
position of Vice-President and making the nationality requirement for presidential
eligibility more flexible was endorsed by referendum on 30 October. Progress was
made in Guinea-Bissau when the political stakeholders signed agreements mediated
by ECOWAS in September and October, committing them to breaking the prolonged
political impasse. However, the agreements have yet to be implemented owing to
continued mistrust between the parties. In Mauritania, a dialogue process, which
was boycotted by several opposition parties and the extra -parliamentary opposition
coalition National Forum for Democracy and Unity, ended on 20 October with the
signing of a political agreement. The agree ment foresaw several constitutional
amendments, including the abolishment of the Senate and the creation of regional
councils. In the Niger, the National Council for Political Dialogue, a framework for
consultation on matters of national interest, decided on 4 October to postpone sine
die the local elections scheduled for January 2017 and to initiate a review of the
electoral process. The decision was criticized by the opposition, which boycotted
the session.
9.
In Nigeria, the Government continued its anti-corruption campaign led by the
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission. The former Ministers of Aviation and
of Defence were charged with money-laundering, while two Supreme Court justices
and the Abia State Resident Electoral Commissioner were arrested on corruption
charges.
10. In Senegal, members of the High Council of the collectivités territoriales were
elected on 4 September, in line with a constitutional amendment approved in the
referendum of 20 March. On 4 October, Senegal introduced the ECOWAS biometric
identity card, which will also be used as a voter card. However, the adoption by
Parliament of a bill to review the voters’ register on 11 August triggered protracted
debate. In Sierra Leone, the release of the final report of the Constitutional Review
Committee, which was expected during the reporting period, was further delayed.
The delimitation of constituency boundaries and preparations for a national civil
and voter registration exercise ahead of the presidential and parliamentary elections
in early 2018 in Sierra Leone were sources of contention between the ruling and
opposition parties. In Togo, there was no significant progress in the implementation
of institutional and political reforms. The opposition continued to refuse initiatives
by the High Commission for Reconciliation and Strengthening of National Unity,
which on 21 July submitted reform proposals to the President of the country.

16-21376

3/18

S/2016/1072

B.

Security trends
11. The security situation in West Africa and the Sahel remained fragile due to the
activities of violent extremist and terrorist groups, including Al -Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb and Boko Haram. Violent extremist groups based in Mali, including
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Al Mourabitoun, continued to expand their
geographical reach into the neighbouring countries of Burkina Faso and the Niger.
In Burkina Faso, three soldiers and four civilians were killed in two attacks on
1 September and 12 October. In the Niger, several attacks were carried out between
September and November by unidentified groups suspected of being based in Mali.
On 6 October, an attack on a security post in an area hosting Malian refugees in
Tazalit, Tahoua region, resulted in the death of 22 soldiers. The same week, an
American aid worker was kidnapped in Abalak, Tahoua region. On 16 October, a
high-security prison near the capital city of Niamey was attacked in what appeared
to be an unsuccessful attempt to free Islamist militants. Meanwhile, insecurity
linked to the presence of Boko Haram in the south-eastern region of Diffa continued
to fuel displacement in this area.
12. During the reporting period, drug production, consumption and trafficking
remained a serious concern. On 26 June, 20 tons of counterfeit medicines, cannabis
and heroin were incinerated by Burkinabe authorities on the occasion of the
International Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, while 200 kilograms
(kg) of cocaine were seized by Guinean authorities in the port of Conakry in July
and October. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), Guinea-Bissau and Mali remain vulnerable drug transit points, while
production and distribution centres emerged in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea Nigeria and
Senegal. Some countries also witnessed an increase in arms trafficking and other
illicit transnational activities. According to UNODC, law enforcement agencies in
some countries were also involved in the sale of arms to militant groups and in
receiving bribes from criminals at border posts to turn a blind eye to the illicit
movement of goods and persons across borders.
13. Maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea remained an issue of concern. The
International Maritime Bureau recorded 28 kidnapping cases from July through
August. Pirate activities seemed to shift their focus fro m the theft of cargo to the
kidnapping of crew members. In the waters off the coast of Nigeria, 40 pirate
attacks were allegedly carried out by the Niger Delta Avengers.
14. Nigeria continued to face several security challenges, in particular a resurgence
of violence in the southern region of the Niger Delta, clashes between farmers and
pastoralists in the Middle Belt region, the Boko Haram insurgency in the north of
the country and violent incidents between security forces and members of the
Islamic Movement in Nigeria. Between July and November, 80 attacks against oil
installations were recorded in the Niger Delta. The Government is continuing with
its dual strategy of negotiating with the attackers while simultaneously enhancing
security measures. Meanwhile, between July and November, it is estimated that
30 deadly clashes between farmers and herders resulted in approximately 222
deaths, which threatened to undermine peace, social cohesion and food security in
the Middle Belt of the country. In addition, on 14 November, clashes between
individuals participating in a Shia procession and the Nigerian police force broke
out in Kano State, resulting in the deaths of dozens of Nigerians.

4/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

Counter-terrorism and Boko Haram violence
15. Boko Haram continued to pose a security challenge in the Lake Chad Basin
area. The Multinational Joint Task Force conducted several operations targeting the
group’s capabilities, disrupting its safe havens and destroying training and bomb making facilities. This contributed to a temporary decline in the scope and impact of
Boko Haram attacks during the rainy season (July and August). It is estimated that
the group carried out approximately 179 attacks between July and November, which
resulted in 330 deaths. This included two separate attacks, on 16 and 17 October,
against security forces in Borno State, Nigeria, killing more than 20 soldiers. In
addition, 46 soldiers who had disappeared during the attacks have not been found.
During the reporting period, Boko Haram continued to use suicide bombings,
improvised explosive devices and ambushes to incite fear. There were also reports
of factional divisions within Boko Haram, with the reported leadership of the group
being ascribed to Abu Musab al-Barnawi by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. In a video released on 10 August, the group’s long -time leader, Abubakar
Shekau, claimed he was still in charge.
16. Meanwhile, the Multinational Joint Task Force continued to strengthen its
internal cooperation and operational capabilities, conducting successful operations
in mid-September that resulted in the deaths of 70 Boko Haram militants in the
Niger. Raids conducted by the Nigerian army on 19 August reportedly killed over
100 militants, including three senior Boko Haram commanders. On 13 October,
following negotiations facilitated by the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Government of Switzerland, 21 of the Chibok girls were released, bringing
the number of girls freed to 23. According to the Nigerian Government, further
negotiations continue for the release of the remaining girls. While several countries
announced further logistical and intelligence support, the Task Force remains
seriously constrained by a lack of funds and assets. A meeting of the African Union
Partners Group on 23 September disclosed that most pledges had not materialized,
with the exception of $34.3 million disbursed by the European Union, $21 million
by Nigeria and $6.2 million by the United Kingdom of Grea t Britain and Northern
Ireland.

C.

Socioeconomic trends
17. West African economies faced an economic landscape marked by a continuous
slump in export commodity prices, tighter financing conditions, narrowing credit
options, and concomitant budgetary pressures. According to the International
Monetary Fund, during the reporting period, overall economic growth was at its
lowest level in the past 12 years, and expectations for a rebound in 2016 have not
materialized. While the performance and level of economic diversification varied
between countries, oil-exporting countries appeared to be the hardest hit, with
Nigeria officially entering into a recession. Efforts to improve access to foreign
exchange in Nigeria were only partially successful and fostered the development of
a parallel market. Countries exporting other raw materials, including Mauritania and
Liberia, were equally affected by deteriorating terms of trade. Quickly depreciating
currencies, such as in Nigeria and Sierra Leone, exacerbated economic hardship for
large segments of the population. Growth prospects appeared to have improved for

16-21376

5/18

S/2016/1072

Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal, partially owing to regulatory reforms conducive to
growth. In its report entitled “Doing Business 2016”, the World Bank ranked
Senegal and Benin in the top 10 most improved econo mies, while Liberia was
reported as having deteriorated since 2008, ranking 174th of 190 countries.

D.

Humanitarian trends
18. The overall humanitarian situation in West Africa and the Sahel remains dire.
In areas under the influence of Boko Haram, extreme levels of food insecurity and
malnutrition were reported, including reports of emerging famine conditions. Across
the Sahel, some 32 million people are facing food insecurity, 9 million are in need
of emergency food assistance, and 3.9 million children under the age of 5 are
severely malnourished. During the period under review, humanitarian access
remained hampered by insecurity and ongoing hostilities. More than 130,000
Malian refugees remained in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the Niger. In the
conflict-affected regions of the Lake Chad Basin, 2.6 million people remained
displaced, and 6.3 million people were considered severely food -insecure.
According to the United Nations Children’s Fund, almost 400,000 children in north eastern Nigeria were severely malnourished. The majority of the displaced had been
sheltered by communities that were already vulnerable, putting a further strain on
their limited coping capacities. With the Nigerian army regaining control in areas
formerly held by insurgents, nearly 800,000 people have become newly accessible,
many of whom are in immediate need of life-saving assistance. Persistent attacks in
Borno State (Nigeria), Diffa (Niger) and Maroua (Cameroon) continued to impede
operations, while aid operations in Chad’s border area were temporarily suspended
owing to insecurity. While humanitarian organizations in the Lake Chad Basin
countries stepped up operations to deliver assistance, only 30 per cent of the
required funds, amounting to a total of $739 million, was receiv ed. Only 32 per cent
($664 million) of the United Nations appeal for $2.09 billion for the Sahel has been
funded.
19. According to data released by the International Organization for Migration
(IOM), the number of recorded migrants passing through the Nig er towards
countries of the Maghreb has markedly decreased, following stricter control
measures being implemented at major transit points and migrants without valid
documentation being refused entry. However, migration flows in the Niger have
increased significantly, with almost 400,000 outgoing and incoming migrants being
registered at IOM flow monitoring points as of September. The migrants are mainly
from the Gambia, the Niger, Nigeria and Senegal. In June, the European Council
decided to use all relevant policies, instruments and tools, including development
and trade, in order to prevent illegal migration and facilitate repatriations.

E.

Trends on human rights
20. The human rights situation in West Africa and the Sahel improved somewhat
with respect to legal and institutional frameworks. Senegal adopted a law reforming
its constitutional court, and Burkina Faso and the Gambia registered progress
towards the establishment of national human rights commissions. Togo acceded to

6/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, while Guinea -Bissau adopted the
1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and 1961 Convention on
the Reduction of Statelessness. A total of 12 of the 15 States members of ECOWAS
have thus far adopted the Conventions. In the Gambia, a law outlawing forced and
underage marriage was passed.
21. However, the continuing threat of terrorism had a negative impact on human
rights standards across West Africa and the Sahel, in particular with respect to
freedom of expression and assembly. Several thousand terror suspects were
reportedly held in pretrial detention for extended periods in the Niger, where the
legal pretrial detention time is four years. Although penal reforms in terrorism related cases were initiated in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritania, the Niger
and Senegal, arbitrary incarcerations continued to pose the risk of radicalizing
detainees in West Africa and the Sahel.
22. In Nigeria, the special investigation panel established by the Nigerian National
Human Rights Commission to investigate clashes between security forces and
members of the Islamic Movement in Nigeria, which took place in December 2015
and resulted in about 350 casualties, submitted its report on 21 October. The panel
recommended, inter alia, a forensic investigation, the timely trial of the Movement’s
leaders, the prosecution of involved military personnel, compensation for victims and
training in crowd management for police. Concerns continue to be raised regarding
possible violations of human rights by some security forces in the fight against
Boko Haram, notwithstanding the commitment by the Government to take action.
23. In the Gambia, a senior member of the opposition United Democratic Party,
Ebrima Solo Kurumah, reportedly died under unclear circumstances while in police
custody on 21 August. Mr. Kurumah was arrested during a peaceful protest on
9 May. He is the second member of the United Democratic Party to have died in
custody, following the death of opposition activist Ebrima Solo Sandeng on
15 April. On 20 July, 29 Party members were sentenced to three years in prison on
several charges, including unlawful assembly. Calls by the international co mmunity
for an independent investigation into the events of April and May, including the
deaths of two opposition members while in state custody, have thus far gone
unheeded. Meanwhile, three days after the announcement of the election results, the
former leader of the opposition United Democratic Party, Ousainou Darboe, along
with 18 Party members who had been sentenced, in July, to three years in prison,
were released on bail. On 8 December, 11 more people who had been arrested after
participating in peaceful protests in April and May were also released.
24. In Guinea, as part of the political dialogue process concluded on 12 October,
political stakeholders agreed, inter alia, to establish a high court of justice and to
release those detained in the wake of political protests. However, on the occasion of
the seventh anniversary of the 28 September 2009 massacre, human rights defenders
and victims’ associations expressed concern about continuing delays in the
prosecution of perpetrators, some of whom were in public office. On 29 June, the
Provisional Commission for Reflection on National Reconciliation submitted its
report to President Alpha Condé, who committed to setting up a truth, justice and
reconciliation commission to investigate major violations of hu man rights in Guinea
from 1958 to 2015.

16-21376

7/18

S/2016/1072

25. In Mauritania, tensions were witnessed between public authorities and the
Initiative pour la résurgence du mouvement abolitionniste, especially after
13 Intiative members were sentenced on 18 August to prison terms of between 3 and
15 years, following protests staged by the organization. The West African Human
Rights Defenders’ Network and other organizations condemned the verdict, and the
European Union called for an investigation into judicial procedures and al legations
of torture. On 18 November, the appeal court of Zouerate acquitted and released
three of the 13 activists and reduced the sentence of the other 10.
26. On 29 July, the Extraordinary African Chambers within the Senegalese courts
ordered former Chadian President Hissène Habré to pay 53 billion CFA francs to
compensate the nearly 5,000 victims of arbitrary detention, acts of rape, sexual
slavery, torture and war crimes committed under his rule. On 28 September, Appeal
Court judges for his case were appointed by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission.

F.

Trends on gender issues
27. During the reporting period, some progress was made in efforts to support
gender mainstreaming and the inclusion of women in political, peace and security
processes. On 29 September, the Liberian House of Representatives passed the
Equal Representation and Participation Bill, which provided for five seats for
female politicians, one for youth and one for people with disabilities in the nation’s
lower House of Parliament. The Nigerian Senate continued its examination of the
gender and equal opportunities bill, raising hopes for its eventual adoption. Civil
society and other organizations continued their advocacy to enhance female political
participation. A study released in September by the National Institute of Statistics
and Economic Analysis in Benin revealed that the literacy rate of young women in
the country dropped from 56 to 43 per cent between 2010 and 2015, highlighting the
structural factors leading to female exclusion.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel
A.

Good offices and special assignments by my Special Representative
28. During the reporting period, my Special Representative for West Africa and
the Sahel continued in order to mobilize international and regional partners through
his good offices missions to support national political dialogue, promote democratic
reforms and encourage transparent and peaceful electoral processes. He conducted
his missions in close collaboration with the United Nations country teams in each
country.
29. Ahead of the presidential election in the Gambia on 1 December, and in the
light of prevailing tensions in the country, my Special Representative conducted a
mission to Banjul on 10 November. He held consultations with political parties,
civil society representatives and election management bodies, during which he
assured all stakeholders of the continued support of the United Nations. He urged

8/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

the Government to deliver on its commitments to democratic governance and
appealed to political actors to engage in genuine political dialogue. My Special
Representative visited Banjul again, a day after the announcement of the election
results, on 3 December, where he met with the President-elect, representatives of the
opposition coalition, the ruling Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation, civil society and
the diplomatic corps. The head of the ECOWAS office in Banjul accompanied my
Special Representative to his meetings. In his consultations, the Special
Representative encouraged all sides to work together for a peaceful transfer of
power. Following President Jammeh’s announcement on 9 December rejecting the
election results, the Special Representative facilitated a joint statement by t he
African Union, ECOWAS and United Nations, which was issued on 10 December
and called on the Government of the Gambia to abide by its constitutional
responsibilities and international obligations; to respect the verdict of the ballots;
and to ensure the security of President-elect Adama Barrow and of all Gambian
citizens. The following day, I called on President Jammeh and all political actors to
fully respect the outcome of the election and carry out a peaceful and orderly
transition process. On 13 December, my Special Representative returned to Banjul
along with President Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia — in her capacity as head of the
ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government — President Koroma of
Sierra Leone, outgoing President Mahama of Ghana, President Buhari of Nigeria
and a representative of the African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs.
30. Special Representative Chambas visited Ghana four times between October
and December to help defuse political tensions and promote peaceful elections . His
good offices, in collaboration with ECOWAS and other partners, were instrumental
in ensuring the signing of the peace accord prior to the elections. The Electoral
Commission in Ghana expressed appreciation for the support of the United Nations
country team to the electoral process, including United Nations assistance in
coordinating international observers and support to two situation rooms (the
Women’s Situation Room and the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding observer
situation room).
31. During the reporting period, my Special Representative remained in contact
with stakeholders engaged in the political dialogue process in Guinea. He met with
President Alpha Condé in New York on 20 September and visited Guinea on 8 and
9 November. In his consultations with stakeholders, including President Condé and
opposition leader Cellou Dalein Diallo, he commended the parties for the agreement
reached on 12 October and reiterated the support of the United Nations in the
implementation of its provisions.
32. In anticipation of the first post-conflict presidential elections to be held in
Sierra Leone without the presence of a United Nations peace mission, scheduled for
early 2018, my Special Representative conducted a mission to Freetown from 6 to
8 November, during which he consulted with relevant stakeholders on a number of
critical issues, including the constitutional review process and electoral
preparations.
33. My Special Representative visited Maiduguri, the capital of Borno State,
Nigeria, in July and November. He interacted with a wide range of government
representatives, humanitarian actors, United Nations agencies and civil society. He
discussed challenges to rehabilitation efforts, humanitarian access and the demining

16-21376

9/18

S/2016/1072

of recaptured territories, for which international support remains crucial. He also
paid a visit to a camp for internally displaced persons in Bakassi, where
humanitarian assistance had been halted for security reasons, and advocated for the
resumption of humanitarian assistance to the camp.
34. While in Nigeria, my Special Representative also held, on 1 August, a round table consultation with high-level Nigerian stakeholders, ECOWAS, the United
Nations country team and representatives from academia and civil society, on
violent extremism, militant activities, separatist tendencies in the south -east,
tensions between pastoralists and farmers and other political and security -related
issues affecting the country. The meeting helped strengthen cooperation with
Nigerian stakeholders and reaffirm the United Nations support for the consolidation
of the peace architecture in Nigeria.
35. On 21 September, President Buhari requested United Nations assistance in
negotiating the release of the Chibok schoolgirls. In response, I designated my
Special Representative, in his capacity as my High-level Representative for Nigeria,
as the point of contact for further assistance. Since then, he has been engaging with
Nigerian authorities and international partners. In his consultations, he has
continued to stress the need for the international community to support Nigeria in
addressing the issue of mass abductions by Boko Haram, the rehabilitation and
reintegration of abductees and better humanitarian access in the north -east of the
country. My Special Representative visited Nigeria from 13 to 18 November to meet
with national and international stakeholders to determine how best to continue
supporting the Nigerian Government’s efforts in finding a negotiated solution for
the release of the remaining Chibok schoolgirls.
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
36. Insecurity in the northern Cameroon-Nigeria border areas, as a result of Boko
Haram-related violence, continued to adversely affect the work of the Cameroon Nigeria Mixed Commission, delaying field assessments and demarcation in several
locations. Nonetheless, experts from both parties met in early December 2015 and
reached an agreement on toponyms within a 30-kilometre corridor along both sides
of the border, as part of the final mapping project. In addition , a project document
on confidence-building measures was endorsed by the Government of Cameroon in
May 2016 and submitted for approval by the Nigerian Government in late
November.
37. On 1 August, in his capacity as my High-level Representative to Nigeria and
Chair of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, my Special Representative held
consultations in Abuja with President Buhari, who reiterated his commitment to a
speedy resolution of the residual issues concerning the border demarcation. He also
met with the head of the Nigerian delegation and other government officials in
December 2016. The parties reiterated their commitment to fully implementing the
judgment of the International Court of Justice as a matter of priority. By the end of
the reporting period, significant progress towards the placement of 163 additional
pillars had been achieved, thus exhausting the remaining resources in the
extrabudgetary trust fund. My Special Representative therefore undertook a
fundraising mission to Brussels, Paris, London and Berlin from 18 to 20 October,
during which partners voiced appreciation for the Commission’s work and pledged

10/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

support for the conclusion of its mandate, pending the submiss ion of more detailed
proposals.

Enhancing subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security
Security sector reform
38. From 17 to 21 October, UNOWAS, together with other United Nations
representatives, visited the ECOWAS Commission in Abuja to provide additional
support for the rolling-out of the ECOWAS policy framework on security sector
reform, which is aimed at promoting a coordinated approach to security sector
reform in the West Africa region.
39. In Guinea, the United Nations senior security sector reform advisory team
continued to support the national security sector reform process. On 29 September,
the national police school was reopened, after 16 years of closure, with the support
of the team. The senior adviser also supported efforts to render the high council of
national defence operational. In response to a request made by President Roch Marc
Christian Kaboré of Burkina Faso, the senior adviser, together with UNOWAS,
conducted a mission to Ouagadougou to assist the Government of Burkina Faso in
the development of a security sector reform road map.
Strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union
40. From 23 to 28 October and 1 to 4 November, UNOWAS visited Liberia and
Côte d’Ivoire, respectively, to explore options for advancing implementation of the
strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union. Discussions with the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and relevant partners helped to identify priority activities currently supported by the
peacekeeping operations, which UNOWAS and the respective United Nations
country teams should help to sustain after the drawdown of the missions. From
30 November to 1 December, the Mano River Union secretariat, with UNOWAS
support, organized a subregional workshop on lessons learned following the
establishment of the Mano River Union joint border security and confidence building units in Monrovia. Participants also exchanged views on initiatives to
enhance cross-border cooperation and curb transnational organized crime.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
41. During the reporting period, the Economic Community of Central African
States and ECOWAS advanced their efforts to operationalize the Interregional
Coordination Centre in Yaoundé, including by completing the rec ruitment of senior
leadership staff. The ECOWAS Commission and Côte d’Ivoire are in the final stages
of finalizing agreements for the establishment of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in West Africa, which will be based in Abidjan. Negotiations ar e also
continuing between the ECOWAS Commission and Ghana on logistical
arrangements for hosting the headquarters for zone F, which comprises Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Some progress was also made
towards the operationalization of the headquarters for zone E, which covers Benin,

16-21376

11/18

S/2016/1072

the Niger, Nigeria and Togo, and is based in Cotonou. In his meetings, my Special
Representative continued to support efforts by ECOWAS to identify a headquarters
for zone G, which comprises Cabo Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali
and Senegal.
42. In the framework of the consultations between African countries, China and
the United States of America to promote peace in Africa, my Special Representative
attended a tripartite consultation meeting between African countries, China and the
United States, organized by the Carter Center in cooperation with the Government
of Togo and held in Lomé on 27 and 28 July. His participation and subsequent
engagement helped to strengthen cooperation between regional actors, China, the
United States and other partners on maritime security and economic development.
43. My Special Representative attended the African Union Extraordinary Summit
of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Security and Safety a nd
Development in Africa, held in Lomé on 15 October, at which the African Union
Charter on Maritime Security, Safety and Development was adopted. During the
side events that took place prior to the Summit, from 10 to 14 October, discussions
focused on the need to boost the implementation of the Yaoundé maritime security
architecture and strengthen the judicial response, including the prosecution of
maritime crimes.
Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
44. On 5 September, UNOWAS attended the ECOWAS ministerial conference in
Abuja, at which participants, together with Mauritania, adopted the 2016 -2020
regional action plan on illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse in
West Africa. On 19 October, my Special Representative atte nded the launching
ceremony for the action plan in New York, which focused on mobilizing resources
for its implementation. With respect to the West Africa Coast Initiative, while the
work of the Transnational Organized Crime Units in Guinea -Bissau, Liberia and
Sierra Leone is continuing, no progress has been made in operationalizing the Units
in Côte d’Ivoire or Guinea.

B.

Implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel
45. In response to the Security Council’s call (see S/2016/89) for further progress
towards the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
an independent evaluation was undertaken in October and November 2016 to look
into the design, scope, thematic focus and implementation modalities of the strategy
and provide recommendations to improve its implementation. The evaluation team
interviewed a broad range of national and international partners at United Nations
Headquarters and in Dakar, and visited the five member States of the Group of Five
for the Sahel to conduct closer consultations with authorities and local and
international stakeholders. The team’s recommendations are reflected in my
forthcoming proposal to the Security Council on the rene wal of the mandate of
UNOWAS and in ongoing efforts to review, at the operational level, the United
Nations system’s approach to the implementation of the integrated strategy,
including its thematic focus, priorities, coordination arrangements, partnership s and

12/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

the role of specific United Nations entities in the field and at Headquarters, in line
with their respective mandates and comparative advantages.
46. As co-chairs of the technical secretariat of the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel, my Special Representative and President Pierre Buyoya,
High Representative of the African Union for Mali and the Sahel and Head of the
African Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel (MISAHEL), conducted a joint visit
to N’Djamena from 4 to 8 August in order to reactivate the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel. In order to make progress on preparations for the next
meeting of the Platform, a joint UNOWAS-MISAHEL technical-level mission
visited Chad from 7 to 10 September.
47. Throughout the reporting period, efforts to improve coordination and secure
funding for the implementation of the strategy intensified, with regular information
exchanges between United Nations entities and external partners, including the
Group of Five for the Sahel and potential donors. The three thematic working
groups of the strategy — on governance, security and resilience — held regular
meetings to improve programme delivery, including joint activities with regional
entities.
48. Cognizant of the key role that Sahel countries play in countering violent
extremism and pursuant to the Security Council’s request (see S/PRST/2015/24),
UNOWAS and other partners made efforts to strengthen the role of the Group of
Five for the Sahel in this area. From 29 August to 1 September, UNOWAS provided
support to a delegation of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force that
visited the region to hold consultations with countries of the Group. This included a
meeting, organized by UNOWAS and the Task Force, that brought together
40 regional experts and United Nations agencies to discuss support to the Group
through the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative, which focuses
on building the capacities of Governments to counter terrorism and prevent violent
extremism, in line with the integrated strategy and as mandated by the Security
Council (see resolution 2195 (2014) and S/PRST/2015/24).
49. UNOWAS also contributed to a conference on preventing violent extremism,
organized by the African Union in partnership with the Group o f Five for the Sahel
and held in Bamako from 11 to 13 October. The meeting was the first in a series of
events aimed at developing a regional action plan. It was attended by a wide range
of representatives from countries of the Group and Algeria, Côte d’Iv oire, Nigeria
and Senegal. Recommendations included strengthening media networks with a view
to reinforcing counter-radicalization narratives. UNOWAS also continued to provide
support to the permanent secretariat of the Group in operationalizing its threat
analysis and early warning mechanism, which will be based in Nouakchott. It
further assisted the Group in the development of guidelines for the prevention of
radicalization and violent extremism.
50. Thanks to technical assistance provided by UNODC under the security pillar
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, authorities in Mali carried
out a number of drug seizures, including one, in August, in Mopti, of over 400
grams of cocaine mixed with ephedrine with a market value of more than $ 20,000.
In October, they also arrested the alleged head of the international drug trafficking
ring responsible for the trafficking of 2.7 tons of cannabis that had been seized in
Bamako aboard a truck coming from Ghana in May. The arrest was made possible

16-21376

13/18

S/2016/1072

through regional cooperation channels, as Malian authorities were able to locate the
suspect in the Niger by exchanging information with their Senegalese counterparts.
This was the first recorded instance in Mali’s history of an international drug
network being dismantled. In the Niger, the Joint Airport Interdiction Task Force at
the Niamey International Airport intercepted some 9 kg of smuggled gold and
€500,000 of undeclared currency on two passengers in October, highlighting the
unit’s capacity to counter forms of transnational organized crime that go beyond
drug trafficking. UNODC also provided support to an anti -corruption awarenessraising campaign in the Niger and, in cooperation with the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, helped universities in Burkina
Faso to establish a master’s degree programme on anti-corruption.
51. Under the governance pillar of the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel, a joint mission, comprising representatives from IOM, the Peacebu ilding
Support Office (PBSO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
UNHCR, was conducted in the Sahel region from 1 to 10 November to support the
development of cross-border projects, funded from the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund. The project is aimed at promoting stability, building resilience
and preventing the spread of violent extremism in border areas in the Liptako Gourma region of Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger. During the mission’s visit to
Mali from 1 to 5 November, programmatic entry points were identified to address
conflict drivers in the region bordering Burkina Faso and the Niger. The findings of
the mission were validated by the United Nations, civil society organizations and
government officials from Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger during a three-day
workshop held in Ouagadougou from 7 to 10 November. PBSO is currently
developing cross-border project documents, in line with the integrated strategy, to
support the countries’ efforts to tackle the root causes of conflict in the region.
52. With regard to the resilience pillar of the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, the Governments of Burkina Faso, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger met on several occasions within the framework of the
Sahel Women’s Empowerment and Demographic Dividend Project, led by the
United Nations Population Fund, which seeks to address demographic challenges in
the Sahel. During a high-level symposium on the demographic dividend and
Africa’s development, organized in Dakar on 29 June, and a high-level dialogue on
strengthening partnership to accelerate Africa’s demographic dividend, organized in
New York on 19 September, a road map with an emphasis on youth empowerment
was developed by participating Governments to address the root causes of insecurity
in the Sahel.
53. Further to the request of the Security Council, contained in its presidential
statement of 8 December 2015, for “detailed information on the financial
contributions towards boosting economic growth and eradicating poverty, through
projects that would support peace and security efforts in the Sahel region’’
(S/PRST/2015/24), the Secretariat undertook consultations with the relevant entities
concerning the pledges made to Sahelian countries, announced during the joint
high-level visit to the Sahel by the United Nations, African Union, World Bank,
African Development Bank and European Union in November 2013. According to
its data, the World Bank has committed over $7.2 billion since 2013 to 13 Sahel
countries (Algeria, Burkina Faso, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Guinea -Bissau,
Libya, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria, Senegal and the Sudan), of which

14/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

$5.1 billion has been disbursed. Of the $7.2 billion pledged to the Sahel, the World
Bank committed $1.9 billion and disbursed $1.6 billion to countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel. Meanwhile, according to its data, the European Union committed
$3 billion to the 13 countries of the Sahel in 2013 and $3.1 billion in 2014, of which
approximately one third was committed to countries of the Group. The European
Union disbursed $3.6 billion to the 13 countries of the Sahel in 2013 and
$2.8 billion in 2014, which included disbursements of $1 billion and $0.9 billion in
countries of the Group in 2013 and 2014. Those figures do not take into account the
additional funding mobilized for operational deployments such as African Union
and United Nations missions in Mali (MISAHEL and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali), the European Union
Training Mission in Mali, the European Union Capacity Building Missions in Mali
and the Niger and other contributions that do not qualify as official development
assistance but nonetheless support peace and security efforts. In November 2015,
the European Union also established an emergency trust fund for stability and to
address the root causes of irregular migration and displaced persons in Africa. The
fund includes $1 billion in earmarked funding for the Sahel and Lake Chad regions.

C.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
54. UNOWAS participated in a forum for non-governmental organizations,
organized by the African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies and held
in Banjul from 17 to 19 October, which aimed at enhancing the participation of
non-governmental organizations in the fifty-ninth ordinary session of the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights. On the margins of the forum,
UNOWAS co-chaired a panel on strengthening the capacity of national and regional
civil society networks. Upon conclusion of the forum, the non-governmental
organizations adopted nine resolutions that were later submitted for consideration
by the Commission. On 21 October, UNOWAS participated in the fifty-ninth
ordinary session of the Commission, also held in Banjul.
55. As part of a mission to Ouagadougou together with the Department of Political
Affairs, PBSO and UNDP, from 28 June to 5 July, UNOWAS contributed to an
assessment aimed at strengthening the capacities of the High Council for
Reconciliation and National Unity of Burkina Faso, which led to the development of
a project aimed at reinforce the Council’s capacity.
56. During the reporting period, UNOWAS efforts to promote the role of women
and youth in conflict prevention focused on creating synergies among regional
organizations while raising awareness regarding Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women, youth, and peace and security,
including resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2250 (2015). In this regard, in August and
September, UNOWAS and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women met with regional members of the Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security in West Africa, coordinated outreach missions of the
Working Group to Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the Niger, and held a workshop
with academic partners in Ouagadougou on 14 October. In addition, UNOWAS
supported the re-establishment of the ECOWAS West African Network of Young
Female Leaders.

16-21376

15/18

S/2016/1072

D.

Inter-institutional cooperation
United Nations inter-institutional cooperation
57. From 9 to 11 November, UNOWAS participated in an inter -agency mission to
Burkina Faso, led by the Department of Political Affairs. The purpose of the mission
was to hold consultations with national authorities and relevant stakeholders for the
development of a strategic framework for the implementation of a pilot approach on
“sustaining peace”, in line with the twin Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions (Council resolution 2282 (2016) and Assembly resolution 70/262), to
help Burkina Faso to consolidate stability in the post-transition period. The strategy
will be supported by all levels of the United Nations system and will emphasize
political support, alignment with regional approaches and strong linkages with
national planning processes in support of stabilization tasks such as national
reconciliation. The approach also foresees the enhancement of partnerships with
international financial institutions. In close collaboration with UNDP and other
United Nations entities, UNOWAS will play a central role in the implementation of
the strategy for sustaining peace.
Cooperation with regional and subregional partners
58. On 20 October, UNOWAS and ECOWAS held a desk-to-desk meeting at the
ECOWAS Commission in Abuja. The meeting discussed priority areas for
cooperation in 2017, including joint early warning and fact -finding missions to riskprone countries, and cross-cutting thematic areas such as the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. In line
with the UNOWAS-Mano River Union cooperation framework workplan that was
adopted in May, a technical meeting was held on 9 November to review progress
and plan joint activities in 2017. Following the establishment of the UNOWAS
liaison cell in Nouakchott in April, UNOWAS focused on facilitating United
Nations engagement with the Group of Five for the Sahel.

IV. Observations and recommendations
59. The overall situation in the West Africa and Sahel subregions during the
reporting period was positive. I was particularly encouraged by the successful
holding of peaceful and credible elections in Cabo Verde and Ghan a and by the
outcome of the political dialogue in Guinea. I was also encouraged by the steps
taken to develop and institute political, institutional and constitutional reforms in
Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Senegal and Sierra Leone. I urge
national stakeholders to continue to engage in dialogue in a spirit of tolerance,
openness and inclusivity.
60. I welcome the measures taken by the United Nations system, in partnership
with the authorities of Burkina Faso, to pilot a new approach to sus taining peace in
the country, including the development of a strategic framework to help consolidate
stability in the post-transition period. I commend the authorities for the work
undertaken, with United Nations support, to reform and reorganize the secur ity
sector and to support national reconciliation. I call on institutional partners and

16/18

16-21376

S/2016/1072

donors to support those efforts and ensure close coordination as part of a wider
partnership to support Burkina Faso in consolidating stability and democratic gains.
61. I am dismayed by the 9 December statement by President Yahya A. J. J.
Jammeh of the Gambia rejecting the outcome of the 1 December presidential
election. I reiterate my earlier call for a peaceful, timely and orderly transfer of
power, in full respect of the will of the Gambian people as expressed in the election.
I urge the Security Council to continue to support the efforts of the people of the
Gambia, ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations for a speedy and
peaceful transfer of power.
62. I remain worried by the prevalence of terrorist and violent extremist threats in
the region and their linkages to transnational organized crime. While I commend the
commitment by concerned Member States, regional organizations and other partners
to step up efforts, with United Nations support, to prevent and counter violent
extremism, I encourage further collaboration to address the underlying drivers relating
to development, social exclusion, environmental degradation and governance.
63. The escalation of militant activities in the Niger Delta region and the incidents
of violence between pastoralists and farmers in the Middle Belt region of Nigeria
are also worrisome. In that regard, my Special Representative will continue to
support efforts to strengthen the national peace architecture in the country with a
view to addressing internal security challenges that have the potential to spill over.
64. I commend the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for its continued efforts
to implement the judgment of the International Court of Justice of 10 October 2002.
I am encouraged by the continued cooperation between the Governments of
Cameroon and Nigeria to ensure the completion of the border demarcation,
implement confidence-building measures and protect the rights of the affected
border communities. My Special Representative will continue to provide good
offices to help to resolve any outstanding issues and assist the two parties in
mobilizing resources.
65. I welcome the leadership demonstrated by countries in West Africa and the
Sahel in advancing democracy and spearheading initiatives to tackle security
challenges in the region. I commend the sustained efforts made by participating
countries for the operationalization of the Multinational Joint Task Force, which led
to a reduction in the number of casualties due to Boko Haram attacks. I encourage
stronger partnership among affected countries, as well as between them and the
African Union, and reiterate my call for all counter -insurgency efforts to be carried
out in full compliance with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. I welcome the assistance provided by regional and international partners, but
remain very concerned about the continuing humanitarian toll in the region. I urge
donors to support the humanitarian response in the Lake Chad Basin, which remains
critically underfunded, and to intensify demining, rehabilitation and resettlement
efforts while addressing the underlying root causes that led to the emergence of
Boko Haram. My Special Representative, in his capacity as my High-level
Representative for Nigeria, will continue to reach out to relevant stakeholders to
build momentum with a view to facilitating the release of Boko Haram abductees.
66. I am encouraged that the pledges made during the joint visit to the Sahel by
the United Nations, African Union, World Bank, African Development Bank and

16-21376

17/18

S/2016/1072

European Union in 2013 were followed up with concrete financial commitments and
disbursements. I commend the donor community for their generous su pport to the
region and encourage Governments in the region and development partners to
explore innovative ways to use these resources to achieve greater development
impact. I also call on all stakeholders to take the steps required to create the security
and political conditions necessary for the implementation of development assistance
in the Sahel region.
67. I commend the close cooperation between the United Nations, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Group of Five for the Sahel, the European Union and othe r
partners in support of stability in the Sahel region and reiterate the dedication of the
United Nations to ensuring the effective implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, in close collaboration with Member States,
regional organizations and other stakeholders. The United Nations will take into
account the conclusions of the independent evaluation to revise the strategy’s
implementation modalities, including its thematic focus, coordination arrangements,
partnerships and distribution of responsibilities among United Nations entities in the
field and at Headquarters.
68. In view of the broad range of challenges to peace and stability that West Africa
and the Sahel continue to face and the continuous need for support to the effo rts of
regional and subregional organizations to promote peace, stability and good
governance, I recommend that the mandate of UNOWAS be extended for a period of
three years, from 1 January 2017 until 31 December 2019. I will submit a detailed
description of the proposed mandate in a letter to the President of the Security
Council.
69. In conclusion, I wish to express my deep appreciation to the Governments of
West Africa and the Sahel region, the ECOWAS Commission, the African Union,
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Mano River Union and the Group of Five for
the Sahel for their continued cooperation with UNOWAS. I also extend my
appreciation to the United Nations system in West Africa and the Sahel, civil society
organizations and other institutions for their close partnership with UNOWAS in the
implementation of its mandate. I express particular appreciation to my Special
Representative, the staff of UNOWAS and the staff of the Cameroon -Nigeria Mixed
Commission for their continuing efforts to advance pea ce and security in West
Africa and the Sahel.

18/18

16-21376
