220

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International Relations,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,16
Noting that the Special Committee has commenced
work to accomplish the tasks assigned to it,
Taking into account that the Special Committee has
not completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of the principle of the non-use of force in
international relations and for assistance by the United
Nations in this endeavour,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest
possible date, a world treaty on the non-use of force
in international relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or such other recommendations as
the Committee deems appropriate;
3. Invites the Goverments which have not yet done
so to communicate their comments or suggestions or
to bring them up to date, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 /9;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, including the preparation of summary records
of its meetings;
5. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Report
of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978

33/97.

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Law Commission
submitted a draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind in 1954, 17
Recalling further that the General Assembly decided,
by its resolutions 897 (IX) of 4 December 1954 and
1186 (XII) of 11 December 1957, to postpone the
consideration of the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind"
until a definition of aggression had been adopted by
the Assembly,
Bearing in mind that on 14 December 1974 the
General Assembly adopted resolution 3314 (XXIX)
entitled "Definition of Aggression",
Having considered the statements made during the
debates on this item,
16 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 41 (A/33/41 and Corr.1).

17 Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/2693), para. 54.

1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States and relevant international intergovernmental
organizations to submit their comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind, including comments on the
procedure to be adopted, not later than 31 December 1979, and to prepare a report to be submitted to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
2. Also reque~ts the Secretary-General to circulate
to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations reports prepared for and
by the International Law Commission, the summary
records of the relevant debates in the General Assembly and all other relevant official documentation
on the item;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Draft Code of
Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind"
and to accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/139.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth session, 18
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing
the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 19 and to give
increased importance to its role in relations among
States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirtieth session
the International Law Commission, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 32/151 of 19 December 1977, completed, in the light of the observations
and comments of Member States, of organs of the
United Nations, of the specialized agencies and of
interested intergovernmental organizations, the second
reading of its draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses,
Noting further with appreciation the work done by
the International Law Commission on State responsibility, succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties, treaties concluded between States and
international organizations, as well as the status of
the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
Taking note of the preliminary work done by the
International Law Commission regarding the study of
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses, the second part of the topic "Relations
between States and international organizations", international liability for injurious consequences arising out
of acts not prohibited by international law and jurisdictional immunities of States and their property,
18 Ibid.,

Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. JO (A/33/10).
2625 (XXV), annex.

19 Resolution
