A/RES/76/112

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 December 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 82
Report of the International Law Commission on the work of
its seventy-second session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 9 December 2021
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/76/473, para. 12)]

76/112.

Protection of the atmosphere
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its seventy-second session, 1 which contains the draft
preamble and guidelines on the protection of the atmosphere,
Taking note of the recommendation of the International Law Commission
contained in paragraph 37 of its report,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of protection of the atmosphere is of major importance
in international relations,
1.
Welcomes the conclusion of the work of the International Law Commission
on the protection of the atmosphere and its adoption of the draft preamble and
guidelines on the protection of the atmosphere and commentaries thereto; 2
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its
continuing contribution to the codification and progressive development of
international law;
3.
Takes note of the views and comments expressed in the debates of the Sixth
Committee on the subject, including those made at the seventy-sixth session of the

__________________
1
2

21-18668 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/76/10).
Ibid., paras. 39 and 40.

271221

*2118668*

A/RES/76/112

Protection of the atmosphere

General Assembly, 3 after the International Law Commission had completed its
consideration of this topic in accordance with its statute;
4.
Also takes note of the preamble and guidelines on the protection of the
atmosphere, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, with the
commentaries thereto, brings them to the attention of States, international
organizations and all who may be called upon to deal with the subject, and encourages
their widest possible dissemination.
49th plenary meeting
9 December 2021

Annex
Guidelines on the protection of the atmosphere
Preamble
Acknowledging that the atmosphere is a natural resource, with a limited
assimilation capacity, essential for sustaining life on Earth, human health and welfare,
and aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems,
Bearing in mind that the transport and dispersion of polluting and degrading
substances occur within the atmosphere,
Considering that atmospheric pollution and atmospheric degradation are a
common concern of humankind,
Aware of the special situation and needs of developing countries,
Noting the close interaction between the atmosphere and the oceans,
Noting in particular the special situation of low-lying coastal areas and small
island developing States due to sea-level rise,
Recognizing that the interests of future generations of humankind in the longterm conservation of the quality of the atmosphere should be fully taken into account,
Recalling that the present guidelines were elaborated on the understanding that
they were not intended to interfere with relevant political negotiations or to impose
on current treaty regimes rules or principles not already contained therein,
Guideline 1
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present guidelines:
(a)

“atmosphere” means the envelope of gases surrounding the Earth;

(b) “atmospheric pollution” means the introduction or release by humans,
directly or indirectly, into the atmosphere of substances or energy contributing to
significant deleterious effects extending beyond the State of origin of such a nature
as to endanger human life and health and the Earth’s natural environment;

__________________
3

2/5

See A/C.6/76/SR.16, A/C.6/76/SR.17, A/C.6/76/SR.18, A/C.6/76/SR.19, A/C.6/76/SR.20,
A/C.6/76/SR.21, A/C.6/76/SR.22, A/C.6/76/SR.23, A/C.6/76/SR.24, A/C.6/76/SR.25 and
A/C.6/76/SR.29. The statements made in the Sixth Committee are available in full (in the
original languages) on the website of the Sixth Committee, at www.un.org/en/ga/sixth/.
21-18668

Protection of the atmosphere

A/RES/76/112

(c) “atmospheric degradation” means the alteration by humans, directly or
indirectly, of atmospheric conditions having significant deleterious effects of such a
nature as to endanger human life and health and the Earth’s natural environment.
Guideline 2
Scope
1.
The present guidelines concern the protection of the atmosphere from
atmospheric pollution and atmospheric degradation.
2.
The present guidelines do not deal with and are without prejudice to questions
concerning the polluter-pays principle, the precautionary principle and the common
but differentiated responsibilities principle.
3.
Nothing in the present guidelines affects the status of airspace under
international law nor questions related to outer space, including its delimitation.
Guideline 3
Obligation to protect the atmosphere
States have the obligation to protect the atmosphere by exercising due diligence
in taking appropriate measures, in accordance with applicable rules of international
law, to prevent, reduce or control atmospheric pollution and atmospheric degradation.
Guideline 4
Environmental impact assessment
States have the obligation to ensure that an environmental impact assessment is
undertaken of proposed activities under their jurisdiction or control which are likely
to cause significant adverse impact on the atmosphere in terms of atmospheric
pollution or atmospheric degradation.
Guideline 5
Sustainable utilization of the atmosphere
1.
Given that the atmosphere is a natural resource with a limited assimilation
capacity, its utilization should be undertaken in a sustainable manner.
2.
Sustainable utilization of the atmosphere includes the need to reconcile
economic development with the protection of the atmosphere.
Guideline 6
Equitable and reasonable utilization of the atmosphere
The atmosphere should be utilized in an equitable and reasonable manner, taking
fully into account the interests of present and future generations.
Guideline 7
Intentional large-scale modification of the atmosphere
Activities aimed at intentional large-scale modification of the atmosphere
should only be conducted with prudence and caution, and subject to any applicable
rules of international law, including those relating to environmental impact
assessment.

21-18668

3/5

A/RES/76/112

Protection of the atmosphere

Guideline 8
International cooperation
1.
States have the obligation to cooperate, as appropriate, with each other and with
relevant international organizations for the protection of the atmosphere from
atmospheric pollution and atmospheric degradation.
2.
States should cooperate in further enhancing scientific and technical knowledge
relating to the causes and impacts of atmospheric pollution and atmospheric
degradation. Cooperation could include exchange of information and joint
monitoring.
Guideline 9
Interrelationship among relevant rules
1.
The rules of international law relating to the protection of the atmosphere and
other relevant rules of international law, including, inter alia, the rules of international
trade and investment law, of the law of the sea and of international human rights law,
should, to the extent possible, be identified, interpreted and applied in order to give
rise to a single set of compatible obligations, in line with the principles of
harmonization and systemic integration, and with a view to avoiding conflicts. This
should be done in accordance with the relevant rules set forth in the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, including articles 30 and 31, paragraph 3 (c), and
the principles and rules of customary international law.
2.
States should, to the extent possible, when developing new rules of international
law relating to the protection of the atmosphere and other relevant rules of
international law, endeavour to do so in a harmonious manner.
3.
When applying paragraphs 1 and 2, special consideration should be given to
persons and groups particularly vulnerable to atmospheric pollution and atmospheric
degradation. Such groups may include, inter alia, indigenous peoples, people of the
least developed countries and people of low-lying coastal areas and small island
developing States affected by sea-level rise.
Guideline 10
Implementation
1.
National implementation of obligations under international law relating to the
protection of the atmosphere from atmospheric pollution and atmospheric
degradation, including those referred to in the present guidelines, may take the form
of legislative, administrative, judicial and other actions.
2.
States should endeavour to give effect to the recommendations contained in the
present guidelines.
Guideline 11
Compliance
1.
States are required to abide by their obligations under international law relating
to the protection of the atmosphere from atmospheric pollution and atmospheric
degradation in good faith, including through compliance with the rules and
procedures in the relevant agreements to which they are parties.
2.
To achieve compliance, facilitative or enforcement procedures may be used as
appropriate, in accordance with the relevant agreements:
(a) facilitative procedures may include providing assistance to States, in cases
of non-compliance, in a transparent, non-adversarial and non-punitive manner to

4/5

21-18668

Protection of the atmosphere

A/RES/76/112

ensure that the States concerned comply with their obligations under international
law, taking into account their capabilities and special conditions;
(b) enforcement procedures may include issuing a caution of non-compliance,
termination of rights and privileges under the relevant agreements, and other forms
of enforcement measures.
Guideline 12
Dispute settlement
1.
Disputes between States relating to the protection of the atmosphere from
atmospheric pollution and atmospheric degradation are to be settled by peaceful
means.
2.
Since such disputes may be of a fact-intensive and science-dependent character,
due consideration should be given to the use of scientific and technical experts.

21-18668

5/5
