General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

128

economy as a matter of priority, in order to reduce its
dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the United States Virgin Islands;57
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people,
to continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the
Declaration with respect to the United States Virgin
Islands;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of the Territory
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and
economic development for the United States Virgin
Islands;
6. Requests the administering Power to consider
favourably inviting a United Nations mission to visit
the United States Virgin Islands for the purpose of
observing conditions in the Territory and learning firsthand of the aspirations of the people concerning their
political status;
7. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of the Territory, to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of its natural resources by
taking effective measures which guarantee the rights of
the people to own and dispose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the United States Virgin Islands;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the United States
Virgin Islands, including the possible dispatch of a
visiting mission in consultation with the administering
Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
I December 1976

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 58
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to Guam, in particular General Assembly
resolutions 3429 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 and
3481 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Deploring the policy of the administering Power in
continuing to maintain military installations on Guam,
in contravention of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate
and first-hand information in regard to the conditions
prevailing in those Territories and to the views, wishes
and aspirations of the peoples therein with respect to
their future status,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement
by its people of the objectives embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam, and
stressing the necessity of diversifying its economy as a
matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence on
fluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Guam; 59
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with_ the freely elected representatives of the people, to
contmue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the
Declaration with respect to Guam;
. 5. ~trongly deprecates the establishment of military
mstallations on Guam as being incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

31/58.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
57 Ibid.,

chap. XXXI.

6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of the Territory
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and
economic development for Guam;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to reconsider
its attitude towards receiving United Nations visiting
5 8 Jbid.,
59 Jbid.,

chap. III, chap. V, annex IV, and chap. XXIII.
chap. XXIII.

VII,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

missions and to permit access by such a mission to the
Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of Guam, to sa_feguard
the inalienable right of the people of the ~erntory. to
the enjoyment of its natural resources by takmg effective
measures which guarantee the rights of the people to
own and dispose of those natural resources and to
establish and maintain control of their future development;
9. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations ~ystem _in
accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life
of Guam;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the impleme!ltation
of the Declaration with respect to Guam, mcludmg the
possible dispatch of a visiting mission in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
J December 1976

31/59.

Question of French Somaliland

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of so-called French
Somaliland (Djibouti),
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,60
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolutions 222,8 (XXI) of 20
December 1966, 2356 (XXII) of 19 December 1967
and 3480 (XXX) of 11 December 1975 on so-called
French Somaliland (Djibouti),
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the liberation movements, the Front de liberation de
la Cote des Somalis 61 and the Mouvement de liberation
de Djibouti, 62
Having also heard the statements of the President of
the Government Council of the Territory, 63 as well as
those of the representatives of the political parties,
namely, the Ligue populaire africaine pour l'independance,64 the Union nationale pour l'independance 65 and
the Mouvement populaire de liberation, 66 and of a
petitioner, 67
so Ibid., chap. XIV.
Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras. 60-109, 17th meeting, paras. 44-49, and 21st meeting, paras. 22-34; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
62 Ibid., 17th meeting, paras 18-43.
63 Ibid., 14th meeting, paras. 22-58, and 20th meeting,
paras. 5-15.
64 Ibid., 17th meeting, paras. 72-94.
65 Ibid., 20th meeting, paras. 35-60.
66 Ibid., 17th meeting, paras. 52-69.
67 Ibid., 20th meeting, paras. 63, 64, 68-70, 78, 79 and
84-87.
61 Ibid.,

129

Taking note of the solemn declarations of the leaders
of the delegations of Ethiopia and Somalia before the
Council 0 ( Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its twcnty-,eventh ordinary session, held at
Port Louis from 24 June to 3 Julv 1976, and before
the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly, 68
affirming that their respective Governments would
recognize, respect and honour the independence, sovereignty and territorial intcg_rity of S?-called_ French
Somaliland (Djibouti) after its accession to mdependence,
Taking note also of the resolution on the question
of so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti) adopted by
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975, 69 and of that part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colomho from 16 to 19 August 1976, regarding the question, 70
Having heard the statement of the representative of
France, as the administering Power, 71 in particular the
expressed commitment of his Government to lead the
Territory to independence in 1977,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti) to self-determination and independence;
2. Reaffirms also its unqualified support of the right
of the people of so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti)
to immediate and unconditional independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Calls upon the Government of France to implement scrupulously and equitably, under democratic
conditions, the programme for the independence of socalled French Somaliland (Djibouti), as outlined by the
representative of France in his statement before the
Fourth Committee of the General Assembly, 71 within
the indicated time frame, namely, the summer of 1977;
4. Urges the leaders of the Government Council
of the Territory, as well as the representatives of the
liberation movements. the Front de liberation de la
Cote des Somalis and the Mouvement de liberation de
Djibouti, and of the political parties and groups to
enter into the broadest possible discussions on neutral
grounds, under the auspices of the Organization of
African Unity, with a view to resolving their differences,
and to agree on a common political platform before
the holding of a referendum, in conformity with the
resolution adopted by the Council of Ministers at its
twenty-seventh ordinary session 72 and subsequently approved by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session;
5. Also calls upon the Government of France to
co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
in its effort to convene. in accordance with the decision
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, a
round-table conference for the speedy implementation
of the request contained in paragraph 4 above;
8
6 / bid .. 20th meeting, paras. 92-146 (Ethiopia); 14th meeting, paras. 110-130, and 17th meeting, paras. 13-17 (Somalia);
and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
6 9 A/10217 and Corr.I, annex I. resolution I.
70 A/31/197, annex I, para. 37.
71 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras. 1-20.
72 A/31/196 and Corr.], annex, resolution CM/Res.480
(XXVII).
