206

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session
- --

year the mandate of the Special Rapportcur on the situation of human rights in Chile.
Dep/oring once 11gai11 the fact that the rcpeated appcals
of the General Asscmbly. the Commission on Human
Rights and othcr international organs to re-cstablish
human rights and fundamental freedoms havc heen
ignored by thc Chilcan authorities, which continuc to
refuse to co-operate with thc Commission on Human
Rights and its Spccial Rapporteur.
1:·xpressing ils ¡m~found cunccrn that. according to the
conclusions of thc Special Rapporteur, the performance or
the Chilean authorities with regard to the situation of
human rights has been negative in general and that they
have not been responsive to the concerns of the international community expresscd in resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights.
Observing that the Chilcan authorities have permitted a
limited number or nationals to return to thc country. but
noting that the rneasures taken to that effect have bcen
arbitrary and restrictivc.
l. Commends the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Chile for his report. 124 prepared in
accordance with <·ommission on Human Rights resolution
1983/38;
2. Reitera/es its grave conccrn at the persistence of and
increase in serious and systcmatic violations of human
rights in Chile. as described in thc report of the Special
Rapporteur;
3. Expresses once again its conccm at thc disruption of
the traditional dcmocratic legal ordcr and its institutions
by the maintenance of exceptional legislation, the institutionalization of various states of emergency and the existence of a Constitution in Chile which does not reflect a
freely expressed popular will and the provisions of which
not only fail to guarantee the enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms hut also suppress, suspcnd or
restrict thc exercise of those rights and frecdoms;
4. A/so reiterares its gral"c conCi'rn at the inefficacy of
reeourse to habeas corp111 or amparo and of protertion in
view of the fact that the judiciary in Chile does not exercise its powers fully in this respect and carries out its functions under severe restrictions;
5. Once again rcqucs/1 the Chilean authorities to
respect and promote human rights in compliance with the
obligations they have assumcd under various international
instruments and. in particular. to cnd the régime of exception and especially the practice of dcclaring states of emergency, under which serious and continuing violations of
human rights are committcd, and to restore the principie
of legality, democratic institutions and the effective enjoyment and exercise of civil and political rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination:
6. Once more urges the Chilean authorities to investigate and clarify the fate of persons who have disappearcd
for political reasons, to inform their families of the results
of such investigation and to bring to trial and punish those
responsible for these disappearances;
7. Reiterares its appea/ to the Chilcan authorities to pul
an end to intimidation and persecution. as well as arbitrary detentions and imprisonment in sccret places and the
practice of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatmcnt which havc rcsulted in unexplained
deaths, and to re,p\'ct the right of persons to life and physical integrity:
124 See A/38138_, ""<l Ad<l. 1
1 2 5 Sec O/hcia/ Rn·1wd\ i f //¡c h 11110,n/(· a,u/ .\'ocwl (·,·un, 1/ . .\1, 11· W'(o11d
1 \ chap '\ '<l. ,f'Cl ll
Session. Suii11/c111{'111
1, ¡r· ,,,:

-

--

-~--------

-···---

------- ------ ----

8. Expresses its concern at the violent suppression of
the ever larger and more widespread popular protests in
!he facc of the incapacity of the authorities to restore
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as reported by
the Special Rapporteur. which have resulted in serious, flagran! and systematir violation of human rights, including
mass detcntions and numerous deaths:
9. Once again urges the Chilean authorities to respect
the right of Chileans to Iive in and freely enter and leave
lheir country. without restrictions or conditions. and to
cease thc practice of "relegation" (assignment of forced
,rsidence) and forced cxile;
1O. Renflrs its appeal to the Chilean authorities to
restore the full enjoyment and exercise of trade union
rights. in particular the right to organize trade unions, the
right to collectivc bargaining and the right to strike;
11. Once more urges the Chilean authorities to protect
and restore the economic. social and cultural rights of the
population and. in particular, to respect the rights
mtended to preserve the cultural identity and improve the
social status of the indigcnous population;
12. Conc/udes. on the basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur, that it is necessary to keep under consideration the situation of human rights in Chile;
13_ Ca/Is again upon the Chilean authorities to coopcratc with the Special Rapporteur and to submit their
commcnts on his report to the Commission on Human
Rights at its fortieth session;
14. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to study
in depth the report of the Special Rapporteur at its fortieth
session and to take the most appropriate steps for the effecti vc restoration of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile, including the extension of the mandate of
thc Special Rapporteur for one more year. and requests the
Commission to report. through the Economic and Social
Council. to thc <irncral Assembly at its thirty-ninth ses,Hm_

/O0th p/enary meeting
16 December 1983

38/103.

Human rights and mass exoduses

!he General Asscmhly,
.\1indJúl of its general humanitarian mandate under the
Charter ofthe United Nations and its mandate to promote
and cncourage respert for human rights and fundamental
frcedoms for all.
Decp/_r disturhcd by the continuing scale and magnitude
of exoduscs and displacements of populations in many
rcgions of the world and by the human suffering of millions of refugees and displaced persons in ali regions of the
world.
Conscwus that human rights violations are among the
principal factors in the complex and multiple causes of
mass cxoduses of population.
Deeply preoccupied by the increasingly heavy burden
being imposed, particularly upon developing countries
with limited resources of their own. and upon the intemational communit) as a whole, by these sudden and mass
exoduses and displacements of population,
Recalling its resolution 32/130 of 16 December I 977
and Commission on Human Rights resolution 4 (XXXIII)
of 21 February 1977 i,; on thc full realization of economir. social and rnltural rights.

\ 1

Re~nlutions adopted on the report, of the Third Commitlt't'

Reca/ling a/so its rcsolutions 35/ 124 of 11 Deccmber
1980, 36/148 of 1(, 1Jeccrnbr1 1481 a11d 37;)2I of 16
Deccmbcr 1982 on mtcrnatio11al co-opcration to avcrt
new flows of rcfugccs. 35' 1% ol 15 Dcccmber 1980 and
37 / 186 of 17 Deccmber 11>82 (>11 human rights and mass
exoduses and ( ·omm1ssion 011 l luman R1ghts rcsolutions
29 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981 ."'' 1982(\2 of 11 March
1982 121 and 1983/35 ol 8 Man:h ll/83. i •
Conrinced that thcrc is an urgcnt rn:cd to improvc coordination within thc cxisting internatiunal machincry to
<leal with mass exoduses and displaccmrnts of population,
Recognizing that thc study on human rights and massivc
exoduses prcpared hy thc Spccial Rapportcur of the Commission on Human Rights 129 can make an importan! contribution to thc dcvclopmcnt of intcrnational thinking on
the present problcm of mass exoduses and their causes.
and thus help in the prcvention ol' further mass movements of population ami thc rnitigation of thcir consequences.
l. Takcs duc 1wlc of thr repon of the SccrctaryGeneral on human rights and mass cxoduscs: 1"'
2. Invites (iovcrnments to intcn~ify thelf co-opcration
and assistance in world-wide clforts to addrcss thc incrcasingly scrious problcm of mass cxnduses:
3. Requests thosc Govcrnmcnts that havc not yct done
so to communicate to the Secretary-Cicneral their opinions
on the study prepared by the Spccial Rapporteur and the
recommendations made therein with a vicw to the General
Assembly taking a dccision on !hose rccommendations:
4. Notes the Sccretary-General's rcqucst to the agencies and organizations of the United Nations system to
make recommendations and to takc whatcvcr stcps possible, within their mandatcs and cxisting resourccs. to
improve international co-operation rn thesc lields:
5. Cnnsiders it dcsirah/c for thc Sccretarv-Gcneral to
utilize to thc grcatcst extcnt possiblc relc~ant United
Nations machinery to analysc promptly information on
situations which might cause mass cxoduses;
6. Notes with inlcrcst that the Secrctary-General has on
many occasions dcsignated special representatives on
humanitarian issues on an ad hoc basis. and his rcadiness
to continuc ami expand this practicc:
7. Rcquests thc Secretary-Gencral to follow closely
developments on this qucstion. to take into consideration
ali the furthcr comments of Member States. including
those expressed at the th irty-cighth session of the General
Assembly and at the forticth session or the Commission on
Human Rights. and to kcep undcr rcvicw thc recommcndations of the Special Rapportcur:
8. Rccalls that, in its rcsolution 36/ 148, the General
Assembly requested the Uroup of Govcrnmental Experts
on Intemational Co-operation to A vert New Flows of Refugees to undcrtake a comprehcnsivc rcvicw ofthc problcm
of massive flows of rcfugees and. in accordancc with paragraph 7 of that resolution, invitcd the Group of Governmental Experts to consider the rccommcndations of the
Special Rapportcur which fall within its mandatc:
9. Decides to considcr thc question of human rights
and mass exoduses at its thirt) -ninlh sc~sion.

38/104.

lnternational Research and Training lnstitute for the Advancement of Women

I 'he ( icncral :lssc111hlr,
Rü·allin¡; its resolution 37 '56 of 3 Decembcr 1982. in
which it invitcd the Sccretary-General to suhmit to thc
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report on
the programme activit1es of the Intcrnational Rcscarch
and Training Institute ror thc Advancement of Women.
rak1ng note of thc rcport of thc Institute on its programmc activities. 111
Recal!ing Economic and Social ( ·ouncil resolution 19831
29 of 26 May 1983 concerning thc programmc of work or
the Institute for the bicnnium 1984-1985.
Bearing in mínd that the opcration of thc lnstitutc
depends solely on voluntary contrihutions.
1. l:"xpresscs its sat1.1Iactwn at the oflicial inauguration
of the International Research and Training lnstitutc for
the Advancement of Womcn at its pcrmancnt hcadquarters at Santo Domingo.
2. rakcs note 11·ith satisfactwn of the programme of
work of the lnstitute I i: and requests that the lnstitutc continue activities that contribute to the full intcgration of
women in the mainstream of dcvelopment and that duc
attention be given to thc interdependence of micro and
macro cconomy and its 1mpact on the role of womcn in
thc devclopment proCl'ss:
3. Requests the Sccrctary-Gencral to take into account.
when preparing the statutc ofthe Institutc, ali relevan! factors, including the fact that the Institute and its work are
fundcd from voluntary contributions, as well as the principie of equitablc geographical distribution applicable to thc
membership uf the Board of Trustccs:
4. Similar/y rcques/s thc Economic and Social Council.
when considering thc statutc of the Institute, to takc thc
above-mcntioncd elemcnts into account:
5. Urges the Sccrctary-Gcneral to continuc to providc
support to the Institutc through the various dcpartmcnts
of the Secretariat and to secure office space at llnitcd
Nations Headquarters for liaison purposes in order to
ensure prompt execution of thc Institute's programme of
work, as well as to maintain channels of communication
bctween the lnstitute and the United Nations in conformity with thc dccision of the Board of Trustccs:
6. Invites Governments and intcrgovcrnmental and
non-govcrnmental organizations to contribute to thc
United Nations Trust Fund for the International Rcsearch
and Training lnstitute for thc Advancement of Women to
meet the urgent need for financia) rcsourccs in ordn to
implement the programmc of work of thc lnstitute:
7. Decides to include in thc provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session a separatc item entitled "lnternational
Rcsearch and Training Jnstitutc for thc Advanccmcnt or
Womcn".

/()11/h plcnary meeting

100th p!enan· 11u'clí11g
/() Dec1'111hcr /983

I (1 Dffcmhcr 1983
126 See Offioul Rn ord~ nf thl' I 1·0111 111111 ,md \'1•c ,al ( r11u1n/. /4'\ J. :-.;up¡,lc

ment No. 5 (E/1981125 and ('orr 11. diap. X\VIII. ,ect. \
127 [!,ui., N82. S11¡•¡1/!'mrn1,\,,211 148.' 1: ,md •·<>rr.11. rhap XXVI
scct. A.
128 Jhid., /()83. \11¡1¡,/oni m ,\,, 3 (1

scrt. A

l 'I:{ J.

1 .11h! í ( l r l l l. thap XX\'ll

207

129L < N.4 1:\11.l
l10 A 18 5.18.

111 A 38 406. annex.
1 '~ /111¡/

anrn,''\ ,cl-1

l ll
