184

General As11emhly-Thirty-third Session

or other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
in Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of
the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put
an end to such enterprises and to prevent new investments that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories;
9. Requests all States to refrain from making any
investments in, or extending loans to, the minority
racist regimes in southern Africa and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other
economic relations with them;
10. Expresses its conviction that the scope of the
sanctions adopted against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia should be expanded to cover all the measures contemplated in Article 41 of the Charter and
calls upon the Security Council to consider adopting
appropriate measures to this end;
11. Condemns all violations of the mandatory
sanctions imposed by the Security Council against the
illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia,
as well as the continued failure of certain Member
States to enforce those sanctions, as being contrary to
the obligations assumed by them under Article 25 of
the Charter;
12. Strongly condemns the supply of petroleum
and petroleum products to Southern Rhodesia by
United Kingdom oil companies which, by that deliberate act, are circumventing United Nations sanctions
and strengthening the illegal regime of Ian Smith;
13. Deplores the complicity of successive Governments of the United Kingdom in the violation of United
Nations sanctions by United Kingdom oil companies,
as exposed in the Bingham report 60 on the supply of
petroleum and petroleum products to the illegal regime
of Ian Smith;
14. Condemns those oil-producing or oil-exporting
countries which supply crude oil and petroleum products to the racist regime of South Africa and demands
that they cease forthwith all exports of crude oil and
petroleum products to the racist regimes in southern
Africa and take the necessary measures against oil
companies which, in violation of United Nations resolutions on sanctions, continue to deliver oil to those
regimes;
15. Requests all States to take effective measures
to end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance, including military supplies and equipment, to
the regimes which use such assistance to repress the
peoples of the colonial Territories and their national
liberation movements;
16. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering
of the natural resources of Namibia by South African
and other foreign economic interests, in violation of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council and of Decree No. 1 for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on
27 September 1974 61 is illegal and contributes to the
maintenance of the illegal occupation regime;
60 T. H. Bingham and S. M. Gray, Report on the Supply
of Petroleum and Petroleum Products to Rhodesia (London,
Her Majesty's Stationery Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 1978).
61 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/ Add.1 ), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gazette No. 1.

17. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of Namibia in complete disregard of the legitimate interests of the Namibian people;
18. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue
all economic, financial or trade relations with South
Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic, financial or other relations with
South Africa, acting on behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend support to its continued illegal
occupation of that Territory;
19. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime
of South Africa which, in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and in open contravention of its specific obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter, continues to collaborate with the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, and calls
upon the Security Council to implement the decisions
contained in the present resolution by imposing economic sanctions against South Africa, including an oil
embargo and the withdrawal of investments from that
country;
20. Invites all Governments and organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to
the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI)
of 1 May 197 4, and of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, contained in Assembly
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to
ensure in particular that the permanent sovereignty of
the colonial Territories over their natural resources is
fully respected and safeguarded;
21. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system which
prevails in the Territories under their administration
and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of
wages to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat, a sustained and broad campaign with a view
to informing world public opinion of the facts concerning the pillaging of natural resources in colonial
Territories and the exploitation of their indigenous
populations by foreign monopolies and the support
they render to the colonialist and racist regimes;
23. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/41.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the spe-

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

cialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and the Security Council on this subject, including
in particular Assembly resolution 32/36 of 28 November 1977,
Having examined the reports submitted on the item
by the Secretary-General, 62 the Economic and Social
Council 63 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 64 as well as the related report of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, 65
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations 66 and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 67
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the
Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, 68
Aware that the struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia for self-determination and independence
is in its final and most crucial stage and that it is therefore incumbent upon the entire international community to intensify concerted action in support of the
peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and their national
liberation movements for the attainment of this goal,
Deeply conscious of the critical need of the peoples
of Zimbabwe and Namibia and of other colonial Territories for concrete assistance from the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations in their struggle for liberation
from colonial rule and in their efforts to achieve and
consolidate their national independence,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system to take all the necessary measures,
within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and other relevant resolutions
of the United Nations, particularly those relating to
the provision of moral and material assistance, on a
priority basis, to the peoples of the colonial Territories
and their national liberation movements,
Noting with concern that, although there has been
progress in the extension of assistance to refugees from
62 A/33/109 and Add.1-4.
68 Official Records of the

General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/33/3), chap. VI, sect. F. ·
64 Ibid., Supplement No. 23
(A/33/23/Rev.l ), vol. I,
chap. VI.
6 5 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/33/24), vol. I, part two,
chaps. II and VII, and vol. II, annexes II and VI-VIII.
66 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 21st meeting, paras. 36-41.
01 I bid., paras. 42-46.
68 Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.

185

the colonial Territories in Africa, the actions taken
hitherto by the organizations concerned in providing
assistance to the peoples of the Territories through
their national liberation movements continue to remain
inadequate to meet the urgent needs of these peoples,
Expressing its confident hope that closer contacts
and consultations between the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and the Organization of African Unity and the national
liberation movements of the colonial Territories will
help to overcome procedural and other difficulties
which have impeded or delayed the implementation
of some assistance programmes,
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of African Unity for the continued
co-operation and assistance extended by it to the organizations within the United Nations system in connexion with the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the intensified efforts of the
United Nations Development Programme in the extension of assistance to the national liberation movements concerned,
Noting also the support given by the organizations
within the United Nations system to the formation of
the Nationhood Programme for Namibia called for
in General Assemblv resolution 32/9 A of 4 November 1977,
·
Mindful of the necessity to keep under continuous
review the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in the implementation of the various decisions relating
to decolonization,

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the item; 64
2. Reaffirms that the recognition by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations organs of the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples to achieve freedom and independence
entails, as a corollary, the extension by the organizations within the United Nations system of all the necessary moral and material assistance to the peoples of
the colonial Territories and their national liberation
movements;
3. Expresses its appreciation to certain specialized
agencies and organizations within the United Nations
system which have continued to co-operate in varying
degrees with the United Nations in the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Expresses its concern that the assistance extended so far by the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system to the
colonial peoples, particularly those of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, and to their national liberation movements
is far from adequate in relation to the actual needs
of the peoples concerned;
5. Regrets that the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have not yet taken the necessary

186

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

measures towards the full and speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, deplores in particular the fact
that those agencies continue to maintain co-operation
with the colonialist racist minority regime of South
Africa and urges the executive heads of those agenci@s
to draw the particular attention of their governing organs to the present resolution with a view to formulating specific programmes beneficial to the peoples of
the colonial Territories, particularly Zimbabwe and
Namibia;
6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
or continue to render, as a matter of urgency, all
possible moral and material assistance to the colonial
peoples in Africa struggling for their liberation from
colonial rule;
7. Requests once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
to continue to provide all moral and material assistance
to the newly independent and emerging States;
8. Recommends that the organizations concerned
should initiate or broaden contacts with the colonial
peoples in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, review their procedures with respect to
the formulation and preparation of assistance programmes and projects and introduce greater flexibility
in those procedures so as to be able to extend the
necessary assistance without delay to help the colonial
peoples and their national liberation movements in
their struggle to exercise their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
9. Urges those specialized agencies and organizations within the United Nations system which have
not already done so to include in the agenda of the
regular meetings of their governing bodies a separate
item on the progress made by those organizations in
the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
10. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to take all
necessary measures to withhold any financial, economic, technical or other assistance from the Government of South Africa and the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, to discontinue all support to them until
they restore to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence and to refrain from taking any action which
might imply recognition of, or support for, the legitimacy of the domination of the Territories by those
regimes;
11. Notes with satisfaction the arrangements made
by several specialized agencies and organizations within
the United Nations system which enable representatives
of the national liberation movements recognized by
the Organization of African Unity to participate fully
as observers in the proceedings relating to matters
concerning their respective countries, and calls upon
those agencies and organizations which have not yet
done so to follow this example and to make the necessary arrangements without delay;

12. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
of which they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations and, in that
connexion, should accord priority to the question of
providing assistance on an emergency basis to peoples
in the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements;
13. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, having regard to the recommendations
contained in paragraph 8 above, to formulate with the
active co-operation of the Organization of African
Unity and to submit, as a matter of priority, to their
governing and legislative organs concrete proposals for
the full implementation of the relevant United Nations
decisions, in particular specific programmes of assistance to the peoples in the colonial Territories and
their national liberation movements;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to prepare for submission to the relevant
bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and other
organizations, a report on the action taken since the
circulation of his previous report in implementation of
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present resolution;
15. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to examine this question and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978

33/42.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 32/37 of 28 November 1977,
Recalling further its resolution 32/119 of 16 December 1977 on assistance to South African student
refugees,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the Programme for 1977 /78, 69
Taking note with satisfaction of the substantial increase in contributions to the Programme in 1978 and
69 A/33/297

and Corr.I.
