S/2016/297

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 March 2016
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2226 (2015), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) until 30 June 2016 and
requested me to provide, by 31 March 2016, a report containing proposals for the
further downsizing and possible termination of UNOCI, taking into account security
conditions on the ground and the capacity of the Government of Côte d ’Ivoire to
take over the security role of the Operation, a request reiterated by the Council in its
resolution 2260 (2016). In accordance with those resolutions, a multidisciplinary
strategic review mission led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
United Nations Secretariat visited Côte d’Ivoire from 8 to 20 February 2016. The
present report comprises the findings of the strategic review and my
recommendations concerning the future of UNOCI, as well as an update on major
developments since my report dated 8 December 2015 ( S/2015/940).

II. Major developments
Political developments
2.
During the period under review, the President of Côte d ’Ivoire, Alassane
Ouattara, initiated a series of consultations with stakeholders aimed at furthering
national reconciliation and social cohesion. On 7 December 2015, the President met
with the chamber of traditional chiefs and kings, who advised that recon ciliation
and the easing of political tensions would be facilitated by measures such as
releasing confiscated assets belonging to persons associated with the former
President, Laurent Gbagbo, accelerating the release of persons detained for alleged
involvement in the 2010-2011 post-elections crisis, encouraging the return of
persons remaining in exile, supporting the reintegration of former combatants and
evicting illegal occupants from national forests. The chiefs and kings also advised
Mr. Ouattara to use his presidential pardon whenever applicable. On 8 December,
Mr. Ouattara met with religious leaders who also underscored the importance of
expediting judicial processes for persons detained in connection with the post elections crisis, and requested support for establishing an interreligious dialogue
platform.

16-04983 (E)

010416

*1604983*

S/2016/297

3.
Also on 8 December, Mr. Ouattara met with the president of the Commission
nationale pour la réconciliation et l’indemnisation des victimes des crises survenues
en Côte d’Ivoire, who encouraged him to continue direct dialogue with the political
opposition, with a view to consolidating national reconciliation. The president of the
Commission also proposed the establishment of special judicial chambers to
expedite pending processes for persons detained in connection with the postelections crisis, as well as the provisional release of detainees and the granting of
presidential pardons or amnesties within the limits of the law. He further
recommended the undertaking of renewed efforts to encourage the return of persons
in exile, while underscoring the importance of addressing issues relating to property
rights and land, particularly with respect to women and vulnerable persons.
4.
In a televised address to the nation on 31 December, Mr. Ouattara announc ed
the granting of a presidential pardon for 3,100 prisoners, as well as the release of
individuals detained in connection with the post-elections crisis. He also reaffirmed
his intention to hold a constitutional referendum and legislative elections in 201 6.
5.
The Government tendered its resignation on 6 January, as requested by the
President. On the same day, the Prime Minister, Daniel Kablan Duncan, was
reappointed. The formation of a new Cabinet of 36 ministers, including nine
women, was announced on 12 January. With the exception of one minister appointed
from civil society, all members of the Government are from the ruling coalition, the
Rassemblement des houphouëtistes pour la démocratie et la paix (RHDP). The
Government includes new ministries of hu man rights and public liberties, and
solidarity, social cohesion and victims’ compensation.
6.
Mr. Ouattara met with a delegation of the former ruling Front populaire
ivoirien (FPI) led by its president, Pascal Affi N’Guessan, on 21 January. Among the
issues discussed were the status of persons detained for alleged violations
committed during the post-elections crisis, the unfreezing of bank accounts and the
return to Côte d’Ivoire of persons living in exile. Also discussed were structural
issues such as political party financing, access to the state media and the
demarcation of electoral constituencies. Subsequently, on 9 March, the Government
approved the provisional release of 70 out of 300 persons detained in connection
with the post-elections crisis whose release had been sought by FPI, as well as the
unfreezing of bank accounts belonging to four associates of Mr. Gbagbo, including
his sister.
7.
On 15 February, former President Henri Konan Bédié, the president of the
Parti démocratique de Côte d’Ivoire (PDCI), announced that an agreement had been
reached with Mr. Ouattara to create a unified party. The new party, to be called
RHDP, would comprise all willing members of the coalition, specifically the ruling
Rassemblement des républicains (RDR), PDCI, the Parti démocratique de Côte
d’Ivoire-Rassemblement démocratique africain (PDCI-RDA), the Mouvement des
forces d’avenir (MFA), the Union pour la Côte d’Ivoire (UPCI) and the Union pour
la démocratie et la paix en Côte d’Ivoire (UDPCI). Efforts were initiated to put in
place the proposed party’s infrastructure and legal framework and to engage party
members.
8.
On 22 February, Mr. Ouattara presided over the conclusion of a seminar on the
government’s programme of work, during which all ministers presented t heir
priorities and planned actions for 2016. The programme, which is consistent with
the national development plan, prioritizes five goals for 2016, specifically

2/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

strengthening of institutions for peace and good governance; structural
transformation of the economy; improvement of living conditions; promotion of
youth and women; and emergence of a “new Ivorian”.

National and international justice
9.
On 25 January, the trial resumed of 24 military officers charged in connection
with the 2002 assassination of General Robert Guéï and his family. On 18 February,
the military court sentenced General Dogbo Blé, the former head of the Garde
républicaine; Commander Anselme Séka Yapo, former head of the close protection
detail of the former First Lady, Simone Gbagbo; and Daléba Séry to life
imprisonment for murder and complicity in murder, while 10 of the accused were
sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. The remaining 13 were acquitted.
10. On 28 January, at the opening of his trial at the International Criminal Court,
Mr. Gbagbo pleaded not guilty to charges of crimes against humanity and war
crimes, including complicity in murder, rape, inhumane acts and persecution. The
co-accused, Charles Blé Goudé, also pleaded not guilty. During opening statements
on 1 February, Mr. Gbagbo’s defence council argued that he was the victim of an
international conspiracy aimed at installing Mr. Ouattara in power by force.
11. On 4 February, Mr. Ouattara announced that no other Ivorian would be
transferred to the International Criminal Court, as the Ivorian justice system was
fully operational. Some opposition figures denounced this statement as fostering the
perpetuation of one-sided justice.

Security situation
12. The security situation remained stable but fragile. For most of the reporting
period, the environment was characterized by labour and student strikes, youth
demonstrations and intercommunal conflict. There were also incidents of sexual
violence, including the rape of children; clashes between the Forces républic aines de
Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI) and communities; and violent crimes such as armed robbery and
banditry. A terrorist attack on a beach resort in Grand-Bassam on 13 March, for
whose commission al-Mourabitoun, a group based in northern Mali and affiliated
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, claimed responsibility injected a new dynamic
into the security situation.
13. An unknown number of heavily armed assailants opened fire on civilians at
three beachside hotels in Grand-Bassam. Twenty-two people were killed during the
attack, including 16 national and foreign civilians, one of whom was a child, and
three Ivorian defence personnel, as well as three assailants. In addition, thirty -three
people were injured. Ivorian security forces responded rapidly to the situ ation; and
UNOCI placed its quick-reaction forces on alert, reinforced its presence near the
attack, at the Abidjan international airport and mission premises, and deployed to an
area of Abidjan, where the assailants had reportedly been present earlier in the day.
The following day, Mr. Ouattara convened an extraordinary meeting of the Council
of Ministers during which measures were adopted to enhance security, including the
deployment of security forces to all strategic sites and areas open to the public.

16-04983

3/21

S/2016/297

14. Other security incidents occurred during the reporting period. A FRCI post was
reportedly attacked on 27 December in the Nougoua village, near the Noé border post
with Ghana. No casualties were reported. One Ivorian and one Ghanaian national
were arrested and detained in connection with the attack. A workers strike in
Ferkessédougou on 22 January degenerated into violent clashes between protestors
and Ivorian security forces, resulting in at least one death. On 20 February, detainees
at the prison in Abidjan staged an uprising during which some of the prisoners were
armed with assault rifles. One guard and 9 prisoners were killed during the exchange
of fire, and 10 prisoners were injured.
15. On 6 March, community members in Assuéfry, near Bondoukou, clashed with
FRCI during protests against the continuous extortion practised by soldiers. FRCI
fired on the protesters, which resulted in the death of three persons and the injury of
one. One person remains missing. The President deployed a team led by the Minister
in charge of Defence to calm the situation; the presence of gendarmerie was also
reinforced. Earlier, on 25 January, community members in Kouassi -Niaguini, near
Boudoukou, clashed with FRCI during protests against extortion by soldiers.
16. On 2 March, the Government adopted a decree establishing a national centre
for the coordination of early warning response, in collaboration with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The mechanism is intended to
prevent conflict, fight terrorism and reduce response times following crisis alerts.

Regional developments
17. On 8 January, Mr. Ouattara was elected president of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union. He succeeded the President of Benin, Boni Yayi.
18. Mr. Ouattara and Mr. Affi N’Guessan attended the 29 December swearing-in
ceremony of the President of Burkina Faso, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré.
Subsequently, Mr. Kaboré expressed concern regarding the security threat to Burkina
Faso posed by elements of the security apparatus of the former President, Blaise
Compaoré, who had taken refuge in Côte d’Ivoire following the failed coup in
September 2015. On 18 January, the Ivorian presidency issued a statement
denouncing the decision of Burkina Faso to issue an international warrant for the
arrest of the Speaker of the National Assembly, Guillaume Soro, for his alleged
involvement in the attempted coup, and indicated that the matter would be settled
through diplomatic channels. On 21 February, three members of the Burkinabè
presidential security regiment which had perpetrated the attempted coup were
extradited from Côte d’Ivoire to Burkina Faso to face justice. On 23 February, the
media reported that Mr. Compaoré, who had been living in Côte d ’Ivoire since having
been deposed in October 2014, had been granted Ivorian citizenship in November
2014. An international warrant for the arrest of Mr. Compaoré for his alleged role in
the 1987 killing of former President Thomas Sankara was issued on 4 December 2015
by the authorities of Burkina Faso.

III. Strategic review of Côte d’Ivoire
19. The strategic review mission conducted from 8 to 20 February was led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and comprised representatives of the

4/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

Department of Field Support, the Department of Safe ty and Security, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) and UNOCI, as well as the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
representing United Nations development and humanitarian agencies, funds and
programmes.
20. The strategic review team met with a broad cross section of stakeholders in
Côte d’Ivoire, including Mr. Ouattara; the Prime Minister and Cabinet members; the
Speaker of the National Assembly; the national commissions responsible for social
cohesion, reconciliation and human rights; members of the donor and diplomatic
community; the leadership of the army, police and gendarmerie; political parties;
civil society; UNOCI leadership, staff and uniformed personnel; and the United
Nations country team. In Liberia, the review team consulted with UNMIL, the
United Nations country team, members of the diplomatic co mmunity, and the
leadership of the national security agencies. The team visited Maryland and River
Gee counties in south-east of Liberia, near the border with Côte d’Ivoire, and the
villages of Grabo, Olodio and Tabou in south-west Côte d’Ivoire, near the border
with Liberia.

Findings of the strategic review
1.

Political environment
21. Côte d’Ivoire continues to consolidate the gains made since the violence that
marked the contested presidential elections of 2010. The peaceful conduct of the
October 2015 election, which resulted in the re-election of Mr. Ouattara to a second
and final term, was an important milestone, whose achievement was attributable not
least to the acceptance by most stakeholders of the transparency and credibility of
the election. Meanwhile, processes likely to result in the further consolidation of the
political dispensation over the course of 2016, and its possible realignment ahead of
the presidential succession in 2020, are on the horizon.
22. The Independent Electoral Commission advised that two electoral processes
were planned for late 2016, including a constitutional referendum and legislative
elections. The referendum could help to address structural issues at the root of the
Ivorian crisis, as one of the proposed amendments aims to revise article 35 of the
Constitution, which sets out the eligibility criteria for pr esidential candidates,
including the requirement that both parents be Ivorian citizens by birth. This
provision could also trigger debates within the ruling political coalition, given that
some PDCI members were the architects of article 35. Some oppositio n figures who
were consulted welcomed the constitutional review. Many interlocutors, including
national institutions responsible for human rights, civil society and political parties,
had not yet been involved in preparations for the referendum, and expres sed the
view that the process should be as inclusive as possible.
23. Members of the political opposition, including those who boycotted the 2015
presidential election, have indicated that they would participate in the legislative
elections, provided that conditions were in place to enhance their legitimacy. Those
conditions would, in their view, include revisions to the electoral law, the
demarcation of electoral districts and the establishment of a more independent

16-04983

5/21

S/2016/297

Independent Electoral Commission, which they considered to be dependent on the
Government. While the Government has not formally requested United Nations
support for the electoral processes in 2016, many stakeholders were of the view that
the presence and support of UNOCI were essential, includi ng with respect to human
rights monitoring, which would enhance perceptions of the legitimacy of the
electoral outcomes. In that regard, they pointed to violations of political and civil
rights committed during the pre-election period in 2015, and expressed concern that
such rights may be more seriously curtailed during the legislative elections.
Meanwhile, the proposal to merge the RHDP coalition into a single party, as
described in paragraph 7 above, could trigger the formation of new parties or
coalitions ahead of the 2020 presidential election.
24. All interlocutors stressed the need for continued efforts aimed at taking
forward a meaningful and comprehensive national reconciliation process, including
political dialogue and community-level social cohesion. Mr. Ouattara announced
that he would prioritize reconciliation within the nation during his second term, and
opposition members engaged by the strategic review acknowledged that important
gestures had been made to this end, including the release of per sons detained in
connection with the post-elections crisis and the return of frozen or confiscated
assets. However, some interlocutors also pointed to deficits undermining
reconciliation. In the absence of political and institutional reforms, efforts aimed at
political accommodation remained, in the view of some, superficial or arbitrary.
Some interlocutors noted that judicial proceedings at both national and international
levels had thus far focused only on violations allegedly perpetrated by Mr. Gbagbo
and his associates during the crisis of 2010-2011, contributing to perceptions of
victors’ justice and impunity.
25. While economic growth was strong, averaging 9 per cent annually for the past
four years, large segments of society, including youth, have ye t to fully benefit from
the prosperity of Côte d’Ivoire. Government officials recognized that this could be a
destabilizing factor, and informed the strategic review team that it would prioritize
more inclusive growth. Some interlocutors expressed the view that social cohesion
was undermined by the impression in some communities, particularly in the west of
the country, that policies had been put in place to benefit people from the north and
foreigners at the expense of the indigenous population, particular ly with respect to
land use.
26. While noting these concerns, government officials stressed that national
reconciliation and social cohesion were long-term, complex processes. Thus far, the
Government’s reconciliation agenda had been dominated by a reparations
programme, initiated in 2015 which, to have a positive impact, would need to be
inclusive of all victims. Meanwhile, the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission had finalized its report and recommendations for taking forward
national reconciliation in December 2014, but to date its report has not been made
public and the hearings held over the course of its three -year exploration of the
Ivorian conflict have also not been made public, thereby weakening its potential
impact.
2.

Human rights situation
27. The human rights situation has improved since the post-elections crisis.
However, important challenges remain. Former rebel commanders allegedly

6/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

responsible for past atrocities and human rights violations continue to hold positions
of authority, including within the armed forces. Meanwhile, associates of
Mr. Gbagbo tried in 2015 for crimes against the State have not yet been brought to
justice for grave human rights violations committed during the crisis. Government
officials assured the review mission that there would be no impunity for serious
human rights violations and that judicial proceedings for alleged perpetrators on
both sides would begin shortly.
28. An estimated 700,000 people in Côte d’Ivoire have remained stateless or at
risk of becoming stateless, or lacked the documents required to prove their
nationality. As a consequence, a large segment of society is ineligible for access to
basic services, including children whose birth was never registered. The
Government has ratified all international conventions concerning statelessness, and
also reformed legislation to allow stateless persons and others born in the country to
apply for citizenship if they have lived in Côte d ’Ivoire for decades. However,
implementation remains a challenge. Meanwhile, a proposed national action plan for
the eradication of statelessness has not been finalized or approved.
29. Côte d’Ivoire remains on the list of countries examined by my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and continues to face serious
challenges with respect to sexual and gender-based violence, including against
children. A national strategy to combat sexual violence was adopted by the
Government in 2014, but implementation has been limited to the initial steps, such
as community mobilization.
30. In 2015, Côte d’Ivoire was removed from the list of countries examined by my
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. However, significant
challenges remained. Approximately half of reported human rights violations
involve children. Children in conflict with the law are particularly vulnerable, as
they are often detained in inappropriate conditions; urgent reforms in the juvenile
justice and penal system are thus required.
3.

Security-related issues
31. The security situation continued to improve, although challenges remained.
Most of the strategic review’s interlocutors were preoccupied to a great extent by
the threat to Côte d’Ivoire posed by the spread of violent extremism and terrorism in
West Africa and the Sahel.
32. The south-west is the only part of the country assessed as facing a threat of a
military nature, owing to periodic armed attacks against national security
institutions, most recently on two FRCI camps in Olodio on 2 December 2015,
during which 7 soldiers were killed and 14 were seriously injured. Security
personnel who were consulted advised that recent attacks, unlike attacks committed
between 2012 and 2014, were not cross-border in nature and were motivated by
factors internal to Côte d’Ivoire. There is particular tension resulting from an influx
into the area of persons from other parts of Côte d’Ivoire and foreigners, who are
seen as illegally exploiting land in collusion with FRCI, which is perceived by some
in indigenous communities as an occupying rebel force.
33. The security environment is also impacted by the accessibility of unauthorized
weapons, contributing to the high incidence of violent crimes, including banditry. In
November 2015, arms caches were found in Guiglo, in the Kouroukoro village near

16-04983

7/21

S/2016/297

the border with Mali, and in the Kokonou village near the border with Ghana. An
arms cache was also discovered in Duékoué in January 2016.
34. Intercommunal conflict, primarily over land and boundary disputes, is also a
source of insecurity. In the west, Man, Odienné and Toulépleu continued to have a
high incidence of such conflict, as do Abengourou, Aboisso and Bondoukou in the
east and Korhogo in the north. Conflict between communities and illegal miners,
most of whom are foreign, continues to be an issue in Aboisso, Bouna and Daoukro.
Security sector reform
35. Important advances were made during Mr. Ouattara’s first term with respect to
the operational effectiveness and governance of the security sector, as well as the
expansion of service provision. Notwithstanding operational deficits, national
security institutions are performing their statutory functions with greater
understanding of their roles as well as enhanced capacity. However, most
government officials expressed the view that efforts to equip the army and law
enforcement services appropriately are hampered by the arms embargo remaining in
effect. Regional security councils in bringing together state and non -state actors
such as civil society could be an important mechanism for decentralizing security
services and addressing community-based insecurity. However, the effectiveness of
these councils has been undermined by trust deficits, including between
communities and security institutions, between civil administration and security
institutions, and among the various services of the security apparatus.
36. FRCI has made improvements as a result of legislation increasing civilian
oversight and enhancing the effectiveness and affordability of the armed forces, for
example, through plans to achieve a ratio of 60:40 between operational costs and
investment, including in training and equipment, by 2020. However, significant
challenges remain, such as those posed by parallel command and control structures,
lack of internal cohesion, indiscipline and shortcomings in operational capability.
Some of the strategic review’s interlocutors expressed concern that former
commanders of the Forces nouvelles dominate the leadership structure of FRCI and
that ethnic and other differences between FRCI soldiers and the population in some
areas have contributed to brutality, extortion and other infractions. Armed robberies
and other violent crimes continued to be committed by informal armed elements
associated with FRCI. Challenges also remained with respect to gender balance.
FRCI commanders conceded that the current 2 per cent representation of women is
inadequate and advised that efforts would be made to reach a proportion of at least
20 per cent.
37. The national police service has made progress, but its effectiveness is
impacted by an overcentralized governance structure, which undermined command
and control, as well as a lack of budgetary autonomy, which hampers daily
operations and planning. Reform proposals aimed at restructuring and stren gthening
trust between civil society and the security forces, included in the internal security
planning act adopted by the Government and submitted to the National Assembly on
6 January 2016, remain to be implemented. While the gendarmerie remains intact
with respect to its internal discipline and infrastructure, its centralized,
overhierarchical command structure requires reforms to enable the delegation of
authority to local commanders so as to enhance effectiveness. A new law on internal
security programming provides for measures that give budgetary control to the

8/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

gendarmerie, which represents an important step. Efforts are also under way to
maximize complementarity between the police and the gendarmerie by optimizing
synergies, including the establishment of an inter-force cooperation mechanism
focused on terrorism.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
38. National disarmament and demobilization activities concluded on 14 August
2015. UNOCI handed over the primary site for disarmament and d emobilization, the
Anyama camp in Abidjan, to FRCI on 30 October 2015. As of 31 January 2016, a total
of 69,506 former combatants had entered the national programme for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration conducted between 2012 and 2015, of which 60,133
are considered reintegrated. The remaining caseload of 9,373 ex-combatants is
enrolled in, or waiting to commence, reinsertion activities. Additionally, there are an
estimated 2,000 former combatants in Liberia who may be ineligible for any
assistance, as combatants returning from exile cannot benefit from reinsertion
activities unless they are registered in an appropriate government database.
39. Throughout the disarmament process, a total of 43,510 armaments, including
14,121 weapons, were collected. Many interlocutors pointed to the discrepancy
between the number of former combatants enrolled in the process and the number of
serviceable weapons handed over. Efforts are required to ensure greater
transparency, including with respect to access to the database of former combatants,
so that the tangible impact of the programme can be clarified.
4.

Humanitarian situation
40. The humanitarian situation has improved since the post-elections crisis of
2010-2011, with estimated requirements for life-saving interventions decreasing
from $400 million in 2012 to under $50 million in 2015. The focus of intervention
has therefore shifted towards supporting the equitable access to basic social
services. Despite the positive trend, however, many people in Côte d’Ivoire remain
in need of humanitarian assistance and protection.
41. The post-elections crisis triggered the displacement of some 300,000 Ivorian
refugees to Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali and Togo, with Liberia hosting some
220,000 refugees at the peak of the crisis. Approximately 50,000 refugees remain in
neighbouring countries, including Liberia (just under 28,000), as well as Ghana
(11,450), Guinea (6,560), Mali (1,000) and Togo (2,270). There are also 300,000
internally displaced persons, primarily in Abidjan and the west.
42. In July 2014, the Ivorian authorities closed the country’s borders with Guinea
and Liberia, as a preventive measure, following the outbreak of Ebola virus disease
in those countries. Those borders have remained closed as of 15 M arch. However,
with the agreement of the Ivorian Government, voluntary repatriation facilitated by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
resumed through humanitarian corridors on 18 December 2015. As of 15 March,
10,195 Ivorian refugees had been repatriated. UNHCR is planning to facilitate the
voluntary repatriation of 25,000 Ivorian refugees in 2016 and 8,000 in 2017, while
about 5,000 refugees are expected to opt for local reintegration. The UNOCI force
provides physical protection for return operations, thereby facilitating an
environment conducive to repatriation and reintegration efforts.

16-04983

9/21

S/2016/297

43. The fact that foreigners, who are primarily economic migrants, constitute
approximately 24 per cent of the population of Côte d ’Ivoire sometimes results in
tensions with indigenous communities in areas of the country. Although a national
strategy on migration was adopted in 2014 with support from the International
Organization for Migration, the management of migrants is hampered b y uncertain
statistics and suffers from inadequate coordination among various ministries.
Meanwhile, protected forests and national parks are illegally occupied by thousands
of migrants from neighbouring countries. Over 20,000 people are occupying Mont
Péko National Park, of which 95 per cent are foreign nationals. These occupants,
including vulnerable groups, require support for relocation and the provision of
basic and other services, while the communities into which they are relocated also
need support. The Ivorian and Burkinabè authorities have agreed to begin the
voluntary repatriation of occupants from Mont Péko to Burkina Faso in 2016.
5.

Border assessment and regional issues
44. The situation in the Liberia-Côte d’Ivoire border area has improved since a
similar assessment conducted in 2014. However, as described in paragraph 32
above, the situation in south-west Côte d’Ivoire remains fraught, with continuing
instability exacerbated by communities’ palpable distrust of FRCI, land conflict, and
intercommunal disputes aggravated by the migration into the area of persons
seeking to exploit the land. Stability is further undermined by periodic attacks
triggered by the encroachment upon land of persons who are not from the area.
Interlocutors stressed that a lack of social cohesion linked to the delay in the
broader national reconciliation process impacts negatively on efforts to sustain
peace and stability.
45. On the Liberian side of the border, there was considerable concern about
instability in the contiguous area in Côte d’Ivoire. Interlocutors pointed to cases of
killings or disappearances under unknown circumstances which had not been fully
investigated. This included the rumoured presence in Vyee Island of armed persons
engaged in nefarious activities in the absence of any intervention by the security
forces of either country.
46. There remain serious shortcomings with respect to the delivery of basic social
and security services on both sides of the border. On the Liberian side, the Bureau
of Immigration and Naturalization and the Liberia National Police are being
increasingly deployed, but lack sufficient personnel, logistics and mobility. The
Armed Forces of Liberia, meanwhile, have deployed small, temporary detachments
to investigate reports of the illegal encroachment upon land of foreign farmers in
Grand Gedeh and River Gee counties. The UNMIL force will cease operations in
April and withdraw from the border in May, in keeping with the drawdown for
UNMIL pursuant to Security Council resolution 2239 (2015). While FRCI is better
equipped and has sufficient personnel, there is still a need to take the required steps
to bolster trust with the population.
47. While most of the Ivorian refugees remaining in Liberia have expressed their
intention to return home, many have concerns about the security situation and lack
of access to basic services, and fear the occupation of their lands by foreigners.
There is a risk of the exacerbation of land disputes and intercommunal clashes in
areas of return. The World Food Programme estimates that approximately 13 per
cent of the population in the west faces food insecurity. It is essential that there be a

10/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

national commitment to facilitating the return and reintegration of the displaced,
ensuring equitable access to services, and respecting their rights.
48. The cross-border security strategy adopted by the Mano River Union in 2013
has yet to be fully implemented. Initial steps have been taken, however, to establish
joint border security and confidence-building units for bringing together border
communities, which, if given adequate support, have the potential to defuse tensions
and address threats.

Recommendations of the strategic review
49. Taking into account the situation in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as the border area, it is
recommended that the mandate of UNOCI be extended for a final period, until 30 June
2017, including a two-month period of mission closure, as described in paragraph 61
below. Until 30 April 2017, UNOCI should have a prioritized mandate focused on the
tasks identified as being most essential for consolidating the progress made over the
12 years of its deployment in Côte d’Ivoire.
50. Specifically, the mission should continue to play a role with respect to
facilitating nationally owned processes such as reconciliation and social cohesion,
as well as support institutional reforms. Going forward, it is envisaged that the
support provided by UNOCI to the Government in the areas of reinsertion of former
combatants and security sector reform would be provided in this context, given that
many of the challenges posed by these processes are political in nature. UNOCI
uniformed personnel would continue to provide operational -level advice and
mentorship to their national counterparts. ONUCI FM, the mi ssion’s radio station,
would continue to play an important role with respect to disseminating messages of
peace, while also communicating information to the population regarding the
forthcoming transformation of the United Nations engagement in Côte d ’Ivoire.
Ahead of the electoral processes, it would also be critical to keep watch on the
media environment in order to mitigate inflammatory rhetoric and hate speech.
51. The mission should also retain a strong human rights mandate, including
support for the national reconciliation process, while also engaging in monitoring
and early warning activities and the development of national capacity to promote
and protect human rights. UNOCI should also retain its mandate to facilitate the
provision of humanitarian assistance, with an emphasis on physical protection. It is
further recommended that UNOCI and UNMIL, with the respective country teams,
continue to support the border stabilization initiatives of the Ivorian and Liberian
authorities, in collaboration with such regional partners as the Mano River Union
and ECOWAS.
52. In light of the improvement in the ability of the national defence and security
services to perform their functions, and with the closure of the mission on the
horizon, it would be appropriate for the Ivorian authorities to fully assume UNOCI
security responsibilities in the months ahead. It is therefore recommended that the
protection-of-civilians mandate of UNOCI be limited to in extremis support for
Ivorian security agencies in protecting civilians in the event of a deterioration of the
security situation, which, taking into account the reduction of the mission ’s
capabilities and areas of deployment, could pose the risk of a reversal of peace and
stability in the country.

16-04983

11/21

S/2016/297

IV. Proposed adjustments to the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire
Military component
53. As indicated in my previous reports, UNOCI has been progressively drawing
down, reducing the force from its peak strength of 9,792 in 2012. Pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2260 (2016), UNOCI withdrew 1,468 troops between
January and March 2016, including an infantry battalion (750 troops), two military
task forces (533 troops), aviation (31 personnel) and a support company (154
personnel). By 31 March 2016, UNOCI will have reached 3,969 out of its
authorized strength of 4,000 military personnel, including two infantry battalions
(1,606 troops) deployed in the west, a 650-troop-strong quick-reaction force based
in Yamoussoukro, two task forces (861 troops) deployed in Abidjan and associated
enablers (594 personnel), as well as 97 staff officers and 192 military observers.
54. Consideration of the necessary strength of the force for the period ahead took
into account a thorough threat assessment, a troop -to-task analysis and the capacity
of the National Armed Forces. It also took into account the priority tasks of the
UNOCI military component for the duration of the mission’s deployment, including
facilitation of humanitarian assistance and support for border stabilizati on initiatives
amid a continuing military threat in the south-west part of the country, as well as the
proposed scope of the UNOCI protection-of-civilians mandate.
55. Specifically, it is proposed that there be a reduction of an additional 1,969
troops, which would leave 2,000 personnel by 31 August 2016. This would be
achieved by repatriating two infantry battalions (1,065 troops); one company from
the battalion deployed in the south-west (200); one company from the headquarters
protection unit (156); and associated enablers, specifically engineering (175), a
military hospital (56) and signals (90), as well as 135 staff officers and 92 military
observers. The 2,000 remaining troops would include one infantry battalion
deployed in the south-west (650); the quick-reaction force (650); a headquarters
protection unit (300); and associated enablers, specifically aviation (176) and
signals (66), as well as 58 staff officers and 100 military observers consolidated at
nine team sites, primarily in the west. As a result of the proposed reductions,
UNOCI will not be able to respond positively should a request for electoral security
support be forthcoming. In 2017, final reductions would include the infantry
battalion deployed in the south-west and one aviation unit in February; the quickreaction force and its aviation unit as well as all military observers in March; and
headquarters elements, specifically the protection unit, and signals and staff
officers, in April.
56. As the quick-reaction force established within UNOCI pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2162 (2014) remains a critical asset, it is therefore planned that
the force will be among the last military units repatriated from Côte d ’Ivoire.
Options are being explored to enable the unit to remain a tool for regional peace and
stability beyond the life cycle of UNOCI, further to its original concept. Subject to
meeting the conditions detailed in Council resolution 1609 (2005), it is
recommended that, if redeployed to another peacekeeping operation, the un it should
continue to fulfil a mandate to provide in extremis support to UNMIL and its
successor mission, along the lines of the provisions of Council resolution 2162

12/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

(2014). Specific proposals will be included in my future reports on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and UNMIL further to a lessons-learned exercise, including on the utility of a
similar tool in other contexts. Taking into account the joint letter dated 29 January
2016 from the President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, and Mr. Ouattara
addressed to me, as referred to in my thirty-first progress report, dated 22 February
2016, on UNMIL (S/2016/169, para. 22), and provided that all necessary
agreements and authorizations are received, the unit could be placed on standby
during the 2017 electoral period in Liberia for possible deployment, if warranted by
the security situation.
French forces
57. In its resolution 2226 (2015), the Security Council authorized the Forces
françaises en Côte d’Ivoire to provide support to UNOCI, within the limits of the
forces’ deployment and capabilities. That support continues to be necessary.
Meanwhile, collaboration continues in supporting FRCI, as well as tripartite
meetings held twice monthly, which bring together FRCI, UNOCI and the French
forces.

Police component
58. The authorized strength of the UNOCI police component stands at 1,500
personnel, including 500 individual police officers and 1,000 officers deployed in
six formed police units. For the duration of their deployment, United Nations police
will focus on consolidating progress made in enhancing the capacity of national law
enforcement agencies. It is recommended that the strength of the i ndividual police
officers progressively decrease, reaching 250 by December 2016, with a focus on
mentoring and operational-level support to the national police and gendarmerie, as
well as the transnational crime unit. The police component ’s deployment would be
aligned to the regional areas of operational responsibility of the national police and
gendarmerie, with team sites decreasing from 23 to 12 by the end of 2016. Support
at the tactical level will cease. The remaining 250 individual police officers wou ld
be repatriated progressively, with none remaining by 30 April 2017. The eight
customs officers are no longer required.
59. Consideration of the necessary strength of formed police units took into
account a thorough threat assessment and analysis of the capacities of national law
enforcement agencies, as well as the deployment of UNOCI force and the proposed
scope of the protection-of-civilians mandate. It is therefore recommended that three
of six formed police units be repatriated immediately during sch eduled rotations in
March and April 2016. One of the units remaining would be deployed in Abidjan, a
city of strategic importance with limited force presence, as well as one each to
Bouaké and Daloa, areas with frequent incidents of public disorder and
intercommunal violence. All units would be downsized from 180 to the standard 140
personnel. The three remaining units would be repatriated in March and April 2017.

16-04983

13/21

S/2016/297

Civilian component
60. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 69/258 B of 25 Ju ne 2015,
UNOCI has 1,225 civilian posts, including 713 national and 512 international posts.
Adjustments are under way to enable achievement of a phased drawdown of civilian
staff, taking into account priorities for the substantive mandate of UNOCI for the
final year of its deployment, as detailed in paragraphs 50 and 51 above, while also
ensuring that the mission retains the requisite expertise. The civilian field presence
would also be consolidated.

Support implications
61. By 30 June 2017, the full closure of the mission would be complete. This
would include all associated tasks such as the closure of facilities, removal of
equipment, final payments and other administrative requirements. A team
specialized in such tasks, overseen by appropriate lead ership, would operate from
1 May to 30 June 2017, and would also finalize the transition to the United Nations
country team, as well as any political facilitation deemed appropriate by the
Government.
62. The drawdown of the mission would proceed in parallel with the final year of
mandated operations. Consequently, the write-off or transfer of UNOCI assets to
other peacekeeping operations, the United Nations country team or the Government
is under way. Appropriate mechanisms and procedures are also in place to ensure
that the closure of UNOCI is completed in an environment -conscious manner.
Consideration is being given to transferring over to the United Nations country
team, UNOCI headquarters at Sebroko, which, pending government approval, would
serve as a United Nations House.
63. The Government has expressed its wish to retain ONUCI FM after the closure
of the mission. The radio station would be operated by the Fondation Félix
Houphouët-Boigny in the context of its programme in partnership with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) on the culture
of peace. Discussions are under way to develop a detailed operational plan, taking
into account the associated costs, as well as the need to guarantee equal access by
all segments of Ivorian society, impartiality and editorial independence.

Safety and security of personnel
64. The assessed risk to United Nations personnel and installations in Côte
d’Ivoire is low to medium, with the greatest threat being posed by crimin al activity.
Preparations are under way to ensure the provision of security for the United
Nations country team following the closure of UNOCI.
65. During the 13 March attack on Grand-Bassam, as described in paragraph 13
above, a United Nations Volunteer was killed and a UNOCI police officer was
severely injured. Both were among the beach-goers and were not specifically
targeted. Security has since been reinforced at United Nations installations.

14/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
66. Issues of conduct and discipline become more acute during mission closures.
UNOCI will therefore enhance its capacity in this area.
67. During the period under review, two cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
were recorded, in addition to one allegation of serious misconduct. There were
additional allegations of five incidents of category 2 misconduct. Investigations are
under way.

V. Future of the United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire
68. Given the positive trajectory in Côte d’Ivoire, no United Nations successor
mission is recommended following the withdrawal of UNOCI, which is consistent
with the views of the Government. However, the United Nations will continue to
accompany Côte d’Ivoire through the United Nations country team, which will
provide support, consistent with the mandates of the respective agencies, funds and
programmes, and within the limits of available resources. The process of
transitioning tasks performed by UNOCI to the Government, the United Nations
country team or other partners, which began in 2013, has therefore taken on a
renewed urgency.
69. During the final period of its mandated operations, UNOCI will focus on
transitioning remaining priorities towards the United Nations country team and
other partners, with a view to consolidating gains, while also facilitating the efforts
needed to address longer-term challenges which will remain following the closure
of the mission. Options for engaging the country team in the mandated tasks of
UNOCI while the mission is still deployed, supported by the mission’s budget, will
be pursued as appropriate, in keeping with the recommendations of the High -level
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the report constituting my response
thereto (S/2015/682). It would be particularly relevant for UNOCI, as a long standing mission, to engage with the United Nations country team and other
partners in delivering on identified priorities for mandate implementation. Such an
approach would also assist the United Nations country team and other partners in
building the capacity and sustaining the momentum needed to continue priority
work after the closure of UNOCI.
70. The United Nations will work closely with regional and other stakeholders, in
particular multilateral and other partners, in developing and implementing the
strategy by which its engagement in Côte d’Ivoire is transformed. The engagement
of the African Union and ECOWAS in complementing the work of the United
Nations country team following the departure of UNOCI would be essential.

VI. Financial implications
71. The General Assembly, in its resolution 69/258 B of 25 June 2015,
appropriated the amount of $402.7 million for the maintenance of the Operation for
the period from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016 (see my report on the budget for
UNOCI for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017 ( A/70/753)). My proposed
budget in the amount of $320.7 million for the maintenance of the mission for the

16-04983

15/21

S/2016/297

period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017 has been submitted to the Assembly for its
consideration during the second part of its resumed seventieth session. It should be
noted that proposed requirements are based on the prevailing mandate and scope of
the mission.
72. As at 14 March 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNOCI amounted to $128.1 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as of the same date amounted to $2,602.8 million.
73. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 January 2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2015, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

VII. Observations
74. When UNOCI deployed in April 2004 at the request of the Ivorian authorities,
Côte d’Ivoire was a country split in half, north and south divided by a militarily
enforced zone of confidence, and in the grip of a political stalemate. Ceasef ire
violations were prevalent, as were serious human rights violations against civilians.
Once a beacon of peace, stability and prosperity in a region racked by vicious civil
wars, the Côte d’Ivoire of 2004 was at the edge of a precipice. However, the coun try
did evolve: Peace agreements were implemented and the zone of confidence was
dissolved. Despite the setback experienced in connection with the contested 2010
elections, which resulted in a crisis during which approximately 3,000 people were
killed and a further 600,000 were displaced, the country continued to evolve. Five
years after the post-elections crisis of 2010-2011, Côte d’Ivoire is well along on the
path to enduring peace and stability, as well as economic prosperity. I wish to
congratulate the people and Government of Côte d’Ivoire for their determination,
which has made this positive evolution possible.
75. However, consolidating peace requires the full commitment of all citizens to a
comprehensive and meaningful process of national reconciliat ion. Among the
objectives of such a process must be defining and agreeing on a shared sense of
nation, as well as on the responsibilities of the citizens of that nation. Such
questions are particularly pertinent and potentially fraught for Côte d ’Ivoire, as,
notwithstanding the progress that continues to be made, the wounds inflicted by the
Ivorian conflict and brought to light during the post-elections crisis, have yet to
heal.
76. I welcome the efforts of Mr. Ouattara to engage with a wide variety of
stakeholders with a view to furthering political dialogue in the spirit of national
reconciliation. I further welcome the receptive spirit in which the President ’s
overtures have been received. It is a positive sign that the full membership of the
Ivorian political class intends to play an active and constructive role in the electoral
processes that are to unfold later this year. At the same time, reforms must go
forward with a view to addressing structural injustices. I therefore welcome the
planned constitutional referendum, which provides an important opportunity for
agreement on a new, shared sense of nation. I underscore the importance of ensuring
that the process is fully inclusive.

16/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

77. Healing the wounds of the past, and addressing the grievances of the present,
will also require action aimed at addressing the root causes of the Ivorian conflict,
including with respect to land tenure, nationality and identity, as well as the
consolidation of an effective and accountable security sector. While I welcome th e
efforts made in this regard, a continued instability triggered by issues relating to
land and belonging makes it clear that more decisive action is required, including in
the context of the process of achieving the social cohesion.
78. I remain concerned by the continuing perceptions of one-sided justice and
impunity for human rights violations, and reiterate my call for all perpetrators of
human rights violations, irrespective of their political affiliation, to be held
accountable. Persistent human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based
violence, are also deeply concerning. Urgent action is required to fight impunity for
such crimes and to ensure the protection of civilians, particularly women and
children. The development of the capacity of national institutions to promote and
protect human rights must remain a priority if peace in Côte d ’Ivoire is to be
sustained. This would involve the strengthening of the National Human Rights
Commission, including through granting it constitutional rank and full autonomy in
compliance with the Paris Principles. The United Nations will continue to extend
the necessary support for these initiatives, in close collaboration with the
Government.
79. I remain deeply troubled by delays in the investigations of major cases such as
the killing in June 2012 of seven United Nations peacekeepers, as well as the attack
in July 2012 on the Nahibly camp for internally displaced persons. I reiterate that
the Government is responsible for bringing the perpetrators of tho se international
crimes to justice.
80. I am outraged by, and condemn in the strongest terms, the terrorist attacks on
innocent civilians in Grand-Bassam on 13 March. I reiterate my deepest sympathy
for and condolences to the families of the deceased, as well as the steadfast
solidarity of the United Nations with the people and Government of C ôte d’Ivoire.
Such reprehensible attacks have no justification. All perpetrators, organizers,
financers and sponsors of terrorist acts must be brought to justice in ac cordance
with international law. I welcome the resolve of regional leaders to work closely
together to counter the scourge of violent extremism and terror, which cannot be
contained by borders. The United Nations remains committed to helping to
strengthen such regional collaboration and supporting the development of
comprehensive strategies for addressing this growing threat.
81. The Ivorian security services have made progress, as demonstrated by the
welcome improvements in the security environment and by their swift and effective
response to the terrorist attack of 13 March. However, significant challenges
remain, particularly in the south-west part of the county where the Ivorian Armed
Forces have failed to gain the trust of the population, which has contributed to
periodic attacks and continued instability amid ongoing refugee return operations. I
urge the Government to take forward critical reforms within the security sector, with
a view to addressing worrying challenges that undermine trust and reconciliation. It
is equally important to explore options for addressing the outstanding caseload of
former combatants, while ensuring that they all have sustainable reintegration
opportunities, with a view to ensuring that they are constructive members of Ivorian
society.

16-04983

17/21

S/2016/297

82. The year 2016 will be an important one for the consolidation of the political
dispensation in Côte d’Ivoire. It will also be a year during which structural and
other reforms critical to the national reconciliation and social cohesion process will
advance. With continued good progress in these and other ongoing processes, it
would be appropriate to conclude that the situation in Côte d’Ivoire no longer poses
a threat to peace and stability in the region. In line with the findings of the strategic
review, I therefore recommend a final extension of the mandate of UNOCI until
30 June 2017. I further recommend that the mandate of UNOCI be adjusted to
reflect the priorities identified in paragraphs 50 to 52 above. Finally, I recommend
further adjustments of the UNOCI military and police components, as detailed in
paragraphs 55, 58 and 59 above, which would bring the authorized strength of
UNOCI to 2,000 military and 670 police personnel. Provided that conditions remain
conducive, all UNOCI military and police, as well as almost all civilian personnel,
would depart the country by 30 April 2017, with the full closure of the mission
completed by 30 June 2017.
83. The trajectory of Côte d’Ivoire is positive and consequently no successor
United Nations presence is recommended beyond that of the country team.
However, there is a clear risk that, unless additional resources accompa ny the
transfer of critical residual tasks to the Government or the United Nations country
team, those tasks may no longer be performed, which would potentially undermine
the sustainability of the gains achieved thus far. I therefore call upon all
stakeholders, particularly bilateral partners and other donors, to provide the
resources needed to facilitate the transformation of the United Nations engagement
in Côte d’Ivoire.
84. I would like to thank my Special Representative for Côte d ’Ivoire, Aïchatou
Mindaoudou, for her excellent leadership, and all United Nations civilian and
uniformed personnel for their commitment to peace and stability in Côte d ’Ivoire.
My appreciation also goes to the troop- and police-contributing countries, donor
countries, regional and multilateral organizations and non-governmental
organizations that continue to provide invaluable support to Côte d ’Ivoire. I wish
also to pay special tribute to the essential role played by the African Union and
ECOWAS throughout the Ivorian peace process, which facilitated the achievements
attained by UNOCI, and without which the country might not now be entering the
final phase of the peacekeeping presence.

18/21

16-04983

S/2016/297

Annex I
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire: military and
police strength
Military component

Police component

Military
observers

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed police units

Bangladesh

13

10

729

752

180

Benin

9

7

368

384

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

Brazil

4

Country

Argentina

3
57

3
3

7

Burkina Faso

45

Burundi
Cameroon

Police
officers

29
1

1

24

Chad

6

6

16

China

6

6

Central African Republic

Democratic Republic of the Congo

6

Djibouti
Ecuador

2

Egypt

2
1

El Salvador

3

Ethiopia

2

France

174

175
3
2

8

8

Gambia

3

Ghana

6

Guatemala

5

5

Guinea

2

2

India

9

9

Ireland

3

3

Jordan

8

Kazakhstan

2

6

3
8

97

11

111

19

2

482

Madagascar
Malawi

2
3

Mali

1

4

1

1

Mauritania

140

Morocco

4

Namibia

1

Nepal

3

1

Niger

5

3

16-04983

9

2

715

719
1
4

864

872

40

19/21

S/2016/297

Military component
Country

Military
observers

Police component

Staff officers

Troops

Total

277

302

Nigeria

2

Pakistan

12

13

Paraguay

1

1

Peru

2

2

Philippines

3

3

Poland

2

2

Republic of Korea

2

2

Republic of Moldova

2

2

Formed police units

2
189

2

Romania

6

6

Russian Federation

10

10

Rwanda

8

Senegal

6

Serbia

3

Spain

5

731

742

16

3
1

1

Switzerland

1

Togo

7

6

Tunisia

8

3

465

478

43

11

38

Turkey
Uganda

3
5

Ukraine
United Republic of Tanzania

2

Uruguay

1

2

7

3

3

2

4

9

1

Vanuatu

11

Yemen

9

Zambia

2

2

Zimbabwe

2

2

Total

186

20/21

Police
officers

1

95

10

4 420

4 701

11

991

379

16-04983

S/2016/297

Annex II

16-04983

21/21
