General Auembly-Eleventh s-ion

40

sultation with the Secretary-General and subsequently confirmed by the Council;
( iii) In respect of one representative of each Member State participating in the Commission on
N arcotic Drugs ;
(d) Travel and subsistence expenses shall be paid
in respect of the following persons regardless of
whether they serve in their individual personal capacity
or as representatives of Governments :
(i) A rapporteur or chairman of a subsidiary
organ who is called upon to present in an
expert capacity the report of such subsidiary
organ to a parent body ;
( ii) One member of a commission acting as its
representative on a second commission or committee;
(iii) One representative of any Member State participating in a commission of inquiry or conciliation instituted by the General Assembly
or by the Security Council, except where the
organ concerned decides that an alternate for
each member is necessary, in which case payment may also be made in respect of an alternate;
( iv) Members of the Board of Auditors;
2. Decides that the principles set forth in paragraph
1 above shall also apply to any subsidiary organ that
may be established in the future, unless the resolution
establishing such subsidiary organ provides otherwise;
3. Decides that the application of these principles
shall be in accordance with the provisions contained
in the annex to the present resolution ;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish
such administrative rules and procedures as are necessary for the implementation of the provisions of the
present resolution.
612th plenary meeting,
7 December 1956.

the clopng date of the ses•sion of the organ or subsidiary
organ to which the daim relates.

ANNEX

1077 (XI). Appointmenta to fill vacanciee in the
Membersbip of the Committee on Contribu•
tions

APPLICATION OF PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE PAY:MENT OUT
OP UNITED NATIONS FONDS OF TRAVEL AND SUBSISTENCE
EXPENSES TO :ME.MBERS OF ORGANS AND SUBSIDIARY ORGANS
OF THE UNITED NATIONS

Travel exflenses

1. Provided that in all cases payment of travel expenses
to the General Assembly shall be limited to five persons for
each Member State for regular session and to one person for
special sessions of the General Assembly, travel expenses may
be paid in respect of a permanent representative or a member
of a permanent mission who is designa.ted by a Member
State as a representative or alternate representative to the
General Assembly. Such travel expenses shall be paid provided
the journey is und;rtaken in connexion with a session of the
General Assembly, either before, during, or after ,such session.
2. In the case of representatives, payment of travel expenses
shall be limited to the cost of round-trip travel between the
capital city of a Member State and the place of meeting, or
to the actual cost of travel undertaken if that should be the
lesser amount. In ail other cases, payment of travel expenses
shall be limited to the actual cost of round-trip travel between
the place of residence or duty station and the place of meeting.
3. Payment of travel expenses shall be limited to the cost
of first-class accommodation or its equivalent by recognized
public transport via a direct route.
4. The United Nations shall not be Hable for the payment
of any claim for reimbursement of travel expenses which is
submitted later than 31 December of the year which follows

Subsistence allowances
5. The subsistence allowance shall provide for the extra
expenses which an individual normally incurs in attending
an official meeting or session and shall not include any element
of fee or remuneration for services rendered.
6. The subsistence allowance shall be paid uniformly to
members of ail eligible bodies, and shall be at the rate of
$25 fier diem in respect of meetings at Headquarters ( New
York) and the equivalent in local currency of $20 fier diem in
respect of meetings away from Head:i,uarters, provided, however, that the allowance shall be reduced to $10 per diem, or
its equivalent in local currency, in respect of a member whose
duty station is also the place of meeting. Subsistence allowances at these rates shall be limited to the period during
which a member's presence is required at the place of meeting,
except that a member receiving the $10 allowance shall receive
the allowance only for the days during which he actually
attends meetings.
7. The subsistence allowance will be $8 fier diem during
periods of travel aboard vessels, trains and airplanes.

1076 (XI). Appointments to fill vacanciee in the
membersbip of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions
The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persans as members of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions :
Mr. André Ganem,
Mr. Kadhim Khalaf,
Mr. T. J. Natarajan;
2. Declares Mr. Ganem, Mr. Khalaf and Mr. Natarajan to be appointed for a three-year term to commence on 1 January 1957.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions :
Mr. Arthur H. Clough,
Mr. Fernando A. Galvao,
Mr. Sidney Pollock;
2. Declares Mr. Clough, Mr. Galvao and Mr. Pollock to be appointed for a three-year term to commence
on 1 January 1957.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.
1078 (XI). Confirmation of the appointment
made by the Secretary-General to the memberBhip of the lnvestments Committee
The General Assembly
Confirms the reappointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Jacques Rueff as a member of the Investments Committee for a three-year term to commence
on 1 January 1957.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.
