A/66/PV.97

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

97th plenary meeting

Thursday, 16 February 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Quinlan
(Australia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/66/668/Add.2)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping
with established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/66/668/Add.2, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communications contained in documents A/66/668
and A/66/668/Add.1, the Marshall Islands has made
the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should also like to
inform members that, since the issuance of document
A/66/668/Add.2, the Sudan and the Federated States
of Micronesia have made the necessary payments to
reduce their arrears below the amount specified in
Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of this information?
It was so decided.

(Qatar)

The Acting President: This information will be
reflected in document A/66/668/Add.3 to be issued at
a later date.
Agenda item 34
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/66/L.36)
The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that the debate on agenda item 34 and
its sub-item (a) will take place at a later date to be
announced.
I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic on a point of order.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As members of the Assembly know, the
President of the General Assembly on Monday,
13 February, convened a plenary meeting (see
A/66/PV.95) under item 64, entitled “Report of the
Human Rights Council”, based on what he called
“the developments in Syria”. At the time, we drew the
attention of the President of the General Assembly and
Member States to the fact that the convening of that
meeting was in contravention of established practice
and the provisions of resolution 65/281 on the review of
the Human Rights Council (A/66/53/Add.2). We called
in vain on the President of the General Assembly to
obtain an independent legal opinion that would have
enabled us to avoid establishing a serious precedent
that might induce the General Assembly to commit an

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-23408 (E)

1223408

A/66/PV.97

increasing number of breaches of the rules of procedure
and violations of the provisions of its own resolutions.
At that meeting, it was announced that a draft
resolution (A/66/L.36) would be presented regarding
the situation in Syria. We find today, however, that
this draft resolution is under another item of the
agenda, namely item 34, entitled “Prevention of armed
conflict” — a completely different item from that
under which the previous meeting was held. We recall
that some Western States said that the events in Syria
should be debated under agenda item 36, “The situation
in Middle East”, either in the Security Council or in the
General Assembly
Based on what I have just said, it would seem
clearly pathetic that the Syrian question should be
addressed over the course of 10 days under three agenda
items that are completely different from each other.
This emphatically shows that Syria is being targeted in
principle. There is no other reason for this confusion in
terms of procedural issues and clear violations of the
rules of procedure.
This confusion threatens the credibility of the
General Assembly at a time when it is dealing with
important issues pertinent to the sovereignty of Member
States. My country understands the importance of
upholding the transparency and credibility of the work
of the General Assembly in terms of principle and not
because we are talking about an issue linked to Syria.
We would therefore ask the President to clearly explain
these procedural issues before we move forward in
order to ensure that the rules are clearly and accurately
understood.
The Acting President: My understanding is that
it is the practice of the General Assembly to convene
a plenary meeting for the purpose of providing an
opportunity to consider any proposal submitted by a
member State or group of member States under any
agenda item. The sponsors, of course, have submitted
the draft resolution before us under item 34 (a), and I
would propose that we proceed on that basis.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen on a
point of order.
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation was surprised by today’s reference to
Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations. This
is a problem for us and I merely wished to inform the
presidency of this.

2

The Acting President: That will be duly noted.
I now give the floor to the representative Egypt to
introduce draft resolution A/66/L.36.
Mr. Mahmoud (Arab Republic of Egypt) (spoke in
Arabic): Today’s meeting is being held in the light of
critical circumstances in a sister Arab State, where an
unacceptable major escalation of acts of violence has
been condemned by the League of Arab States, the
United Nations and the international community, which
have all demanded an immediate end thereto. On behalf
of the Group of Arab States, we reiterate our absolute
rejection of the use of violence against civilians,
regardless of the justification. We demand that the
Syrian Government heed and fulfil the demands of the
Syrian Arab people.
Staunching the bloodshed and ending the suffering
of the brotherly Syrian people is the top priority of
the League of Arab States’ current agenda. Many
resolutions have been adopted thereon, the latest of
which is the resolution adopted by the Ministerial
Council of the League of Arab States on 12 February.
The League today stresses the need for the
immediate, full and faithful implementation of all
the provisions of the Arab action plan, which is the
sole and ideal way to fulfil the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people to freedom and democracy in a
comprehensive, Syrian-led political process in an
environment free from violence, fear, intimidation
and extremism. We stress once again the primacy of
the Arab solution under Arab auspices, our rejection of
military intervention in Syria, and our commitment to
preserving Syria’s unity and territorial integrity.
In implementation of the resolution of the Council
of the League of Arab States of 12 February, which
mandates the League to submit a draft resolution to
the General Assembly that reflects the Arab initiative
and the other relevant resolutions of the League, the
Group of Arab States has introduced draft resolution
A/66/L.36 on the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic,
under agenda item 34, “Prevention of armed conflict”.
The League has taken into consideration the link
between the draft resolution and sub-item (a) of the
agenda item, “Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution”. We believe that this principle is at the very
core of the League’s initiative, which is fundamentally
aimed at finding a peaceful settlement to the Syrian
conflict.

12-23408

A/66/PV.97

The draft resolution takes into consideration all the
pillars of the peaceful settlement of the Syrian crisis,
as reflected in the Arab action plan of 2 November
2011, the resolution adopted by the Ministerial Council
of the League on 22 January, and its latest resolution
of 12 February. These Arab initiatives and efforts
enjoy unprecedented international acceptance and
recognition. The draft resolution is sponsored by some
70 States Members of the United Nations. The League
of Arab States and all sponsors hope that it will be
adopted by consensus today, thereby demonstrating
that the international community speaks with one voice,
reflecting the gravity of developments in Syria, and
reaffirming full support for the efforts of the League
of Arab States, which are the only framework accepted
by all.
On that basis, the delegation of Egypt, on behalf of
the Arab Group and all sponsors of the draft resolution
in New York, calls today on all Member States to stand
shoulder to shoulder in sending a clear message of
support to the Syrian people by voting in favour of the
Arab draft resolution on the situation in Syria.
The Acting President: The Assembly shall now
proceed to take action on draft resolution A/66/L.36.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/66/L.36, I should like to place on record
the following statement on the financial implications
on behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure.
Under the terms of paragraph 11 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would request
“in this context, the Secretary-General and all
relevant United Nations bodies to provide support
to the efforts of the League of Arab States, both
through good offices aimed at promoting a peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis, including through
the appointment of a Special Envoy, and through
technical and material assistance, in consultation
with the League of Arab States”.
It is estimated that additional resources in the
amount of $900,000 would be required for the initial six
months in the biennium 2012-2013 to provide support to
the efforts of the League of Arab States, both through
good offices aimed at promoting a peaceful solution to
the Syrian crisis, including through the appointment

of a special envoy, and through technical and material
assistance.
These requirements would be met through the
use of the commitment authority granted to the
Secretary-General in resolution 66/249 for activities
that the Secretary-General certifies as relating to
the maintenance of peace and security. Any further
requirements would be proposed for charging against
the provision for special political missions approved by
the General Assembly for the biennium 2012-2013 in
the report to the General Assembly.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of vote before the voting,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Syria is currently working on three major
issues. The first is our ongoing and immediate response
to the just demands of the Syrian people for reform
by following up on the accelerated implementation of
a comprehensive reform programme. This response
alone fully answers the substance of the statement
made by my colleague, the representative of Egypt, in
introducing draft resolution A/66/L.36. The difference
between my brief description of that issue and the full
statement made by my colleague from Egypt is to be
found in the political intent of these words. I shall go
into that immediately.
We note that the adoption of the new draft
constitution for Syria shall be decided in a direct
national referendum in 10 days, on 26 February. The
draft constitution provides for the establishment of a
modern, democratic Syrian State of citizenship, rule of
law and equality among all citizens based on political
pluralism, the separation of powers, the protection
of public freedoms, and the democratic exercise of
authority through the ballot box. These extremely
important provisions respond to the genuine demands
and aspirations of the people, be they members of the
majority or the opposition.
Secondly, we shall continue to call in earnest for
an immediate national dialogue among all Syrians
who care for the security and future of their country,
regardless of their political ideology and affiliations.
This is the only way to resolve the painful events in
Syria, fulfil the aspirations of the Syrian people, and

12-234083

A/66/PV.97

maintain the country’s prestige as an effective actor in
its geographic and Arab region.
We welcome all honest efforts to support that
comprehensive national dialogue, including the Russian
offer to host it in Moscow. We call on all Member
States to encourage the national Syrian opposition to
participate in the comprehensive national dialogue.
We also call on those countries that are inciting the
opposition not to take part in the national dialogue to
desist and to persuade the opposition to distance itself
from the armed terrorist groups that have taken up a
new path to reform based on the destruction of oil and
gas pipelines and trains, assassination and violence
against public and private institutions and property.
Thirdly, we shall continue to undertake the
responsibilities and duties of the Syrian State and
to protect the Syrian people and its interests by
maintaining the stability of the country and the security
of its citizens from terrorism and the acts of violence
of armed groups, in accordance with international and
Syrian law. No country can accept the presence of
armed terrorist groups on its territory or allow them
to attack its institutions, private and public property,
civilians or military personnel.
We have deep concerns vis-à-vis the real intentions
of the sponsors of the draft resolution, in particular their
aggressive political and media campaign against Syria;
their provision of comprehensive logistical media,
financial and political support to the armed terrorist
groups; and securing them a voice in international
forums. These countries have denied the existence
of the armed terrorist groups since the current events
began. While claiming their desire to spare Syrian lives
and blood and to resolve the crisis in Syria peacefully,
they have hastened to impose unilateral sanctions on the
Syrian people outside the framework of international
legitimacy, which have affected their day-to-day
existence. They have also cut off relations with Syria
without justification.
All of this clearly demonstrates that they have
no desire to achieve any reform or proposal based on
peaceful dialogue. They are instead a major part of
the problem and the crisis. We call on them from this
rostrum to stop interfering in Syrian domestic affairs
and adding fuel to the fire of violence and sectarian
strife among all Syrians without exception, including
the opposition.

4

The draft resolution before us is an example par
excellence of bias, and has nothing to do with events
in Syria. The sponsors have rejected all negotiated
amendments to the draft, including an invitation to the
opposition to distance itself from armed groups. That
in itself explains everything. They have no intention of
assigning any responsibility whatsoever to the armed
terrorist groups for launching terrorist attacks on State
institutions and civilians; they do not even seek to
condemn those attacks, including the suicide attacks
in Damascus and Aleppo. They refuse to make any
reference to the exclusive responsibility of the Syrian
State to protect its citizens from these attacks. They
have paid no heed to the serious reforms under way in
Syria, including the new draft constitution.
Furthermore, the draft resolution refers to
decisions and resolutions that are unbalanced and will
only intensify the crisis. The resolutions adopted by
the League of Arab States violate Syrian sovereignty,
which is protected under the United Nations Charter
and all international norms, and international law. I
cite paragraph 9 of the most recent resolution adopted
by the Arab League, which is referenced in the draft
resolution. That resolution calls on League members
to “provide [the Syrian opposition] with all forms
of political and material support”. That paragraph
represents a clear official invitation to provide logistical
support and weapons to the armed opposition and to
encourage it to continue its terrorist attacks in Syria,
including the suicidal attacks that have claimed the
lives of hundreds of civilians in Damascus and Aleppo.
It is the very armed terrorist groups that have officially
endorsed these attacks through the satellite channels
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and its media
that are to receive all material support pursuant to the
League’s resolution.
I deeply regret to say that never in my professional
life of multilateral diplomacy have I heard of a similar
resolution adopted by any international, governmental
or regional organization calling for the provision of
support to armed groups that commit terrorist attacks
on civilians. We might assume that those organizations
would be more interested in seeking ways to deal with
these groups and organizations than in supporting
them or giving them legitimacy and political and media
cover.
The League of Arab States, which is supposedly
a regional organization that promotes the interests
and preserves the sovereignty of its members,

12-23408

A/66/PV.97

including Syria, is now — under the domination of the
GCC — competing in every conspiratorial manner with
the traditional enemies of the Arabs to smite Syria. Is it
conceivable that the League of Arab States called for an
international peacekeeping operation to be deployed to
Syria? Is it conceivable that this invitation was rejected
by some Western States that conspire against Syria?
In considering the situation of certain Arab
countries following the so-called Arab Spring, we note
that they are regrettably suffering violence on a daily
basis that is far more vicious than events in my country.
And yet, these developments receive little coverage
in the media or attention from the countries that have
provoked these unanticipated repercussions for Arab
citizens. At the same time, these countries seek to
plunder the resources of all Arab countries and to allow
Israel, on behalf of Western interests in the region,
to dominate the Middle East, squelch the Palestinian
question, swallow the occupied Arab territories, and
return the Arabs to the age of darkness once their oil and
gas wealth and revenues have been usurped. They do all
this to save the economies of Europe and the United
States from the financial crisis that is smothering them.
We would hope that the United Nations and its
Member States would support the Syrian Government
and people in addressing the challenges of extremism
and terrorism and in accelerating the serious reforms
under way in the country. In that context, we draw
the Assembly’s attention to the danger that the
Organization, under political pressure exerted by some
Member States, may be used as a smokescreen for
armed terrorist groups in Syria. The report issued by
the Arab observer mission documented the criminal
acts committed by those armed groups.
In that context, we would like to reiterate that
a biased, non-objective resolution would only send
the wrong message to all of those extremists and
terrorists — the message that their acts of violence
and deliberate sabotage have the support and
encouragement of the States Members of the United
Nations. Consequently, the adoption of such a resolution
would only lead to an exacerbation of the crisis and to
more violence in the region as a whole, rather than to a
peaceful settlement of the crisis.
We would therefore appeal to all States, when
the draft resolution is put to the vote, not to become
indirectly parties to something that will only result in
more chaos and intensify the crisis. We appeal to all

members to vote against this draft resolution against
Syria for all the reasons I have cited.
In conclusion, I would like to pose a question, and I
would like each and every representative here to reflect
on it. Did anyone think of the consequences of the
destruction of Basra? This Arab proverb does not apply
to the city of Basra in Iraq; it simply draws attention
to what could happen if the draft resolution is adopted.
That step would be disastrous not only for the region
but for international relations as a whole.
Any reasonable person in this Hall is aware that the
chaos in Arab countries has implications for regionanl
and international peace and security. Did anyone
consider the fact that the bloodshed in Syria and other
countries only serves the interests of Israel and promotes
its plans to kill the Palestinian question and redraw the
geopolitical borders of the region, thereby dashing any
hopes for a comprehensive and just peace in the region,
including the hope of establishing a Palestinian State
on the basis of the borders of 4 June 1967?
The crux of the matter is that certain sponsors of the
draft resolution would like to settle political accounts
with Syria. This involves long-standing political issues
with the West — old and new ones with respect to some
Arab countries, unfortunately.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The principles of
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity are the very foundation of human coexistence
in today’s world, which is made up of nations that boast
a rich political, cultural and religious diversity. These
principles ensure peaceful coexistence and fraternity
among the human beings who inhabit Mother Earth.
These principles must therefore be scrupulously
respected, and the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be an
exception to that rule.
We denounce before the world the fact that imperial
Powers and their allies are proposing to trigger regime
change in Syria, even at the cost of further bloodshed.
They want to use the same approach as the one taken in
Libya, which had dire consequences for international
peace and security. They are seeking to militarily
occupy a sovereign country, carry out a coup d’état
against its legitimate authorities, and turn Syria into a
protectorate.
The imperial Powers and their allies, working in
concert with the international media, which are at their
service, would turn the city of Homs, Syria’s Benghazi,

12-234085

A/66/PV.97

into the headquarters of armed groups operating with
foreign support. The alleged goal of human rights
protection in Homs and in other parts of the country is
but a smokescreen to be used to violate the sovereignty
of Syria and to promote civil war on a large scale.
The draft resolution (A/66/L.36) before us
represents an intervention in the internal affairs of an
independent State, as it sets forth various mechanisms
for the mentoring and monitoring of a sovereign country.
If the draft resolution is adopted, it will be used by the
media to justify foreign military intervention in Syria.
The draft resolution attacks the Syrian Government.
It calls for respect for human rights while failing to
mention the ongoing proven human rights violations
perpetrated by terrorist groups, which are committing
heinous crimes against civilians and attacking State
officials and facilities using weapons of all kinds.
The draft turns a blind eye to the initiatives
of President Bashar Al-Assad and of Syrian State
institutions to promote political dialogue with the
opposition, which are aimed at achieving an inclusive,
democratic and peaceful national agreement. It also
ignores the call made by the Syrian Government for
the holding of a referendum on 26 February on a new
Constitution that would establish a political system
based on the principle of political pluralism and the
democratic exercise of power through elections. The
exercise of democracy and popular elections are the best
options for moving towards the creation of a political,
democratic and pluralistic system in which all citizens
are equal, regardless of their affiliations, ethnicity or
beliefs.
The draft resolution denies the Syrian State its
right to protect its population and to ensure internal
peace and security. The draft asks it to give up the
privileges granted by the Constitution for ensuring the
stability of the country. The draft does not call for — as
proposed in the amendment submitted by the Russian
Federation — “all sections of the Syrian opposition to
dissociate themselves from armed groups engaged in
acts of violence”, nor does it urge “Member States and
all those in a position to do so to use their influence to
prevent continued violence by such groups”.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela recognizes
the commendable efforts undertaken by the Russian
Federation to bring the content of the draft resolution
closer to a balanced and objective text, which has not
been achieved. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

6

supports the initiatives of the Russian Federation and
the People’s Republic of China, which have prevented
the Security Council from being used to violate the
sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela therefore
supports the peace efforts made by the Russian
Federation in Damascus through their Minister Sergey
Lavrov. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela hopes
that those efforts are supported by the countries that
truly desire a negotiated, peaceful and inclusive
solution in Syria. Dialogue among the Syrians should
be encouraged. It is not desirable that the logic of war
that the imperialists wish to impose on Syria and the
world prevails.
The General Assembly, which is today discussing
the possibility of invading a sovereign country, should
rather be concerned with the full recognition of the
Palestinian State, Israel’s ongoing violations of the
rights of the Arab people and how to implement the
resolution ordering the Government of the United
States to suspend the criminal blockade against the
heroic sister Republic of Cuba.
For these reasons, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, under the leadership of Hugo Chávez Frías,
will vote against draft resolution A/66/L.36 before us.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Before voting, the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would like to clarify its
position on three dimensions.
First, any issue related to a United Nations Member
State should be discussed strictly on the basis of the
principle of respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of United
Nations Member States. The Syrian Arab Republic
is a full-fledged member of the United Nations and,
therefore, is no exception.
Secondly, the use of violence against the Syrian
Republic and innocent people should be stopped
immediately and simultaneously and all elements of
instability should similarly be removed.
Thirdly, the question of the Syrian Arab Republic
should be settled in the best interests of the Syrian
people. The fate and future of Syria are in the hands
of the Syrian people. Therefore, the process of stability
and peace should strictly be a peaceful and Syrian-led
process through dialogue and negotiation without any
outside interference.

12-23408

A/66/PV.97

In view of that principled position, the delegation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will vote
against draft resolution A/66/L.36.
Ms. Williams (Grenada): The Government and
people of Grenada, a peace-loving people, extend our
sincere condolences to all the Syrian families who
have lost their loved ones on the sad events under
consideration here.
Grenada believes that, at all times, the United
Nations must do the right thing, according to the letter
and the spirit of our Charter, and we must be seen to be
doing so.
Regarding draft resolution A/66/L.36, entitled “The
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”, Grenada places
on record that it is our understanding that the draft
resolution will do only what it says, namely, to provide
diplomatic support to Syria, the Arab League and the
Secretary-General in order to help the Government and
people of Syria end all bloodshed and find an agreed
solution to the internal situation.
Grenada understands that in and with this draft
resolution, the General Assembly is not voting on or
for a resolution that directly or indirectly or through
interpretation or reinterpretation can be used as the basis
for the removal of a Government, military intervention
or other acts against the Charter of the United Nations
in letter or in spirit. With that understanding, and
naturally with a prayer and a hope, Grenada will vote
for the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/66/L.36, entitled “The
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/66/L.36, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, the
Central African Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Djibouti, Estonia,
Germany, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,

Micronesia, Monaco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

12-234087

A/66/PV.97

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Cameroon, Comoros,
Fiji, Lebanon, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet
Nam
Draft resolution A/66/L.36 was adopted by 137
votes to 12, with 17 abstentions (resolution 66/253).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Burundi and the
Comoros advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In order to resolve the Syrian crisis, there is a
need to uphold two principles to which no one seems to
object. The violence must be stopped by all sides, and
the necessary solutions can be found only through an
inclusive, Syrian-led political process.
Resolution 66/253, “The situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic”, submitted by the Group of Arab States
today, does not meet these criteria. To a large extent, it
reflects the worrisome trend of attempts to isolate the
Syrian leadership, reject any contact with it, and impose
an external formula for a political settlement.
In order to make the sponsors’ text more
balanced, the Russian Federation had proposed
several amendments. The most important amendment
placed non-contentious and reasonable demands on all
opposition forces to disassociate themselves from the
armed groups carrying out acts of violence and on those
groups themselves to cease their attacks on residential
areas and State institutions, just as Government forces
must stop shelling towns and withdraw from populated
areas. However, our amendments were not taken into
account. In these circumstances, the Russian Federation
had no other choice than to vote against the resolution.
The Russian Federation will continue its
unflagging efforts to help Syria emerge from the crisis
in cooperation with all those who regard the interests of
the Syrian people, regional peace and security to be of
paramount importance.

8

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese Government consistently pursues an
independent foreign policy of peace and is committed to
upholding regional and world peace and stability. China
has followed closely developments in the situation in
Syria and is deeply worried about the escalating crisis
there, which has caused civilian casualties and affected
peace and stability in the Middle East.
We condemn all acts of violence against innocent
civilians and urge the Government and all political
factions in Syria to immediately and fully end all acts
of violence and quickly restore stability and normal
social order. We call on the Government of Syria to pay
serious heed to the peoples’ legitimate desire for reform
and development. We call on the various political
factions in Syria to express their political aspirations
through non-violent means under the rule of law.
We urge all parties concerned in Syria to
immediately launch inclusive political dialogue without
preconditions and jointly discuss a comprehensive
political reform plan and mechanism. We call for the
holding of a referendum on the new draft constitution
and parliamentary elections at an early date, the
establishment of a national unity Government with
the participation of various factions, and the full
implementation of the reform plan on this basis.
We understand the concerns of Arab countries
and the League of Arab States and their desire to seek
a quick solution to the Syrian issue. We value the
important role of Arab countries and the League of
Arab States in seeking a political solution to the issue of
Syria. We appreciate the efforts of Arab countries and
the League of Arab States to find a political solution
to the Syrian issue. We support the position of Arab
countries that the violence should end immediately,
that Syrian civilians should be effectively protected,
that humanitarian assistance should be extended to
Syria, and that external military intervention should be
avoided. We hope that the Syrian issue will be resolved
within the framework of the League of Arab States
through political and peaceful means.
We believe that the international community should
fully respect Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, the independent choice of the
Syrian people, and the outcome of political dialogue
among the various Syrian parties. We do not approve of
armed intervention or forcing a so-called regime change

12-23408

A/66/PV.97

in Syria. We do not believe that sanctions or the threat
of sanctions are helpful to achieving an appropriate
solution. The actions of the international community
and the United Nations on the issue of Syria should help
to ease tensions, facilitate political dialogue and resolve
differences. Such actions, instead of complicating the
issue, should contribute to maintaining peace and
stability in the Middle East and upholding the unity of
the international community. China voted in accordance
with this position.
China is a responsible country and a friend of the
Arab people. China has always followed the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic norms governing international relations.
China takes an objective, just and responsible stance
on the issue of Syria. China is willing to maintain
communications with the Government and various
political factions of Syria, as well as with the Arab
countries and the League of Arab States. China will
work with the international community and play a
positive and constructive role to appropriately resolve
the issue of Syria.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): The Republic of Serbia
voted in favor of resolution 66/253. We believe that all
international efforts should be inspired solely by the
desire to put an end to the suffering of the people of
Syria. We appreciate and respect the efforts made by
the League of Arab States and the Group of Arab States.
We would have wished to see the proposals and
amendments offered by some countries considered and
evaluated, because we appreciate and welcome all the
diplomatic efforts that have been made so far to help
ease the Syrian crisis. We believe in particular that
the resolution would have been enriched by some of
the amendments submitted by the Russian Federation.
These amendments, in our view, are truly constructive
and could have led to the adoption of the resolution by
consensus.
We hope that the international community will
take these amendments into consideration in the future
diplomatic process. Their content cannot be avoided, and
sooner or later will need to be addressed. The Republic
of Serbia believes that all initiatives directed at stopping
the bloodshed in Syria and creating an atmosphere in
which serious talks about the arrangements that would
bring stability in Syria are most welcome.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Pakistan has acceded to
the collective wisdom of our brothers in the Arab world

and voted in favour of resolution 66/253. We share
the concerns of the international community on the
situation in Syria. Continued violence and bloodshed
cannot be condoned. We strongly condemn the use of
force against peaceful protestors and the human rights
violations committed by all sides. We feel that all
efforts have to be geared towards breaking the spiral of
violence in Syria and enabling the legitimate aspirations
of the people to be heard and channelled for the sake of
the peace, prosperity and stability of the country. Haste
often leads to waste, and is historically contrary to the
principles of tried and tested diplomacy.
There is a general consensus within the
international community on two of the main objectives:
an immediate end to the violence and killing, and a
peaceful resolution of the situation through an inclusive
political process. There are some differences, however,
on how to operationalize these objectives. Pakistan has
stressed the importance of a consensual approach to
the issue, including in the Security Council, for only
a unified message could help to promote our common
objectives.
We feel that we are very close to arriving at
such common ground in the Security Council. There
could have been greater efforts to bridge the gaps by
accommodating the amendments proposed by Russia
and China and, for the sake of world peace, to achieve
greater consensus in the Assembly. Our position in
the Security Council was based on the principles of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and the
non-use of foreign military intervention. Even today,
we stand by those principles.
We call on both sides to shun violence, pursue the
path of dialogue and reconciliation, and engage in a
results-oriented and inclusive political process leading
to a peaceful resolution of the problem. We have always
urged that any discussion of Syria at the United Nations
take place in full cognizance of and respect for the
principles of the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of that country. We continue to
believe that the objectives of peace and security can
best be served by pursuing a cooperative approach with
the country. We therefore reiterate our earlier calls
for respect for the will of the Syrian people and for a
Syrian-led solution to the ongoing unrest.
All remonstrances aside, there is growing
apprehension and anxiety in the Islamic world as
another Muslim country faces ingress at the hands of

12-234089

A/66/PV.97

the United Nations. We must not allow this to become a
belief; this growing trend must cease.
Let me conclude by committing our continued
support to the collective efforts of the League of Arab
States aimed at ending the violence and promoting a
peaceful resolution of the problem through dialogue
and engagement.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica expresses its deepest concern over the
grave, repeated and massive violations of human
rights in Syria, in particular the deaths and suffering
of thousands of civilians and others protected under
international law, and the growing dangers faced by the
people of that country. The international community
cannot remain silent in the face of the violations
described by the commission of inquiry, which has
earned our full confidence.
We vehemently call on the Syrian authorities to
put a definitive halt to the execution and persecution
of protestors and champions of human rights, arbitrary
detentions, forced disappearances, reprisals, torture
and attacks on the civilian population. We also condemn
sexual violence and the violations of the human rights of
boys and girls, as described in the report of the Human
Rights Council (see A/66/53/Add.2). Earlier this week,
we also listened with great interest to the briefing of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to the General Assembly on the situation in Syria (see
A/66/PV.95). We express our deep concern over the
ongoing deterioration of the situation.
My country believes that all actors in the
international community should play a role in this
serious and grave situation, pursuant to their respective
competences. We note the leadership and responsible
engagement of the League of Arab States in the
search for solutions to the crisis. The many decisions
adopted by that organization on this matter should be
implemented, including its plan of action. To that end,
it is imperative that the Syrian authorities consistently
and seriously to cooperate with that mechanism and
to comply with existing and future resolutions of the
Human Rights Council.
The Human Rights Council has also fulfilled its
responsibilities by holding three special sessions, and
in particular by adopting resolution S-18/1, which we
endorse as a member of the Council. The Human Rights
Council, as the highest human rights body of the United
Nations, has tools available to it that we must continue

10

using in the session that will begin on 27 February.
We therefore endorse the appointment of a special
rapporteur. That is one of the mandates conferred upon
the Human Rights Council, and as members we should
act accordingly.
Given the prominent role of the Human Rights
Council, its technical capacity and its ability to visit
the field in situations of human rights violations
that are serious enough to require country-specific
consideration, Costa Rica has on this occasion
maintained its traditional position of not co-sponsoring
such resolutions in the General Assembly.
Nevertheless, we call the Assembly’s attention to
the fact that, given the seriousness of the findings of
the commission of inquiry, the Human Rights Council
itself, in paragraph 19 of resolution S-18/1, transmitted
to the Secretary-General its report for appropriate
action and transmission to all relevant United Nations
bodies. Despite that, the Security Council failed to
respond in a timely manner to this grave situation with
respect to crimes against humanity, which are a threat
to peace and security.
Working with the other countries of the so-called
group of five small nations, we have expressed our
concern about the use of a veto by two permanent
members of the Security Council on 4 February (see
S/PV.6711). We have reiterated our call for the veto
not to be used in situations relating to genocide, crime
against humanity, ethnic cleansing or war crimes.
There is an urgent need for reform to democratize
the Security Council, to guarantee greater plurality
in decision-making, and to limit privileges. In these
circumstances, we carefully studied the resolution
introduced by the Group of Arab States under agenda
item 34, “Prevention of armed conflict”. We believe
that it is an appropriate response to the gravity of the
crisis and, given our deep concern for the situation in
Syria, we voted in favour of it.
Although we attach high value to consensus,
consensus-seeking cannot and should not paralyse our
action, or weaken the Organization’s ability to send a
strong message when confronted with unacceptable
events such as those before us.
The Security Council still has time to fulfil the
important responsibilities conferred upon it by the
international community. Political concerns cannot
be put above the highest priority of protecting human

12-23408

A/66/PV.97

life and integrity by sending a forceful and unanimous
message and taking the measures that are necessary to
achieve peace and security and that have a true impact
in the field. Those responsible for these acts should
answer to the relevant courts, and the Security Council
should take specific measures to achieve that goal,
including referral of the situation to the International
Criminal Court.

social crisis, with all its ramifications for the region as
a whole. Our goal, therefore, should be focused on a
process that leads to strengthening national unity and
ensuring public order, national security and the stability
and prosperity of the Syrian people, while bearing in
mind that the primary and ultimate responsibility for
the safety, security and stability of the Syrian people
lies with the people and Government of Syria.

Finally, we firmly urge all the various international
and national actors to make every possible effort to find
a peaceful solution to the Syrian conflict. All parties
involved should seek a solution through dialogue and
prevent by all means possible further violence against
the civilian population. The decision as to how they
will organize their Government and institutions is up
to the Syrian people alone. Voices of change cannot
be silenced with violence. The clamour of the people
should be heard and respected.

We regret that the whole process of calling a meeting
of the General Assembly to debate the situation in Syria
did not go through the proper procedures. Furthermore,
with regard to the lack of consultation even with the
members of the General Committee in convening the
meeting, there is an inconsistency in the agenda item
under which the debate is taking place. While the
recent meeting of the General Assembly on this issue
(A/66/PV.96) was convened under agenda item 64,
“Report of the Human Rights Council”, the resolution
adopted today is under agenda item 34, “Prevention of
armed conflict”. Discussing the situation of an armed
conflict in a given country and the ways and means
to prevent it has legal and political implications. We
strongly believe that such a situation does not apply to
the case of Syria. We very much suspect that attributing
the situation of Syria to that category may notonly not
help us to resolve the internal political dispute, but also
would further complicate the situation.

Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Ukraine voted in favour
of resolution 66/253. The position of the delegation
of Ukraine on the resolution presented by the Group
of Arab States is a continuation of our stance on the
relevant resolution (A/C.3/66/L.57/Rev.1) adopted last
November by a large majority in the Third Committee.
We proceed from the reality that countries of the
region that are striving for peace and want to bring an
end to the violence in their neighbourhood are in the
best position to reach these goals. Therefore, in our
view, the peaceful efforts of the League of Arab States
aimed at a negotiated settlement deserve the support of
the Assembly.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, in a
statement dated 10 February, expressed great concern
at the escalating violence in Syria, which threatens
to grow into a full-scale civil war with unpredictable
consequences for the entire Middle East. Ukraine
urges all parties of the internal Syrian confrontation to
cease violence and to start a dialogue with the aim of
finding acceptable and effective ways of resolving their
differences.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted against resolution 66/253, in line with
our principled position that addressing the legitimate
demands of the people through a peaceful and
domestically led political process and free from foreign
intervention is the only way out of a crisis. In the case of
Syria, any attempt to interfere in Syrian internal affairs
would only lead to the deepening of a political and

Even if we accept that the Syrian situation should be
discussed under agenda item 34, “Prevention of armed
conflict”, that is one side of the coin. But the other side
of the coin is that if the issue is considered under armed
conflict, it means that we explicitly recognize that there
are armed groups in Syria fighting the Government,
committing violence and destroying public buildings
and infrastructure. The question now arises from where
and which sources those groups obtained their arms
and sophisticated equipment.
What is more regrettable, however, is that the
sponsors of the resolution chose not to accommodate any
amendments to it, whereas their acceptance could have
made the resolution more balanced and comprehensive
and more adapted to the real situation on the ground in
Syria. The amendments called for “all sections of the
Syrian opposition to dissociate themselves from armed
groups engaged in acts of violence” and highlighted
the importance of armed groups stopping their attacks
against State institutions and quarters of the cities
and towns.

12-2340811

A/66/PV.97

Those are key issues in the resolution of the crisis
in Syria. As long as armed groups continue to resort
to violence, the crisis would obviously continue. We
should be clear and steadfast in condemning any act of
violence and terrorism in any form and manifestation.
Foreign interference, acts of violence and incitement to
terrorism would pour more oil on the fire.
As we have stated before, Syria has historically
played an important role in the Middle East. Therefore,
prolonged instability and unrest in Syria would have
adverse consequences for peace and stability in the
Middle East region. I would like to make it clear that
destabilizing the Middle East and promoting violence
in the region eventually serve the best interests of the
Zionist regime and its criminal acts against humanity,
Muslims and the Arab world.
We should all work together for a comprehensive,
effective and practical way to help a peaceful resolution
of the present crisis in Syria. The resolution in its
present wording would not lead us to that goal. That is
why we voted against it.
Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia also voted against resolution 66/253
that the General Assembly has just adopted. That is why
we would like to take this opportunity to explain the
reasons for our decision.
We would like to begin by first asking what is
happening is Syria. Is there an embryonic civil war?
Or perhaps it is an armed crushing of a civil uprising
or maybe a clash between the regular Syrian army and
armed forces organized by the opposition? Is there
perhaps genocide in Syria? Those are some of the
questions that we asked before taking a decision.
We must admit that we do not have an exact answer.
We know only that there is a recognized opposition and
also a Government open to reform. In the words of the
Ambassador of Syria to the United Nations, we heard
that it is a Government that is ready to make changes,
to alter its Constitution and to lead the Syrian political
process towards a democracy.
However, we cannot be sure about that because
we know that it is an ongoing process that has still
not shown its definitive traits. Nevertheless, we know
the dangers of an exacerbation of the situation. We
are aware of the possibility of a power vacuum and a
sectarian or religious struggle. And we are aware, above

12

all, of the possibility of the entire region of the Middle
East ending up destabilized, as has happened in earlier
conflicts.
What the Bolivarian delegation knows is that
the Syrian problem can have two outcomes. One is
the outcome implemented in Libya ─ the formula
facilitated by the United Nations last year. That
involves legitimizing a foreign intervention into a
country embroiled in conflict and, after legitimizing
that violence through a United Nations resolution ─
in the case of Libya Security Council resolution 1973
(2011) ─ justifying regime change and disruption of the
civilian order in that country.
We witnessed that outcome, and it seems that we
did not learn a lesson. It appears that we are ready
to repeat the same mistakes as last year, turning the
United Nations into a platform to legitimize a foreign
intervention. The difference is that last year, it was
the Security Council and today, it appears to be the
General Assembly that will ultimately allow that step
to be taken.
We hope that, indeed, as the Ambassador of
Grenada said, this resolution will not make it possible
to implement the formula that we saw last year. But we
have serious doubts about that. That is why we voted
against the resolution.
However, we also envisage a second outcome,
which is not the one outlined above. That is a peaceful
transition, which we also witnessed a year ago in Egypt
and Tunisia. The Arab Spring was based on a principle
of peaceful tools of dissent in order to, to some extent,
guide a return to democracy and, possibly, regime
change, but through the popular will of its citizens
without allowing a foreign intervention. We think that
that first breath of the Arab Spring should blow hard
in Syria and sincerely believe that the Government
of Syria could take steps in that direction. We would
therefore not want the United Nations instead to be
tempted to move quickly and once again implement the
Libya formula, which seems to us inappropriate.
For that reason, Bolivia would have supported the
amendments that yesterday the Russian delegation
wanted to submit to the draft resolution. We think
that the Russian Federation’s amendments would have
helped the resolution to truly enjoy the consensus that
we all hoped, above all when we are talking of the
General Assembly, where there are no greater or lesser

12-23408

A/66/PV.97

countries and where no one has the right to veto the
decision of the majority.
This year, Bolivia will have had 30 years of
uninterrupted democracy with unlimited respect for
human rights. Bolivia has also lived through difficult
times of conflict in the past and is not insensitive to
violence. Furthermore, Bolivia supports the victims
of the violence in Syria, but will not on that account
overlook the fact that in many cases the United Nations
has made mistakes. We must remember that.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina voted in favour of resolution 66/253 and
would like to point out the following issues relating to
how this matter was handled.
First, it is of the utmost importance to make
every possible effort to guarantee comprehensive,
unrestricted respect for human rights in Syria. The
Syrian Government is responsible for complying with
that exigency.
Secondly, it is necessary to preserve the right to free
association, political participation and social protest of
the Syrian people as a whole, without any repression
that seeks to restrict the effective exercising of their
rights.
Finally, Argentina is convinced that this crisis
should be resolved in the context of dialogue, negotiation
and the democratic participation of all sectors without
interference or plans for military intervention by
foreign Powers.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Since the
beginning of the crisis in Syria in March last year, India
has been concerned about its implications within and
outside Syria. We have been mindful of the important
role that the Syrian Arab Republic has historically
played in the Middle East. We think that prolonged
instability and unrest in Syria have serious implications
for peace and stability in the wider region. We have
therefore, since the beginning of the protests, called for
a peaceful and inclusive political process to address the
grievances of all sections of Syrian society.
We strongly condemn all violence, irrespective
of whoever the perpetrators are. We also condemn
all violations of human rights. India holds the rights
to free expression and peaceful assembly among the
fundamental values that should be respected, while
ensuring the stability and security of society. India has
conveyed this message to the Syrian leadership, both

bilaterally and with its partners in the India, Brazil and
South Africa group. We have impressed upon the Syrian
side the urgent need to abjure violence and pay heed
to the aspirations of the people of Syria. This message
was also contained in the statement of the President of
the Security Council S/PRST/2011/16, issued in August
2011 under India’s presidency.
Unfortunately, the situation has continued to
deteriorate. We have also witnessed several terrorist
attacks in different parts of the country. Resort to
violence by all sides in the crisis remains unabated.
We are firmly of the view that a political process to
resolve the present crisis should be led by the Syrians
themselves. We believe that the main role of the
international community, including the Assembly, is
to facilitate the engagement of the Syrian Government
with all sectors of Syrian society for an inclusive
political process, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of all Syrians while ensuring respect for
the country’s independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity.
The League of Arab States, as an important regional
organization, should play its required and historic role
in promoting political dialogue among the Syrian
parties. Our support for resolution 66/253, adopted
today, is in accordance with our support for the efforts
of the Arab League to find a peaceful resolution of the
crisis through a Syrian-led inclusive political process.
I would, however, like to express our regret at the
procedure followed in the Assembly during the week
spent discussing the situation in Syria. Exceptions to
established procedures are best avoided in order to
maintain the credibility of any institution. Also, it would
do us immense good if there were greater readiness on
the part of all quarters to negotiate a text with a view to
reaching consensus.
My delegation notes that the resolution just adopted
expressly reaffirms that all countries should refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, and
from acting in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations. The resolution also
condemns all violence, irrespective of where it comes
from, and calls for serious political dialogue between
the Syrian Government and the whole spectrum of
the opposition under the auspices of the League of
Arab States. We believe that the leadership of Syria is
a matter for the Syrian people to decide. We call on

12-2340813

A/66/PV.97

all opposition forces in Syria to peacefully engage in
constructive dialogue with the authorities.
In this connection, we have noted the decision of the
Syrian leadership to hold a referendum on a new draft
constitution on 26 February and to organize multi-party
elections within next three months. We hope that this
decision will create a new environment for peace and
facilitate a political process.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): Singapore voted in favour of
resolution 66/253 because it is clearly not a politically
motivated country-specific human rights resolution of
the type that is too common in the Third Committee. By
contrast, the resolution clearly deals with a unique and
extraordinary emergency.
Singapore calls on the Government of Syria to
immediately cease all violence against its own citizens.
We call upon the Syrian Government to work with all
parties, including the League of Arab States and the
United Nations, to end the violence and resolve the
situation peacefully.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Viet Nam has been
closely following developments in Syria, and we are
particularly concerned by reports of increasing violence,
instability and loss of public order, which seriously
affect the right of the Syrian people. We join in the
international community’s call on all parties concerned
in Syria to exercise self-restraint, end the violence and
find a political solution through constructive dialogue
and national reconciliation, in conformity with the
aspirations of the Syrian people.
Viet Nam supports the position, espoused by
many countries, upholding respect for the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, especially the principles of
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
as well as the peaceful settlement of conflicts and the
guarantee of the right to self-determination of the Syrian
people. Therefore, it is important that this process be
determined by the Syrian people.
We also support the efforts of the international
community, including those of the League of Arab
States, in contributing constructively to the early
restoration of stability, dialogue towards national
reconciliation, and the promotion of peace in Syria so
that the Syrian people are able to devote themselves to
national reconstruction and development.

14

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
voted in favour of resolution 66/253. The General
Assembly has raised its voice to resoundingly condemn
the systematic and massive violations of human rights
in the Syrian Arab Republic, such as the use of force
against civilians; arbitrary executions; assassinations;
the persecution of protestors, human rights activists and
journalists; arbitrary detentions; forced disappearances;
torture; and sexual violence, including against children.
The serious events that have been denounced,
as well as those reported by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, cannot go
unpunished.The rule of law should become a reality,
and those responsible for grave violations of human
rights, including those that could constitute crimes
against humanity, should be brought to justice.
The Government of Chile once again calls on the
Government of Syria to put an end to the brutality and to
open realistic pathways to dialogue with the opposition,
and for the Syrian people to be allowed to choose their
own destiny in a peaceful climate free of violence. In
addition, channels must be opened for the international
community to provide necessary aid to the victims of
the humanitarian crisis that has been emerged.
Finally, Chile reiterates its support for the efforts
of the League of Arab States to reach a solution to
the crisis in Syria, which represent the importance
that regional organizations attach to the search for a
solution to the conflict.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): The delegation of
Bangladesh voted in favour of resolution 66/253, entitled
“Situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”. Bangladesh
maintains a principled position of generally abstaining
on human rights resolutions calling for action against
any State Member of the United Nations. However,
we voted in favour as an exception in order to end the
bloodshed and misery of the Syrian people.
We must mention that the convening of the meeting
of the General Assembly to consider the report of the
Human Rights Council (A/66/53/Add.2) at this time
of year was not procedurally correct. It contravenes
paragraph 6 of resolution 65/281. Bangladesh hopes that
this will truly be an exception without any recurrence.
Bangladesh has closely examined the resolution and
notes that, unlike the usual country-specific resolutions,
it was submitted by the League of Arab States under
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. It follows

12-23408

A/66/PV.97

several actions by the Arab League to bring peace and
stability to Syria and to promote a Syrian-led political
transition. Bangladesh notes with satisfaction that the
resolution, in its condemnation of violence, addresses
all parties in Syria, including armed groups. We would
have appreciated it if the amendment of the Russian
Federation could have been accommodated.
Bangladesh strongly believes that any action in
Syria should be led only by the Syrian Government
through a constructive dialogue that enjoys its full
consent with respect for the national sovereignty, unity
and integrity of Syria. The proposed observer mission
of the Arab League and the appointment of a special
envoy of the Secretary-General for a peaceful solution
to the Syrian crisis would, we hope, initiate a process of
peaceful dialogue and engagement with all concerned
in Syria.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
international community has clearly expressed its
opinion and its message has been conveyed to everybody.
The Arab Group and all 72 sponsors of resolution
66/253 were bolstered in their resolve by the large
number of sponsors. The resolution, which reaffirms
the need for a peaceful solution to the crisis as part of
the League of Arab States initiative, enjoyed significant
and overwhelming support. The 137 votes in favour of
the resolution confirms that prognosis and sends the
unambiguous message to the Syrian regime that it is
high time to listen to the voice of its people. It is high
time to immediately, fully and faithfully implement the
relevant initiatives and decisions of the League of Arab
States in order to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
That peaceful solution should remain in the hands of
the Arabs in the context of the initiative of the Arab
League, which is the only acceptable context available.
We all know that the situation in Syria is
deteriorating. The situation is extremely serious
and there must be no hesitation or delay. Everybody
must focus on the crisis of the Syrian people and the
attainment of their legitimate aspirations to a free life
within a democratic context. That can be achieved only
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process as part
of the Arab League initiative. We must avert a further
deterioration in the situation that could have dramatic

humanitarian repercussions and a negative impact on
the stability of the entire region.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Arab Group and all
the sponsors of the resolution, I would like to thank all
the members who voted in favour. This is a first step
forward on a path that we will resolutely pursue with
the support and leadership of the League of Arab States
and the international community to bring an end to the
Syrian crisis and to fulfil the legitimate aspirations and
hopes of the Syrian people.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I did not wish to take the floor a second
time, but having listened to the statement made by the
representative of Egypt, I should like to make some
concluding remarks.
First, I should like to reassure my colleague, the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Egypt, and all
other members of the League of Arab States that the
Arab Trojan horse has been unmasked today and that
the role of the League of Arab States must come to an
end. The Western sponsors of resolution 66/253 have
used the League of Arab States as a bridge, opening the
way to internationalize the situation in Syria and to take
the Syria file to the Security Council once again. That
was the role demanded of the League of Arab States. I
tell its members that the League’s role must end today.
The League has been depleted in that regrettable and
suspect role.
Secondly, the League of Arab States no longer
exists, having been kidnapped by the Gulf Cooperation
Council countries. Syria has left the League of Arab
States, albeit temporarily. The League is broken within,
politically and morally.
Thirdly, following its plot against us today, I wish
good luck to the Arab League in implementing the tasks
entrusted to it by Israel. I congratulate the League on
its new alliance with Israel and the historic enemies of
Syria.Syria has always defended all Arabs, expecting
nothing in return. Syria has always defended all Arabs,
expecting nothing in return. Today, we do not wish
them to stand by us following their shameful position
in the international community. All we want from them
today, now that the Arab League Trojan horse has been
unmasked, is to save whatever face and dignity they
have left and to cease and desist in their plotting against

12-2340815

A/66/PV.97

Egypt, Libya, the Sudan, Algeria, Yemen, and maybe
more to come.
The wealth of all the Gulf Cooperation Council will
be squandered on reckless and doomed adventures. That
price will be borne by all the Arabs. All the Arabs will
be used as free fuel to achieve the objectives of the West
and Israel. As I have said, the issue is the settlement of
political accounts with Syria and its regional and Arab
role and its alliances in service of Arab and Islamic
causes. Had there been the very minimum of credibility
among some sponsors the resolution, they would have
accepted the Russian amendments. They would have
encouraged the national dialogue. They would have
ceased providing weapons and media and political
cover to the armed groups.
Finally, it is also truly regrettable that the United
Nations — which is interested primarily in maintaining
international peace and security and enshrining the

16

purposes and principles of its Charter — has for some
time now been sending the false message that it is
acceptable to violate the sovereignty of Member States
and invade them, and viable to exert political pressure
on Member States to change their policies and agendas.
If things continue in this manner, the United
Nations will collapse, first morally and then politically
and legally. We will have thus destroyed an organization
that has been a major forum for multilateral political
and legal action for the past 66 years. That will be
the final result. That will be the harvest of those who
sow the seeds of intervention in the internal affairs of
Member States.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 34.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

12-23408
