S/2022/101

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 February 2022
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2592 (2021) and paragraph 41 of resolution 2568 (2021), provides updates
on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandates of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers significant developments from
6 November 2021 to 31 January 2022.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments and United Nations activities
2.
During the reporting period, some progress was made towards implementation
of the electoral process in accordance with the agreements on elections of
17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021. However, the progress was marred by
widespread complaints of procedural irregularities and a lack of transparency.
Renewed political tensions between the President, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
“Farmajo”, and the Prime Minister, Mohamed Hussein Roble, further threatened to
halt the electoral process.
3.
In Mogadishu, Mr. Roble dismissed and then replaced seven members of the
Electoral Dispute Resolution Committee, including the Chair, Hussein L aki
Mohamud, on 18 December, citing failure to act with transparency and impartiality
in adjudicating cases brought for its review. The Committee, also on 18 December,
rejected Mr. Roble’s decision as a breach of the independence of electoral institutions,
arguing that any changes to or dismissals of Committee members should be jointly
decided with the National Consultative Council.
4.
Following that, on 26 December, Mr. Farmajo issued a statement accusing
Mr. Roble of having failed to lead and implement the elections and undermining the
cohesion and operational independence of the election committees. On 27 December,
Mr. Farmajo announced the suspension of Mr. Roble’s powers pending the completion
of an investigation into graft allegations related to a parcel of land in Mogadishu
belonging to the Somali National Army. Armed forces were positioned around

22-01184 (E)

100222

*2201184*

S/2022/101

Mr. Roble’s residence, preventing him from gaining access to his office until the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) intervened.
5.
Mr. Roble rejected the allegations against him and accused Mr. Farmajo, whom
he called a “former President”, of having attempted to stage a coup. Mr. Roble
indicated that he would continue to carry out his constitutional mandate and pledged
to fulfil his national responsibility to conduct an acceptable electoral process that
culminated in a peaceful transition of power. On 1 January, Mr. Roble appointed the
Minister of Defence, Abdulkadir Mohamed Nur, to chair a five -member ministerial
committee to investigate the 27 December incident.
6.
In the light of the rapidly escalating tensions, and to address the mounting
complaints of irregularities in the electoral process, the National Consultative Council
met in Mogadishu from 3 to 9 January to discuss how to strengthen the integ rity and
credibility of the electoral process and to agree on a new timeline under which to
complete the elections. The conference concluded with an 18 -point communiqué
outlining measures designed to strengthen electoral procedures and the transparency
of the process. In the communiqué, it was outlined that the names of the Delegate
Selection Committee must be registered and published prior to the election of each
seat in the House of the People, that the respective State Electoral Implementation
Team would share the names of the Delegate Selection Committee with the Federal
Electoral Implementation Team and the Electoral Dispute Resolution Committee and
that all electoral management bodies would operate without interference. The
communiqué included a call for the security forces to remain neutral and for
AMISOM to strengthen the security of the presidential palace. It also included an
announcement of the new timeline for the completion of the House of the People
elections and a note that they would be held from 15 January to 25 February.
7.
The communiqué from the National Consultative Council was met with a
positive response across the political spectrum. On 9 January, the opposition Council
of Presidential Candidates welcomed the decisions taken by the National Consultative
Council and urged Mr. Roble to take charge of the implementation of the electoral
procedures. In early December, the Council of Presidential Candidates had issued a
10-point proposal to address electoral malpractice, in which it called fo r halting the
election and announced that it would convene a national consultative conference on
the challenges facing the process.
8.
In a state of the nation address delivered on 10 January, Mr. Farmajo
commended the National Consultative Council for its agreement and encouraged
federal member state leaders to follow through on the stipulated timeline for
completion of the elections.
9.
Throughout the period, UNSOM engaged with Mr. Farmajo, Mr. Roble and key
interlocutors, calling for an immediate de-escalation of tensions and encouraging the
leaders to resolve differences through dialogue. UNSOM continued to underscore to
all parties the importance of creating an environment conducive to the full
implementation of the electoral agreements of 17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021
and the urgency of concluding the elections in a timely manner while ensuring that
the process was transparent and credible.
10. These messages were also reinforced by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa during her visit to Somalia from 8 to 11 November, when she met with
Mr. Roble, the Hirshabelle President and Acting President of South -West State, the
Council of Presidential Candidates and civil society organizations, including
representatives of young people and women. She urged all stakeholders to ensure
attainment of the 30 per cent quota for the representation of women in the electoral
process and for accelerating the participation of women in the political process.

2/16

22-01184

S/2022/101

11. In “Somaliland”, the President, Muse Bihi Abdi, accepted the amendment of the
Regulation of Political Associations and Parties Law, through which new political
associations were allowed to be formed, on 12 December. The opposition criticized
Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi’s decision, alleging that it served as a pretext for delaying the
elections and demanding that only the current registered parties participate in the
forthcoming presidential election. On 21 December, 46 parliamentarians asked the
Constitutional Court of “Somaliland” to provide a legal opinion on the dis agreement
over the registration of new political associations.

B.

Elections and United Nations support
12. Despite the challenges, elections for the 54-member Upper House of the Federal
Parliament concluded on 13 November. A total of 14 women, or 26 p er cent, were
elected, which represents an increase from 24 per cent in 2016. Elections for the
275-member House of the People commenced on 1 November in Mogadishu for the
“Somaliland” seats. As at 31 January, 87 House of the People seats had been
contested, with 18 women elected.
13. On 16 November, the Federal Electoral Implementation Team notified all State
Electoral Implementation Teams of the number of reserved seats for women, which
was required to ensure the 30 per cent quota for their representation in the House of
the People elections.
14. Following the announcement by Mr. Roble of the dismissal of the Chair of the
Federal Electoral Implementation Team, on 25 December, the Chair was removed
through an internal vote of no confidence, allegedly over a lack of consultation with
other committee members in decision-making. This followed a similar attempt, on
6 November, to vote the Chair out. The new Chair of the Federal Electoral
Implementation Team, Musa Gelle Yusuf, was elected on 15 January. Leadership
elections were held for the Electoral Dispute Resolution Committee on 20 January, in
which Ahmed Awil Warsame was elected Chairperson.
15. Elections to 6 of the 27 House of the People seats allocated to Jubbaland were
held on 28 December, even as some candidates submitted a letter of complaint to the
Electoral Dispute Resolution Committee and others complained that they had been
denied registration certificates by the State Electoral Implementation Team and the
Jubbaland Intelligence and Security Agency. From 27 to 30 November, South -West
State completed elections for 11 House of the People seats in Baidoa, with 4 of the
seats reserved for women. The Federal Electoral Implementation Team has called for
a rerunning of the election for two seats, one of which belongs to the incumbent and
former House of the People Speaker, Mohamed Sheikh Osman Jawari, who faced
challenges in registering as a candidate. Moreover, on 27 January, following the
submission of a complaint, the Electoral Dispute Resolution Committee suspended
the announcement of the results for three House of the People seats for “Somaliland”.
As at 31 January, the Committee had registered three official complaints related to
the House of the People elections, including a complaint from a woman.
16. Following the request by the Government and the Federal Electoral
Implementation Team for additional financial support, international partners
conditionally approved, on 16 November, additional funds of $3.7 million for the
electoral process, bringing the donors’ contribution to over $11 million of the overall
$27.2 million budget. The conditions for the release of the funds included that all
election fees from candidates be deposited into the treasury single account, in additi on
to meaningful and credible progress on election implementation.

22-01184

3/16

S/2022/101

17. No further meetings of the National Elections Security Committee have been
held since 2 October. The United Nations and AMISOM continue to assist with
election security-related planning and support at voting locations.
18. The Integrated Electoral Support Group of the United Nations continues to
provide technical, logistical and financial support to the electoral committees. In
parallel to these efforts, the United Nations continues to r ender capacity-building
support to the constitutionally mandated National Independent Electoral Commission
for the development of its five-year Strategic Plan 2022–2026.

C.

Security developments
19. The security situation remained volatile, with a monthly average of 265
incidents recorded in 2021. Most incidents continued to be perpetrated by
Al-Shabaab, with a 17 per cent increase in the group’s activities compared with in
2020. The attacks continued to target primarily the Somali security forces and
AMISOM through improvised explosive devices. The Shabelle Hoose, Banaadir and
Shabelle Dhexe Regions were the most affected by Al-Shabaab activity.
20. Al-Shabaab continued to carry out targeted attacks through suicide bombings in
Mogadishu. On 11 November, a suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
targeted an AMISOM convoy in the Wadajir district. At least three bystanders were
killed in the incident. On 20 November, a person-borne improvised explosive device
targeted a private vehicle transporting the Director of Radio Mogadishu and the
Director of the Somali National Television. On 25 November, a suicide vehicle -borne
improvised explosive targeted the private company Safelane (a Mine Action Service
contractor) while it was travelling in a convoy escorted by the United Nationscontracted security company Duguf. At least eight civilian bystanders died, including
minors, and 20 people were injured. Two Duguf escort members suffered minor
shrapnel injuries.
21. On 12 January, a suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive targeted a convoy
escorted by a foreign security company in the Waberi district, reportedly killing nine
security guards. A United Nations national staff member who was in the vicinity of
the site of the explosion, was injured slightly. Al-Shabaab claimed that it was targeting
“Western security officers”.
22. On 16 January, in Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab carried out an improvised explosive
device attack on the vehicle of the Spokesperson of the Federal Government of
Somalia, Mohamed Ibrahim Moalimuu, who was in the vehicle and sustained light
injuries.
23. In the southern and central regions, Al-Shabaab maintained a high tempo of
attacks. In Bay Region, on 27 November, Al-Shabaab launched several mortar rounds
in the direction of the AMISOM-protected area in Baidoa, where the United Nations
compound is also located. Five mortar rounds landed inside the protected area. No
casualties were reported. Al-Shabaab claimed the attack, stating that it had targeted
the adjacent South-West State presidential palace and the Baidoa airport area to
coincide with the initial day of the House of the People elections in Baidoa.
24. In Hiran Region, Hawadle clan militias led by General Abukar Hud and Colonel
Nur Dheere clashed with Hirshabelle armed forces near Beledweyne on 30 December
and 2 January. Reportedly, eight people were killed and 11 were injured. Elements of
the Hawadle clan claimed that they had been disenfranchised from key political and
official positions in the Administration. The fighting ended fo llowing intervention by
clan elders.

4/16

22-01184

S/2022/101

25. On 24 November, the President of Puntland, Said Abdullahi Deni, dismissed the
Director of the Puntland Security Forces, General Mohamud Osman Abdullahi
“Diano”, replacing him with General Amin Haji Khayr. The dismis sal was contested,
and tensions emerged in Boosaaso, leading to an increased Puntland Security Forces
presence and a setting up of checkpoints and search operations. From 20 to
22 December, armed clashes between forces loyal to the dismissed Director and
Puntland Security Forces erupted at a Puntland Security Forces base near the World
Food Programme (WFP) warehouse. No United Nations casualties were reported, but
one stray round impacted the gate of a WFP guesthouse.
26. Activity by pro-Da’esh elements was reported in Banaadir Region, with a total
of two improvised explosive device attacks in Mogadishu. On 6 November, an
improvised explosive device targeting a Somali National Army checkpoint exploded
in Huriwa district. Four soldiers were wounded, including the checkpoint commander.
Another attack was carried out on 23 November, when an improvised explosive
device targeting a police battlewagon transporting the police commander, Colonel
Mohamed Dahir, exploded in Hodan district. Colonel Dahir survived, but t wo civilian
bystanders were killed in the attack.
27. On 24 January, a vehicle improvised explosive device explosion targeted a
businessperson’s vehicle in the Bakara market, in Mogadishu. On 26 January,
businesses in the market closed their shops owing to alleged extortion by individuals
claimed to be affiliated with a pro-Da’esh group. Subsequently, Mr. Roble ordered
the Minister of Security to take action against the alleged activity, deploying Somali
security forces to the Bakara market.

III. Update on other activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
28. The United Nations continued its advocacy of an enhanced role for and the
increased representation and participation of Somali women in the electoral process,
as well as increased investment in the women and peace and security agenda.
29. On 30 November, the United Nations and Federal Government of Somalia
launched a two-year joint programme on women, peace and protection, funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund and the multi-partner trust fund for Somalia. Over 60 participants
representing key stakeholders, including state and federal women’s affairs ministries,
civil society organizations, women parliamentarians and donors, attended the launch
event. The joint programme is aimed at accelerating the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in Somalia.
30. A national consultative conference on women in the maritime sector, held in
Mogadishu on 29 December with support from UNSOM, was aimed at advancing the
representation of women. The conference was attended by 75 participants, of which
60 were women, from eight line ministries and civil society representatives. Among
others, the women participants stressed the existing gender inequalities and the need
for developing common gender policies for women in the maritime sector.
31. The federal Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development and Goodwill
Ambassadors held a consultative forum and a conference in Mogadishu on 1 and
2 December and 27 and 28 December, respectively, supported by the United Nations.
Analysing the challenges that women candidates faced during the Upper House
elections, attendees of both events discussed possible strategies and ways forward to
advocate with the National Consultative Council and election management

22-01184

5/16

S/2022/101

committees. The conference was attended by over 150 participants who were mainly
women, including women political rights activists, women ministers, officials from
the indirect election implementation bodies and women candidates and aspirants. A
communiqué was issued outlining a set of actions, including continued advocacy
campaigns to achieve the minimum 30 per cent quota for the representation of women
in the ongoing House of the People elections.
32. The United Nations Theme Group on Gender supported federal and federal
member state-level women’s ministries and civil society partners in commemorating
the annual 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence campaign across the
country. Most events held in the federal member states were focused on advocacy of
the 30 per cent quota for the representation of women and the prevention of violence
against women during the elections.

B.

Youth empowerment
33. On 4 November, the International Trade Centre launched its Digital Skills for
Jobs initiative, engaging 140 young people, comprising 56 young women and 84
young men, which was focused on young returnees and internally displaced persons.
The Centre, with local partners, will continue to provide technical training, coaching
and mentoring to the participants to develop their technical and entrepreneurial skills
in the digital sector while also supporting digitalization, value creation and
employment in Somalia.
34. On 5 and 6 December, the United Nations Population Fund, together with
UNSOM and partners, organized a workshop with 30 representatives of youth -led and
civil society organizations to design a project on youth electoral participation and
democratization. Through a series of forums in each federal member state in 2022,
the project was aimed at supporting dialogue and action to advance the role of young
women and men in democratization at the subnational level.
35. On 7 December, the annual Mogadishu Tech Summit was held, supported by the
United Nations Population Fund and partners. The Summit was aimed at providing
young innovators with a platform through which to showcase their businesses and
technological solutions to investors, the government and the p rivate sector.
Approximately 5,000 people attended the Summit, which was focused on
strengthening local resilience for inclusive coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
recovery.
36. A total of 540 young Somalis, including 270 women, engaged in 630 sustained
dialogue sessions in Baidoa, South-West State, Jawhar, Hirshabelle and Caabudwaaq,
Galmudug State, through the project Connecting across Divides: Youth Building
Peace in Somalia. Implemented by the Life and Peace Institute and Somali Peace
Line, with financial support from the Peacebuilding Fund, the project is aimed at
building meaningful relationships among young men and women in conflict -affected
communities across diverse socioeconomic, political, religious and clan identity lines
through wide-reaching sustained dialogue sessions. The youth participants in the
sustained dialogues carried out 60 collaborative peace actions, including the
Abduwak Peace March, which led a community affected by recurring clan conflicts
to come together, advocate the ending of hostilities and call for lasting peace.

C.

Coordination of development assistance
37. On 21 December, in consultation with the Federal Government of Somalia, the
steering committee of the United Nations aid coordination project agreed to conclude

6/16

22-01184

S/2022/101

the project without a successor arrangement in place. The project is aimed at
supporting the government’s development coordination efforts. The design of and
assistance for the government-led aid coordination architecture will be revisited
following the completion of elections in Somalia.
38. High-level government and international community representatives celebrated
International Anti-Corruption Day in Mogadishu on 9 December. The celebration was
preceded by a workshop organized by the Ministry of Justice on 8 D ecember that
gathered together students, young professionals and representatives of the National
Youth Board from federal member states to discuss next steps in the implementation
of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, to which Somalia became a
State Party in August 2021. Somalia participated in the biennial Conference of the
States Parties to the Convention, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, from 13 to
17 December.
39. In November, South-West State issued 4,305 title deeds to land in the new
Barwaaqo site, in Baidoa, as part of a government-led durable solutions effort
supported by the United Nations. Public-private partnerships are being explored to
facilitate the settlement and reintegration of the displaced communities. The Ministry
of Planning, Investment and Economic Development, supported by the United
Nations, carried out a mapping exercise of the National Durable Solutions Strategy
in Galmudug State in November. It builds on similar exercises already completed in
Puntland, Hirshabelle and South-West State.
40. The joint coordination mechanisms created by the Federal Government of
Somalia, the government of Hirshabelle State and UNSOM contributed to reducing
the impacts of floods in Beledweyne.

D.

Humanitarian assistance
41. Somalia is facing an acute humanitarian situation, with 7.7 million people
expected to need humanitarian and protection assistance in 2022, including over
3.2 million people affected and 245,000 people displaced by extreme drought. On
23 November, the Federal Government of Somalia declared a state of emergency
owing to the drought, with an urgent appeal for international assistance.
42. According to the Famine Early Warning Systems Network and the Food Security
and Nutrition Analysis Unit of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the 2021 deyr rains largely failed across most of Somalia, leading to the
worst seasonal harvests on record, livestock losses and high cereal prices. The
situation is projected to intensify as Somalia faces the risk of a fourth consecutive
failed rainy season in early 2022.
43. The drought conditions in southern parts of the country have deteriorated from
severe to extreme, while those of other areas have shifted from minor to moderate.
Water wells are drying up as the levels of the Juba and Shabelle Rivers continue to
decrease at an alarming rate. Water prices have risen sharply, with eastern and central
parts of Galmudug State, Jubbaland and South-West States reporting the highest
prices.
44. The drought is devastating livelihoods in particular because the most vulnerable
Somalis have had their ability to cope eroded by decades of protracted conflict,
climate shocks and disease outbreaks. In 2022, 71 per cent of Somalis are projected
to continue to live below the poverty line. Current severe water shortages and poor
access to sanitation and hygiene facilities have heightened the risk of disease
outbreaks, including acute watery diarrhoea and cholera, especially in camps for
internally displaced persons and conflict-affected areas.

22-01184

7/16

S/2022/101

45. Without a scale-up of humanitarian assistance, 3.8 million people were
projected to be in Integrated Food Security Phase Classification phase 3 (crisis) and
phase 4 (emergency) by January, increasing to 4.6 million people by May. The
prevalence of acute malnutrition remains high, with global acute malnutrition rates
assessed as serious (10 to 14.9 per cent) in most drought-stricken parts of the country
and as critical (15 per cent or higher) in some of the worst-affected areas.
46. Somalis continued to be displaced as a result of conflict and climatic shocks.
According to the Protection and Return Monitoring Network, in November alone,
42,000 people were displaced by drought and 2,000 by conflict. About 2.9 million
people remain internally displaced and face significant protection risks, including
eviction, abuse and harassment. About 2.2 million of those need humanitarian
assistance. Displaced women and girls face a heightened risk of sexual violence and
harassment, abuse and intimate partner violence.
47. Through a disability inclusion study conducted by the International
Organization for Migration targeting all 146 internally displaced persons sites in
Kismaayo, Jubbaland State, it was found that 20 per cent of respondents were person s
with disabilities, while 31 per cent indicated that they experienced mental health
concerns. Furthermore, over 24 per cent of respondents reported that they encountered
danger when gaining access to or using services within internally displaced persons
sites or the greater community, while 9 per cent reported encountering physical
violence. In addition, 6 per cent of respondents cited experiencing verbal harassment,
and 5 per cent encountered incidents of bribery when obtaining access to services.
48. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have an impact on the humanitarian
situation. As at 31 January, the country had reported 26,067 COVID-19 cases in total,
including 1,332 associated deaths (5.24 per cent). Since 7 December, the country has
reported an increased number of cases, possibly owing to the circulation of the
Omicron variant. As at 16 January, 5.5 per cent of people eligible to receive
COVID-19 vaccines (18 years of age and older) had been fully vaccinated. To date,
Somalia has received a total of 1.9 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine, of which
1.6 million doses (85 per cent) have been administered.
49. Humanitarian access remains a major challenge, affecting the safety of
humanitarian workers and their ability to help people in need. At least 17 acc essrelated incidents were reported. In a continuing trend throughout 2021, the highest
number of incidents occurred in Galmudug, Hirshabelle and South -West States. To
enable access to hard-to-reach areas, five flights using Caravan planes – air assets
dedicated for use by the aid community to improve access to remote areas – were
conducted with the support of WFP, coordinated by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. A total of 23 such flights have been undertaken since
12 June, when the service commenced.
50. Despite the challenges, more than 272 humanitarian partners have continued to
deliver life-saving assistance across Somalia, including 183 national non-governmental
organizations. The partners have ramped up drought response, reprogr amming
activities to address acute water shortages and other urgent life-saving needs. The
United Nations has released $25 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund,
in addition to a $6 million allocation from the Somalia Humanitarian Fund. This
brings funding for Somalia from the Central Emergency Response Fund in 2021 to
$52 million. Donors contributed close to $60 million to the Somalia Humanitarian
Fund in 2021.
51. On 20 December, the humanitarian community in Somalia launched the 2022
Humanitarian Response Plan, through which $1.46 billion is requested to assist
5.5 million of 7.7 million people in need. This constitutes a significant increase from
the 5.9 million people in need and 4 million people targeted in 2021. The 2022 Plan
8/16

22-01184

S/2022/101

includes a drought response plan that builds on the lessons learned from the drought
of 2016 to 2017, during which quick joint actions by the Government, the United
Nations, international partners, local communities and the diaspora helped to avert a
famine.
52. Funding for humanitarian response in Somalia continues to arrive late and in a
staggered fashion, hindering robust and timely response. At the end of December, the
2021 Humanitarian Response Plan was 71 per cent funded, with the majority of the
funding received in the last quarter of the year.

E.

Human rights and protection

1.

Human rights
53. UNSOM recorded 183 civilian casualties (82 killed and 101 injured), which
constituted a 6 per cent decrease compared with the 194 civilian casualties (99 killed
and 95 injured) reported during the previous period. Al -Shabaab remained the main
perpetrator, responsible for 78 civilian casualties (43 per cent), including the
beheading of a district Chief Judge, followed by the state security forces, with 64
(35 per cent), unidentified actors, with 31 (17 per cent) and clan militia, with 10 (5 per
cent). Out of the 64 casualties (24 killed and 40 injured) by state security forces, 51
(15 killed and 36 injured) were a result of fighting by intra -Puntland security forces
in Boosaaso town.
54. Three of the above-mentioned casualties were linked to the electoral process.
On 16 November, one female civilian was killed and one male civilian was injured
when an improvised explosive device was detonated at their residence in Ki smaayo,
Jubbaland. The injured man had reportedly received threatening messages about his
participation in the electoral process. In another attack, in Mogadishu on
17 November, unidentified assailants shot and killed a man who was involved in
sub-clan electoral negotiations in Mogadishu.
55. UNSOM continued to record violations of freedom of expression, documenting
12 such violations during the period under review, affecting 10 men and 2 women,
including the killing of the Director of the State-owned Radio Mogadishu on
20 November, when a suicide bomber from Al-Shabaab targeted his vehicle. Another
journalist was injured in the same attack. Between 26 and 30 December, the
“Somaliland” police arrested six people, including three journalists. All were
subsequently released without charges. In addition, on 22 December, the South -West
State police arrested and detained a 13-year-old boy in Hudur town, Bakool Region,
after he posted a video criticizing the third anniversary celebration of the President,
Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed “Laftagareen”, amid severe drought conditions in the
state. The boy was released through clan negotiations and was told not to post videos
again.
56. In Mogadishu, the Military Court Prosecutor, Abdullahi Bule Kamey,
announced on 21 November that preliminary findings indicated the absence of
sufficient evidence to prove the involvement of National Intelligence and Security
Agency officials in the disappearance of Ikran Farah Tahlil, an Agency employee who
had not been seen since 26 June 2021. On 24 December, her family rejected the
findings.

2.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
57. UNSOM continued to support the implementation of various human rights due
diligence policy mitigation measures, including background checks o n recipients of

22-01184

9/16

S/2022/101

United Nations support and technical advice to United Nations entities regarding
letters of assist and compacts.
58. On 23 November, the United Nations-AMISOM joint technical working group
on the human rights due diligence policy discussed ways to strengthen measures to
prevent and address civilian casualties, including standard operating procedures for
air assets and the enhancement of synergies with respect to capacity -building
activities for the Somali security forces.
3.

Children in armed conflict
59. From 6 November 2021 to 31 January 2022, the country task force on
monitoring and reporting on grave violations of children’s rights verified 767 grave
violations affecting 635 children (467 boys and 168 girls), seven attacks on schools
and one attack on a hospital. A total of 289 children were recruited and used, 220
were abducted, 182 were victims of killing and maiming and 68 were subjected to
rape and other forms of sexual violence. Of the violations, 510 (66.5 per cent) were
attributed to Al-Shabaab, 114 (14.9 per cent) to unknown armed elements, 39 (5.1 per
cent) to clan militia, 4 (0.5 per cent) to Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a, 1 (0.1 per cent) to
Westland militia and 99 (12.9 per cent) to federal and state security forces.
60. From 12 to 14 December, UNSOM, in collaboration with the child protection
unit of the Ministry of Defence, conducted a training session for 19 focal points for
child protection and civil-military relations from the Somali National Army on the
protection of children affected by armed conflict.
61. As part of UNSOM-led advocacy of the effective implementation of the road
map on children and armed conflict (2019) and the standard operating procedures for
the reception and handover of children separated from armed groups in Somalia
(2014), on 21 December, the Mission, in collaboration with the Office of the Puntland
Human Rights Defender, concluded a two-day training session on child rights and
child protection, human rights and humanitarian law in Garoowe, Puntland. The
40 participants included 11 members of the Puntland Human Rights Parliamentary
Committee, 10 judges, 10 members of the Office of the Puntland Human Rights
Defender, five lawyers and four members of civil society.

4.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
62. UNSOM verified, through the monitoring and reporting arrangement, four
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence affecting one woman and three girls 15
to 16 years of age. All the incidents involved rape, including a gang rape. The first
incident of rape was recorded in Armo district, south of Boosaaso, Bari Region; the
second was recorded in Garoowe district, Nugaal Region; and the third was recorded
in Dagaari village, Gaalkacyo district, Mudug Region. The gang rape was recorded
in a village near Jannaale town, Shabelle Hoose Region. In three incidents,
investigations are continuing following the arrest of alleged perpetrators, while the
alleged perpetrator of the fourth incident was not identified. Psychosocial and medical
support is provided to survivors through United Nations implementing partners.

F.

Support for the security sector, the rule of law and stabilization

1.

Implementation of the Somali transition plan
63. On 8 and 9 December, the Federal Government of Somalia convened the
inaugural meeting of the Somali Transition Plan Strategic Steering Committee.
Chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Committee assessed progress made in
implementing the Somali transition plan and outlined priorities for the first qua rter of

10/16

22-01184

S/2022/101

2022, which included the need to address force generation, improve joint planning
between the Somali Security Forces and AMISOM, accelerate capacity -building
efforts in the federal member states and complete Operation Badbaado I in Shabelle
Hoose. The meeting of the Security and Justice Committee, expected to be held in
December 2021, was postponed to early 2022.
64. Overall, the implementation of the Somali transition plan remains behind
schedule owing to, inter alia, a delay in generating more holding forces, including for
the Federal and state police services. The Somali security forces maintained a high
operational tempo in Juba Hoose, Galmudug, Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe,
conducting several joint operations with AMISOM. The generation of AMISOM
mobile forces was affected by the deployment of AMISOM units to support electoral
security and addresses challenges in the deployment of holding forces.
2.

Comprehensive approach to security

(a)

Institutional capacity-building
65. The sub-working group on police of strand 2B of the comprehensive approach
to security supported the revision of the policy on the Police Darwish and facilitated
discussions with government and international partners on weapons and ammunition
management for police. In December, 80 additional Somali Police Force Darwish
completed their training.
66. On 1 and 17 November and 7 and 8 December 2021 and 18 and 19 January 2022,
UNSOM, in coordination with the United Nations Development Programme and the
Geneva Centre for Security Sector Governance, completed a series of workshops for
Federal Government parliamentary security committees on civilian oversight of the
security sector.
67. On 25 November, UNSOM and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
facilitated a five-day workshop at which the Custodial Corps of the Federal
Government and federal member states validated and adopted standard operating
procedures for prison management. The set of documents is expected to strengthen
the functioning of correctional institutions in Somalia, in line with international
prison management standards. Capacity-building activities were conducted by
UNSOM for 54 (11 women and 43 men) Custodial Corps personnel and 135 (37
women and 98 men) judicial personnel in Kismaayo, Hargeysa, Baidoa and Garoowe
on human rights, survivor-centred gender-responsive justice, trial and advocacy skills
and prison administration.
68. On 27 and 28 November, UNSOM hosted a workshop in Mogadishu for 34
women parliamentarians from federal member states of Somalia to discuss how the
women and peace and security agenda can be advanced through the Somali transition
plan.
69. UNSOM, in cooperation with international partners, continued its support for
the five rehabilitation centres for low-risk former Al-Shabaab fighters. As at
2 December, a total of 337 men and 223 women beneficiaries were enrolled in the
centres in Mogadishu, Baidoa and Kismaayo.
70. The Mine Action Service delivered 1,270 in-person explosive ordnance risk
education sessions to 1,388 women, 741 men, 1,370 girls and 2,110 boys in five
federal member states and distributed 257 risk education talking devices embedded
with audio messages on explosive ordnance and COVID-19 to the at-risk population
across the country. The Service provided office and inf ormation technology
equipment to the Somalia Explosive Management Authority at the federal level and
to Jubbaland State to strengthen its mine action coordination capacities.

22-01184

11/16

S/2022/101

71. On 15 December, under the Joint Rule of Law Programme, the United Nations
supported the second meeting of the “Somaliland” threat assessment task force in
Hargeysa. The report of the task force will be published in June to inform the third
national development plan of “Somaliland”.
(b)

Stabilization and prevention and countering of violent extremism
72. On 29 November, the Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
held a forum on national stabilization in conjunction with its federal member state
counterparts, which outlined the upcoming review of the national stabilization
strategy and provided briefings on social cohesion, governance and community
recovery initiatives at the district level.

G.

Support of the United Nations Support Office in Somalia for the
African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali security forces

1.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
73. In addition to the mandated support provided to 19,626 AMISOM military,
police and civilian personnel, UNSOS facilitated deployments to various sectors to
support elections. On 20 December, logistical support for AMISOM, Somali National
Army and United Nations Humanitarian Air Service flights were temporarily halted
when the Federal Government of Somalia closed the United Nations terminal in
Mogadishu and pressed for modifications to procedures at the facility. Following
meetings between senior leadership of the United Nations and senior Somali officials,
operations at the terminal were temporarily recommenced on 8 January, with a
technical working team established to address the future modalities for long -term
arrangements.
74. UNSOS successfully vaccinated 10,400 AMISOM personnel in Somalia against
COVID-19, and efforts are under way to secure additional vaccinations to inoculate
the remaining personnel.
75. In line with its environmental strategy, UNSOS deploy ed 50-barrel incinerators
for the disposal of solid waste at the AMISOM forward operating bases. UNSOS
trained the Ghana Formed Police Unit and Burundian AMISOM personnel on
environmental management. UNSOS continued to conduct environmental audits at
AMISOM sites and forward operating bases and provided recommendations to ensure
environmental compliance.
76. The Mine Action Service supported AMISOM and Somali security forces in
improvised explosive device threat mitigation by providing 19 threat analysis re ports
and 6 reports on awareness of improvised explosive devices. The Service trained
1,936 AMISOM military and police personnel and enhanced their capability to locate
and destroy improvised explosive devices and operate safely within a threat
environment. The Service contributed to the safety and security of strategic
infrastructure by deploying 32 explosive detection dog teams to conduct searches of
30,008 pieces of luggage, 73,579 vehicles, 139 buildings, 37,292 m² of building areas
and 7.2 km² of open areas throughout the sectors.
77. The Mine Action Service supported 73 AMISOM convoys across all six sectors,
providing 72 pre-deployment and 71 post-deployment briefings. It supported
AMISOM in conducting 204 searches for improvised explosive devices alon g the
main supply routes, during which three such devices were found and destroyed.
AMISOM improvised explosive device disposal teams trained by the Service
destroyed five devices.

12/16

22-01184

S/2022/101

2.

Support for Somali security forces operations
78. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to 13,900 Somali security
forces. The United Nations trust fund in support of the Somali security forces received
contributions of $620,655 in November 2021 and $3,307,157 in January 2022. As at
13 January 2022, the trust fund had a balance of $1,745,118. With a further anticipated
contribution, the balance will be sufficient to sustain mandated logistical support for
the Somali security forces until 31 March 2022. Outreach efforts continue to appeal
for more contributions to the trust fund.
79. UNSOS continued to support eligible Somali National Army personnel with
communications equipment to enhance interoperability with AMISOM. On
9 November, two FM transmitters were donated to the Somali National Army.
UNSOS has stocked 20 high-frequency Codan manpacks and 683 sets of handheld
radios for onward issuance to the Somali National Army and the Somali Police Force.
In addition, UNSOS is in the process of procuring 200 high-frequency mobile radios,
20 mobile repeaters and 30 fixed repeaters for the Somali security forces.
80. The Mine Action Service completed the training of five additional Somali
National Army multi-skilled improvised explosive device disposal teams in January,
which brings the total number of multi-skilled improvised explosive device disposal
teams trained through the support of the Service to 21. Continuation of the project
will require further donor funding. The Service facilitated the installation of
electronic countermeasure equipment in three Somali National Army vehicles and
delivered electronic countermeasure training to 12 Somali National Army personnel.
81. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support, including materials such as
handheld metal detectors, vehicle inspection mirrors and field defence stores, to the
Somali security forces for the security of election centres across Somalia. Election
security items and field defence stores were delivered to Mogadishu polling centres
on 21 and 28 November, and concrete jersey barriers were delivered on 18 and
19 December. Security items and field defence stores were delivered to Beledweyne,
Baraawe, Dhuusamarreeb, Kismaayo, Baidoa, Jawhar and Garbahaarrey and
subsequently handed over to Somali security forces. In addition, UNSOS delivered
handheld wands and vehicle inspection mirrors on behalf of UNSOM to Garoowe and
Boosaaso.

IV. United Nations presence in Somalia
82. United Nations entities remained present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosaaso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 9 January, 327 international staff and 1,454
national staff were deployed throughout Somalia.

V. Observations
83. The electoral process in Somalia is now more than a year behind schedule, with
the resulting instability increasingly jeopardizing gains that the country has made in
the past decade. The elections of the Upper House and the House of the People have,
moreover, come under increasing criticism from Somalis themselves. Alt hough the
Upper House elections have been completed, thus far only 87, of which 18 were
women, out of 275 House of the People seats have been elected. After sustained
advocacy by national and international stakeholders, the representation of women in
the Upper House increased moderately, from 13 representatives to 14 out of the total
membership of 54. Similar efforts are under way in the continuing House of the
22-01184

13/16

S/2022/101

People elections to ensure the achievement of the 30 per cent quota for the
representation of women.
84. I commend the procedural clarifications announced by the National
Consultative Council and the Somali leaders’ renewed commitment to the electoral
agreements of 17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021, which remain the basis for
finalizing the elections. I urge leaders to urgently implement the agreed measures to
ensure a credible and transparent process by the revised deadline of 25 February. The
reported irregularities in the elections are of grave concern, and it is of utmost
importance that they be addressed and rectified. A credible, fair, timely and
transparent electoral process is vital to guarantee the support and confidence of the
Somali people.
85. The leaders of Somalia should rise above their political differences and work
together to complete the elections credibly and swiftly so that the country can focus
on addressing its many pressing challenges and critical national priorities. Greater
demonstration of commitment to the process and recognition of its urgency are
critical. I urge the Somali leaders to rally behind the electoral process to secure its
conclusion towards a legitimate and peaceful transfer to advance the consolidation of
peace, security and stability in the country. It is of utmost importance that all
stakeholders exercise restraint, de-escalate tensions and address grievances through
political dialogue when disagreements arise.
86. Another notable development is a commitment by Somali authorities to ensuring
that the 30 per cent quota for the representation of women is met in th e House of the
People, and I encourage leaders to reserve at least 82 seats for women. The equal
participation of women in the public sphere, including elected offices, the executive
and the judiciary, is key to the country’s State-building process.
87. It is essential to reiterate the importance of participation by young people and
marginalized groups in political life, including through elected bodies. In this regard,
I am pleased to note that the direct district council elections that Puntland has pilote d
have enabled candidates from marginalized communities to compete and be elected.
88. I strongly condemn the attacks by Al-Shabaab, which continue to affect civilians
disproportionately. The increase in Al-Shabaab attacks in 2021 and its continued
ability to conduct them in populated urban areas are deeply troubling. I reiterate my
strong condemnation of all acts of terrorism and violent extremism and express my
sincere condolences to all the victims. The fight against Al-Shabaab requires close
coordination and collaboration among all Somali stakeholders. I call upon them to
work jointly towards this common goal.
89. While Al-Shabaab remains the largest perpetrator of civilian casualties overall,
the increased civilian casualties inflicted by state security forces are alarming. The
clashes in Boosaaso in December caused significant casualties and civilian
displacement and disrupted the movement of people and trade as the country was
undergoing severe drought conditions. I call upon the Somali authorities to ensure the
protection of civilians and resolve political differences peacefully.
90. The continued attacks on freedom of expression are deeply concerning. It is
essential that the Somali authorities ensure the protection of journalists and media
workers and uphold the right to freedom of expression for all Somalis. Independent
reporting on issues of public interest, open debate and criticism are cornerstones of
democracy. Somali authorities should create an enabling environment for safe, free
and independent media and end the arbitrary arrests and detentions of journalists,
media workers and other citizens exercising their right to freedom of expression.
91. Conflict-related sexual violence and grave violations against children continue
to be of great concern. I urge the Somali authorities to investigate these violations, as
14/16

22-01184

S/2022/101

well as all forms of violence occurring outside the conflict, and to hold perpetrators
accountable. I further urge the Somali authorities to take all steps and measures
necessary to fulfil their commitment to ending and preventing grave violations against
children, specifically in relation to the 2012 action plans and the 2019 road map, and
to ending rape and other forms of sexual violence, including by adopting a new
national action plan to prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict.
92. The impact of the drought on the most vulnerable people in Somalia is extremely
concerning. Their coping mechanisms have been eroded by decades of conflict,
climate shocks, disease outbreaks and now three consecutive rainy seasons with
below average rainfall. In this regard, I thank donors who contributed to the drought
response and to the overall humanitarian response. It is critical that the international
community and partners ensure substantial and early funding for the 2022
Humanitarian Response Plan.
93. I appeal to Member States to provide additional contributions to the United
Nations trust fund in support of the Somali security forces to ensure that support for
the forces can be provided. Moreover, I call for continued funding for the Mine Action
Service-provided training and equipping of Somali National Army multi-skilled
improvised explosive device disposal teams, noting that such devices pose the
greatest risk to the Somali security forces.
94. I wish to convey my heartfelt appreciation to the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the European Union, Member States,
non-governmental organizations and other development partners for their sustained
support and engagement in the peacebuilding and State-building processes in
Somalia. I would like to pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali security forces for
their tremendous sacrifices to protect the Somali people and in the pursuit of peace
and stability for the country and the wider region.
95. I thank my Special Representative, James Swan, and the staff of UNSOM,
UNSOS and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Somalia. Their hard
work and commitment under challenging and often dangerous conditions reflect their
unshakable dedication to the Somali people.

22-01184

15/16

S/2022/101

16/16

22-01184
