S/PRST/2012/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6741st meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 March 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Council made the following statement on behalf of
the Council:
“The Security Council is following closely the security and humanitarian
situation in the Sahel region, and has received regular briefings on these
issues.
“The Security Council expresses its serious concern about the insecurity
and rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Sahel region, which is
further complicated by the presence of armed groups and terrorist groups, and
their activities, as well as by the proliferation of weapons from within and
outside the region, that threaten peace, security and stability of regional states.
The Security Council calls for national authorities, and international, regional
and sub-regional organizations, to take urgent steps to further their concerted
efforts to address these challenges in an effective and appropriate manner.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the forcible seizure of power
from the democratically-elected government of Mali by some elements of the
Malian armed forces, and in this regard recalls its Press Statement of 22 March
2012. The Security Council condemns the acts initiated and carried out by
mutinous troops against the democratically-elected government and demands
they cease all violence and return to their barracks. The Security Council calls
for the restoration of constitutional order, and the holding of elections as
previously scheduled.
“The Security Council condemns the attacks initiated and carried out by
rebel groups against Malian Government forces and calls on the rebels to cease
all violence and to seek a peaceful solution through appropriate political
dialogue.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need to uphold and respect the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Mali.
“The Security Council expresses its concern over the fragile security and
humanitarian situation in the region, and notes that it has been exacerbated by
drought, food shortages and the return of thousands of returnees following the
Libyan crisis and other crises in the region.

12-27543 (E) 260312

*1227543*

S/PRST/2012/7

“The Security Council was also informed that millions of people in the
Sahel region are suffering from that crisis, forcing thousands to migrate to less
affected neighbouring countries.
“The Security Council commends the joint efforts made by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and other agencies of the
United Nations to provide humanitarian assistance and to draw international
attention to the scale of the problem in the Sahel region. The Security Council
was informed of the proposal to appoint a Senior Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator.
“The Security Council welcomes the Emergency-programmes undertaken
by the national authorities of the region as an expression of their primary
responsibility. The Security Council also welcomes the initiatives taken by
regional and sub-regional organizations such as the African Union (AU) and
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and efforts so
far made by bilateral and multilateral partners, to assist the Sahel countries to
alleviate the regional food and nutrition crisis. The Security Council
encourages the international community to provide support to resolve the crisis
in Mali and the Sahel region based on an integrated strategy for immediate and
long term needs, encompassing security, development and humanitarian
issues.”

2

12-27543
