Resolutions adopted on the report of the Fifth Committee

3. Decides to appropriate an amount of $33 million
for the United Nations Operation in the Congo for the
period 1 July to 31 December 1%3;
4. Decides to apportion:
(a) The amount of $3 million among all Member
States in accordance with the regular scale of assessments for 1963,
( b) The $30 million balance of the amount appropriated in paragraph 3 above among all Member
States in accordance with the regular scale of assessments for 1963, except that each economically less
developed country shall be assessed an amount calculated at 45 per cent of its rate under the regular
scale of assessments for 1963,
provided that this apportionment shall constitute an
ad hoe arrangement for the present phase of this peacekeeping operation, and shall not constitute a precedent
for the future ;
5. Decides that, for the purpose of the present resolution, the term "economically less developed countries" shall mean all Member States except Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland,
France, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Nether lands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Romania, South Africa, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America;
6. Recommends that the Member States named in
paragraph 5 ahove make voluntary contrihutions in
addition to their assessments under the present resolution in order to finance authorized expenditures in excess of the total amount assessed under this resolution,
such voluntary contributions to be credited to a special
account by the Secretary-General and transferred to
the Ad H oc Account as and when an economically
less developed country has once paid to the credit of
the latter account its assessment under paragraph 4
( b) above or an equal amount, the transfer to be
of an amount which bears the same proportion to the
total of such voluntary contributions as the amount of
such payment bears to the total of the assessments on
economically less developed countries under paragraph 4
( b) ; any amount left in such special account on 31
December 1965 shall revert to the Member States that
made such voluntary contributions in proportion to
their respective voluntary contributions;
7. Appeals to all other Member States which are in
a position to assist to make similar voluntary contributions or alternatively to forgo having their assessments
calculated at the rate mentioned in the exception contained in paragraph 4 ( b) above;
8. Decides that the voluntary contributions referred
to in paragraphs 6 and 7 above may be made by a
Member State, at its option, in the form of services
and supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, furnished for use in connexion with the United Nations
Operation in the Congo during the period 1 July to
31 December 1963, for which the Member State does
not require reimbursement, the Member State to be
credited with the fair value thereof as agreed upon
by the Member State and by the Secretary-General.

1205th plenarv meeting,
27 Ju.ne 1963.

5

1877 (S-IV). Payment of arrears in respect of
assessed contributions to the United Nations
Emergency Force Special Account and the
Ad Hoe Account for the United Nations
Operation in the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Working Group
on the examination of the Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations, 111
Noting with concern the present financial situation
of the Organization resulting from the non-payment of
a substantial portion of past assessments for the United
Nations Emergency Force Special Account and the
Ad Hoe Account for the United Nations Operation in
the Congo,
Believing that it is essential that all assessments for
these accounts be paid as soon as possible,
1. Appeals to Member States which continue to be
in arrears in respect of their assessed contributions for
payment to the United Nations Emergency Force Special Account and the Ad H oc Account for the United
Nations Operation in the Congo to pay their arrears,
disregarding other factors, as soon as their respective
constitutional and financial arrangements can be processed, and, pending such arrangements, to make an
announcement of their intention to do so;
2. Expresses its conviction that Member States
which are in arrears and object on political or juridical
grounds to paying their assessments on these accounts
nevertheless will, without prejudice to their respective
positions, make a special effort towards solving the
financial difficulties of the United Nations by making
these payments;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
those Member States which are in arrears on the
United Nations Emergency Force Special Account and
on the Ad Hoe Account for the United Nations
Operation in the Congo and to work out with
them arrangements as to the most appropriate modalities within the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations, including the possibility of payment
by instalments, for bringing the payments of these accounts up to date as soon as possible;
4. Requests Member States which are in arrears on
these accounts to make the arrangements with the Secretary-General set out in paragraph 3 above before
31 October 1963 ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report, as appropriate, to the General Assembly on the consultations
and arrangements mentioned in paragraphs 3 and 4 of
the present resolution.
1205th plenary meeting,
27 June 1963.
1878 (S-IV). Terms and conditions governing the
issue of United Nations bonds
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, in paragraph 1 of resolution
1739 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, to authorize the
Secretary-General to issue United Nations bonds in
accordance wtih the terms and conditions set forth m
the annex to that resolution,
Decides to amend paragraph 8 of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 1739 (XVI) to read as
follows:
15 Ibul.,

document A/5407.

6

General Assembly-Fourth Special Session

"8. The bonds may be sold in whole or in part
from time to time until 31 December 1%3."

1205th plenary meeting,
27 June 1963.
1879 (S-IV). Establishment of a peace fund
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the purposes of the United Nations
as set out in Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Realizing the need for prompt and effective action
to prevent any threats to or breaches of international
peace and security,
Believing that inadequate financial resources can
seriously delay or jeopardize the success of such action,
Desiring to make sufficient funds readily available
to the Secretary-General, thus enabling him to discharge, without undue delay, his responsibilities under
the Charter in cases of breaches of the peace,
Convinced that the establishment of a peace fund
through voluntary contributions from Member States
as well as organizations and individuals is worthy of
study as a means of furthering this objective,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to consult all
Member States and interested organizations on the
desirability and feasibility of establishing such a peace
fund;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its eighteenth session.
1205th plenary meeting,
27 June 1963.
1880 (S-IV). Continuation of the Working Group
on the Examination of the Administrative
and Budgetary Procedures of the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1854 B (XVII) of 19 December 1%2,

Bearing in mind the principles enunciated in its resolution 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1%3, that shall serve
as guidelines for the equitable sharing of the costs of
peace-keeping operations involving heavy expenditures
that may be initiated in the future, to the extent that
these expenditures will not be otherwise covered by
agreed arrangements,
Bearing in mind further that the maintenance of
peace and security is a primary purpose of the United
Nations,
Desirous that ways and means should be found to
arrive at working arrangements so that all Member
States may feel able to share in such costs,
Noting that the tasks with which the Working
Group on the Examination of the Administrative and
Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations was
charged have not been completed,
1. Decides to continue in being the Working Group
on the Examination of the Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Working Group:
(a) To recommend a special method for the equitable sharing of the costs of future peace-keeping operations involving heavy expenditures to the extent not
otherwise covered by agreed arrangements ;
( b) To consider suggestions regarding other sources
of financing future peace-keeping operations;
( c) To explore ways and means for bringing about
the widest possible measure of agreement among all
Member States on the question of the financing of
future peace-keeping operations;
3. _Invite~ the W orki~g Group to ~onsult as appropnate with the Committee on Contnbutions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
to the Working Group the necessary facilities and assistance for the accomplishment of its tasks;
5. Requests the Working Group to report on these
matters to the General Assembly as soon as possible,
but not later than at its nineteenth session.
1205th plenary meeting,
27 June 1963.
