TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 29 AUGUST 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1506) . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , , . , . . , . . , . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . , . . . .
Letter dated 18 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9397) .

S/PV. 1506
-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 29 August 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Jaime DE PINIES (Spain).

timing of the United States delegation’s request for this
meeting, and especially surprised by the draft proposal
contained in document S/9414. We are certain that the
United States delegation has very thoroughly studied the
question of the micro-States and we hope that it will share
its knowledge with us. At the same time we hope that the
contributions of other members of the Security Council to
the working-out of a solution to the problem will render it
more acceptable to the entire membership of the United
Nations. For that reason we do not object to the
establishment of a group of experts, and my delegation is
ready to take part in its deliberations.

Presetzr: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, FinIand, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l506)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 18 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9397).

3. But my delegation feels that to request the SecretaryGeneral, in the name of the Security Council, to inscribe an
item on the provisional agenda of the twenty-fourth session
of the General Assembly entitled “Creation of a category of
associate membership” would be committing members of
the Council to a course of action, without having had the
benefit of the work of the group of experts or, to be more
precise, without being convinced that we can offer a timely
and workable solution. Of course, if any Member of the
United Nations feels that this question should be inscribed
on the agenda of the forthcoming session of the General
Assembly, it has the right to request the inciusion of such
an item on the agenda; but today, my Government cannot
subscribe to such a request by the Security Council without
a discussion of the substance of the question.

Adoption of the agenda
The

agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 18 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/9397)
1. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): My Government is very much
aware of the fact that the implementation of the resolution
of the General Assembly on decolonization has changed the
composition of the membership of the United Nations and
the political picturs of this Organization. To promote the
granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
is one of the most important obligations of our Organization, and we should not stop that process; indeed, the
decolonization resolution of the General Assembly [I.514
(XV]] should be fully implemented. At the same time, we
are also aware of the problems that may arise from the fact
that many small States are joining this Organization.
Therefore, we share the feelings of the Secretary-General
that the problem of the micro-States should be studied.
From that angle, we agree with the initiative of the United
States Government namely that a group of experts of the
Security Council be established to study this complex
problem, We are of the opinion that any attempt to solve
the problem must be undertaken with care. All possible
consequences of a decision, be it legal, political, organizational or otherwise, must be properly analysed.

4. After those observations, I should like to make one
concluding remark: The institution of associate membership does not exist in Chapter II of the Charter, which
describes carefully the conditions and procedures concerning membership in our Organization. Therefore, the
establishment of any new type of membership by aI1means
should be considered as a revision of the Charter, and
Member States should act accordingly.
5. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): For some years now, beginning
in 1965, the Secretary-General has been drawing the
attention of the Organization to the historical phenomenon
of the emergence of small new States, often called
“micro-States” or “mini-States”, which are characterized
by the smallness of their size and of their human and
economic resources-a condition which, in the words of the
Secretary-General, “can pose a difficult problem as to the
role they should try to play in international life”.’ The
Secretary-General believed the time had come for a closer
examination of the question of association of those States
with the United Nations.

2. The United States delegation raised this question almost
two years ago. Since that time not too much progress has
been made. We were therefore a little surprised by the

1 See Official
Records
of the General
Session, Supplement
No. IA (A/6001/Add.l),

1

Assembly,

page2.

Twentieth

6. My delegation is grateful for the initiative taken by the
United States delegation in bringing the question of those
small States to the notice of the Security Council with a
view to a further and detailed examination of the question
by a committee of experts of the Council, and possibly by
the General Assembly itself.

experts, and subsequently the recommendation of the
Security Council, be made available to the twenty-fourth
session of the General Assembly, we seem to agree generally
that our action now would not prejudge or prejudice future
consideration and decision by the Council in this respect,
13. At this stage, I do not wish to go in detail into the
substance of the matter in all its aspects, because we shall
have an opportunity to do so during meetings of the
proposed committee of experts. However, I feel that it
would not be inappropriate for me to state the basic
position of my delegation on this question.

7. Given the complexities of the question, this examination will no doubt be a difficult task. None the less, our
task has been made considerably less difficult by the fact
that, since the publication of the Secretary-General’s
introduction to the annual report for 1965, valuable
research and studies on the conditions and problems of
those States have been carried out by individual scholars
and institutions such as UNITAR, and also by the fact that
the Secretary-General himself has discussed the question in
somewhat more detail in the introductions to his annual
reports for 1967 and 1968.

14. Let me say at the outset that we have viewed the
question on the basis of general principles, about which
mention was made by Ambassador Yost in his statement,
15. First and foremost in our minds is the principle of the
universality of our Organization. We have welcomed the
emergence of new independent States and their admission
to the United Nations. In our opinion, this happy trend, far
from weakening the United Nations, has enriched it. My
delegation was indeed very happy the other day when the
representatives of France and the United Kingdom acknowledged, in glowing terms, the positive and beneficial
contribution to the international community made by
those new States, and by some of the smallest among them.
Therefore it would appear but natural that the delegation
of Nepal should not agree with the assumption that increase
in the membership of the United Nations as a result of the
emergence of what are called the “micro-States” would
inevitably lead to the weakening of the Organization.

8. NO one can claim that we would all necessarily agree
with the conclusions drawn as a result of that valuable
research and study as to the course of action that the
United Nations should take in order to ease the difficulties
of the problem which is our common concern. But those
studies have largely succeeded in giving a clearer picture of
the complexities of the question, so that we might say that
we are now in a better position to consider it in its true
perspective.
9. At our last meeting, we listened with the utmost
interest and attention to the statement made by the United
States representative, Ambassador Yost, in which he raised
the matter in a very thorough way. The United States has
suggested the creation of a category of associate membership for the benefit of those small States. To that end it is
proposed that the Council request the Secretary-General to
inscribe an item concerning this question on the agenda of
the forthcoming session of the’ General Assembly, and that
the Council refer this question for study and appropriate
recommendation to a committee of experts.

16. Furthermore, we regard the principle of the sovereign
equality of States as the basis of the whole United Nations
system. Provisions of the Charter make a distinction
between the right to independence of a State and its right
to membership in the United Nations. No State becomes a
Member automatically by virtue of its independence. There
are independent States which have, for various reasons,
opted out of membership. States which apply for membership must satisfy certain conditions set in the Charter
before they are admitted by the General Assembly on the
recommendation of the Security Council. In that respect
the authority and discretion of the Council and the
Assembly are supreme under the Charter. However, as we
view this question, it seems to me that nothing contained in
the Charter limits the right of independent States, even if
they do not have the right to membership in the United
Nations, at least to apply for it. In considering any criteria
or categories of membership or associate membership, it is
incumbent upon us to pay very particular attention to that
aspect of the sovereign rights of independent States.

10. At that meeting, we also heard preliminary observations on the question by the representatives of Finland,
France, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom, In the
light of those observations it appeared to me that the
general consensus was that the Council would be well
advised to proceed in the consideration of the question
with caution and no undue haste. Ambassador BBrard, in
advocating a cautious approach, exhorted the Security
Council to take into account the fact that iny change in the
conditions for membership would necessarily lead to a
substantive modification of the Charter. My delegation is in
full agreement with that view.
11. The need, as my delegation sees it, is for a more
careful and thorough study of this important question. I
would join in the support for the proposal made by the
United States delegation that the Security Council refer the
question to a committee of experts for study. The
committee should be required to report the results of its
study, and its recommendations, to the Security Council
for further consideration.

17. My delegation can envisage that in the future many
emerging States may find the obligations of membership
too onerous for them to bear. It is for those States
themselves to decide. Consequently they might, in their
judgement and for reasons of their own, deem it advisable
to opt out of membership of the United Nations vohmtarily. Because of these considerations, my delegation feels
that, while it is prepared to join in the proposed study with
a view to working out a beneficial system of associatiofi
between the United Nations and those new small States

12. As I understand it, although the United States
delegation wishes that the report of the committee of
2

that for various reasons do not become Members, it does
not necessarily mean that, it is definitely committed to the
idea of laying down any limitatidns or conditions for
membership other than those already contained in Article 4
of the Charter.

23. It is true that accession to the United Nations Charter
involves certain conditions, in particular those laid down in
Article 4 to the effect that:
“Membership in the United Nations is open to all other
peace-loving States which accept the obligations contained in the present Charter and, in the judgement of the
Organization, are able and willing to carry out these
obligations.”

18. We recognize that the question is of great importance
and complexity and, therefore, is not susceptible of
ordinary, easy solutions. When the Secretary-General drew
our attention to this question some four years ago,2 his
pl’incipal concern was the protection and promotion of the
legitimate aspirations for national security, economic and
social development and international co-operation of the
emerging small independent States, which, for reasons of
their own, might not find it advisable to associate themselves with active membership in the 1Jnited Nations. We
fully share that concern,

Thus, the United Nations reserved the right to consider the
case of each State wishing to become a Member of the
Organization.
24. In ‘our view, however, one of the fundamental elements underlying the Charter remains the principle of the
sovereign equality ‘of States. Membership in the United
Nations is itself still a prerogative of the international
sovereignty of every State rccognized as such.

19. My delegation would address itself to the task ahead
of us with that objective uppermost in our minds. Both the
Secretary-General’s report and Mr. Yost’s statement make
reference to the fields of association that already exist
between the United Nations and States which are not
Members of the Organization. In the realization of our
objective, we could, as a first step, start by defining those
existing fields of mutual association and co.operation,
extending them and seeking newer ones, without, however,
doing violence to the fundamental principles and purposes
of the Charter.

2.5. We know, however, that for some years now in the
introduction to his annual reports the Secretary-General
has drawn our attention to the diftjculties which might
ensue from the entry into the United Nations of very small
States with very limited resources.
26. Without going into the substance of the question at
this stage, it may nevertheless be argued that because of the
legal and political aspects involved, it is extremely complex.
Therefore, in the opinion of my delegation the question of
micro-States, which is the subject of our debate, should be
referred to a committee of experts of the Security Council.
The committee will be requested to make a detailed study
of dl aspects of this important question and to report to
the Security Council at a later stage.

20. I could not conclude my observations on this question
without paying a grateful tribute to my friend, the
representative of the United Kingdom. During the nearly
five years of my association with Lord Caradon, I have not
always agreed with his views but I have come to regard him
as truly a “United Nations man”, to use his own term. His
understanding of the problems connected with our Organization is profound, sincere and generous. Nothing reflects
the profundity, sincerity and generosity of this understanding better than the two interventions he made at our
last meeting.

27. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): First of all I should like to
express our thanks to the Secretary-General for his foresight and persistence in drawing the attention of the
Members of the United Nations to the question of the place
and status of micro-States within the United Nations family
of organizations in the light of long-telm implications of
the present historical trends.

21. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated jionz French):
Shortly after the Second World War, the newly established
United Nations had barely 50 Member States, most of them
Western. At the time, very few countries of Africa and Asia
were independent and, hence, represented in the United
Nations. As a result of the struggle waged by the peoples of
Asia and Africa, the colonial system has been undermined
and many peoples have acceded to independence and
international sovereignty. Consequently, membership of the
United Nations has increased considerably. This fresh blood
built up the United Nations: in fact, it became a more
faithful reflection of the new lines of force in the world.
The Third World was emerging on the international scene as
primarily a moral and political force. One of the first
consequences of this new situation was the adoption by the
United Nations of resolution 1.514 (XV) containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. This historic Declaration, condemning the colonial system, closed one of the darkest chapters
in the history of mankind.

28. Secondly, we join with the other members of the
Security Council in thanking the United States delegation
and Ambassador Yost for finally succeeding in making the
Council become seized of the matter.
29. Thirdly, we should like to congratulate UNITAR for
the excellent study on the status and problems of very
small States and Territories.3
That study will greatly
facilitate a search for a realistic but at the same time, an
equitable solution of the question of the relationship
between such States and the United Nations family in full
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations-as has
been so rightly stressed by Ambassador BCrard of France.
30. My delegation has followed with great interest the
statements made by four of the permanent members of the
Security Council, by the delegation of Finland and by the
other delegations that have spoken today. Those inter-

22. Thus, the achievement of independence by a State was
and is a source of great satisfaction to us.

3 Small

States

and

Territories:

Status

SeriesNo. 3 (New York, Arno Press).

2 Ibid.

3

and Problems,

UNTAR

ventions have greatly clarified the issues. In particular, We
should like to say how greatly we appreciate the emphasis
that the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
Caradon, has placed on the importance of meeting the
needs and aspirations of the small countries, the needs of
economic development and the aspirations to security.
31. At this time we should like to reserve our position on
the substance of the question until the Security Council’s
committee of experts is able to consider it fully. We are
ready to support the proposal to establish such a committee
and to refer the question to it for study.

delegationfeels that a thorough study of the questionson
the agendaof our precedingand presentmeetingsmay be
extremely useful to the future of the United Nations.
38. The Secretary-GeneralU Thant, has at various times,
and particularly in the introduction to his annualreport on
the work of the organization for the year ending IS
June 1967,4 referred at somelength andin great earnestto
the question of the so-calledmicro-States, which involves
the concept of the universality of the United Nations.
39. In this connexion, we thank the United States
delegationfor bringing the question now before us to the
Council’s attention. In a sense,this discussionrepresents
payment of an outstanding debt owed not only to the
distinguished Secretary-General but also to the United
Nationsitself.

32. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated. from Fk~h):
The question before the Council today was, as everyone
knows, raised by the United States delegation. It is in fact a
problem of quite long standing which has already been
mentioned several times by the Secretary-General in the
introduction to his annual reports. In search of a solution
to this problem, the United States delegation felt that it
should submit for our consideration a proposal whereby the
Secretary-General would be requested to place the question
entitled “Creation of a category of associate membership”
on the agenda of the twenty-fourth session of the General
Assembly.

40. With regard to the procedures whereby the Council
could ensure that its work is both useful and legally
acceptable,my delegation believes that the best method
would be for a study of the various questionsdealt with in
the letter contained in document S/9397 to be madeby a
committee in which each member of the Council would
have every opportunity to expresshis views on the various
aspects-especiallythe political and legalaspects-of these
questions and their implications, in order to seek the
common denomiriators reflecting the opinion and the
collective will of the membersof the Council.

33. My delegation has listened carefully to the statements
of the representatives who have spoken before me and who
stated their Governments’ views about the association of
newly independent States with the United Nations. The
Senegalese delegation believes that the United Nations
should not impose new criteria for admission on newly
independent States. Those States, in the view of my
delegation, should retain the freedom and right to request
membership in the United Nations in acbordance with
Article 4 of the Charter, which clearly defines the conditions for the admission of new States. I must state here that
we are opposed to any idea of new criteria.

41. My delegation is confident that, at this stagein our
discussion,this is the course which the Security Councif
shouldfollow in the presentstate of affairs.
42. In conclusion,it goeswithout saying that this statement implies no judgement on the substance of the
questionsI have mentioned.
43. Mr. MORALES SUAREZ (Colombia)(translatedfrom
Spanishl: The delegation of Colombia has listened with
close attention to the statement by the United States
delegationon the problem of the so-calledmicro-States,a
problem which has already been mentioned repeatedly by
the Secretary-General.

34. Moreover, as certain representatives and particularly
the representative of France have already pointed out, the
introduction of changes in the conditions for admission
may raise problems which could be difficult and delicate
and might even lead to a significant alteration of the
Charter.
35. Under these circumstances, my delegation considers it
advisable, before any final decision is taken, to submit the
problem to a competent organ of the United Nations,
which would make a thorough study of the question. After
this preliminary work, which in the view of my delegation
is necessary and which would have the great advantage of
defining the scope and content of the problem, the Council
could meet again to recommend the inclusion of this item
on the agenda of the General Assembly, which will have the
final word on the substance of the question.

44. My delegationis grateftll for theseexplanations,which
we think are useful and necessary for the satisfactory
dischargeof the functions of the Organization. We favour
considerationof the problem by a committee of experts,
whose task should be broadly defined so as to set no
limitations on the aspectsto be considered.The legal and
political elements involved are so important that my
delegationfeels it would be premature and even hazardous
to do more than expresssupport for a comprehensivestudy
of the problem.

36. Therefore, in conclusion, my delegation would like to
state that, in the light of the observations made at the
outset of our statement, we should like to see a change
made in the title of this item, which seems to prejudge the
position of the Council on the substance of the problem.

45. Mr. CHANG (China): My delegation welcomesthe
opportunity to discussa question which is of the greatest
importance to the future of the United Nations. This is the
question of how to deal with the growing number of what
has often been referred to as “micro-States” within the
framework of the United Nations.

37. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Like others who have spoken before us, my

4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twerzty-seco?ld
Session, Supplement No. IA.

4

46. This question is, of course, not new. The SecretaryGeneral has repeatedly called attention to the problem.
Ambassador Yost, in his opening statement, last Wednesday /lSOSth meeting], outlined the reasons why the
Council should at this moment act on the question.
Inasmuch as, he said, there are now no applications for
membership before the Council, the question of principle
can be addressed in the proper perspective and with the
greatest objectivity. It seems to my /delegation that the
arguments he has advanced in support of the draft
resolution [S/9414/ he has proposed are both cogent and
persuasive.

51. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): If no
other member of the Council wishes to speak, I should like
to make a statement on behalf of my country, SPAIN.
52. When the time comes, my delegation will give a
detailed explanation in the committee of experts of its
views on the subject before us. Because of the importance
of this matter, however, I consider it appropriate to make
some preliminary considerations.
53. In the view of my delegation, the study we are to
make in the committee of experts should cover solely and
exclusively the future relationship with the United Nations
to be offered to sovereign and independent States, bearing
in mind that active participation as full members might, in
the opinion of those sovereign States, place an excessive
burden on their limited resources.

47. I believe that all members of the Council are agreed
that a general influx of micro-States would, to quote the
Secretary-General, “lead to a weakening of the United
Nations itself”.5 Membership in the United Nations, mor&
over, is not an unmixed blessing for the small Territories
which may one day attain independent statehood, There is
therefore, I believe, merit in the United States proposal that
a new and separate category of associate membership
should be created to accommodate those future independent States which are too small in size and population
and too poor in resources to assume the obligations of full
membership. The status of associate membership would
enable those States to play a role in the international
community without being burdened by the responsibilities
of regular representation in the United Nations.

54. We have followed with great attention the statements
made by various representatives and my delegation has
noted the importance attached by some delegations to the
problem of decolonization. This is not the problem we have
to consider. The United Nations has already laid down the
principles on the basis of which the decolonizing process
must continue relentlessly in all dependent territories;
although in most cases it is obvious that the interests of the
peoples concerned must be paramount, it is no less true
that in other cases, either because imported populations or
certain specific interests are involved, the principle of
territorial integrity must prevail.

48. My delegation is, of course, aware that there is another
side to the question. Most of the small Territories which
may one day emerge as independent States are today part
of the colonial system. For the colonial peoples the end of
the colonial rule marks the beginning of a new process: the
conversion of nationalism into nationhood. Membership in
the United Nations has served this purpose. It has become a
badge of independence, the credentials of sovereignty and
the symbol of nationhood, It is only when a new nation
takes its place in the grand hall of the General Assembly
that it considers itself as having arrived.

55. To us that is clear. There is already a whole series of
United Nations resolutions on certain specific cases and it is
therefore unnecessary to refer to them at this time.
56. The study made by UNITAR
on the status and
problems of very small States and territories has also been
mentioned here. This important study was made by a group
of experts who tried to examine thoroughly and in depth
all the problems raised. Nevertheless, we should like to
point out that the study is incomplete in certain respects,
particularly when it refers to territories where the principle
of territorial integrity should prevail. It confines itself to
giving the viewpoint of the administering Power and the
claimant Power, without referring to the decisions adopted
by the General Assembly. We feel that a reference to a
body of doctrine already established by the United Nations
would have been of particular value, since it would then be
unnecessary to go into the controversial and disputed views
of the respective parties; the attentive reader would be able
to see at a glance what was the opinion and the decision of
this international Organization, which has already passed
judgement on the question.

49. The question of micro-States is thus one of great
complexity. It seems to my delegation that the conditions
of membership laid down in Article 4 of the Charter, if
strictly applied, would be adequate to deal with the
question. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have under that Article a discretionary power to pass on the
ability of a State seeking admission to the United Nations
to fulfil its obligations under the Charter, It is because the
Charter conditions for membership have not always been
strictly applied that the United Nations is now faced with
the problem of micro-States.
50. That being so, my delegation finds itself in essential
agreement with the proposal set forth in the statement of
Ambassador Yost. The proposal does, however, pose a
number of important and delicate questions. Further study
of the problem is thus called for. Perhaps the most practical
procedure to be followed under the circumstances is to
entrust the problem to a committee of experts. That seems
to be the consensus of the Council.
5 Ibid.,

57. As to the substance of the matter before us, my
delegation considers that in making the study the Security
Council committee of experts must be fully aware that
whatever is decided must always be an alternative offered
to the sovereign State. The Charter of the United Nations
proclaims in its Preamble the equal rights of nations large
and small and Article 2, paragraph 1, confirms that statement when it establishes that “The Organization is based on
the principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members”.

para. 164.
5

courtesy, co-operativeness and capability with which you
have conducted the consultations leading up to the action
just taken by the Council this morning. I think there is no
doubt that these qualities have typified your conduct of
office, and as the month of August nears its close I merely
want to say to you how deeply indebted I am sure we all
feel to you for the manner in which you have discharged
the onerous duties of the Presidency.

58. There can be no doubt, s,o, far as,,my delegation is
concerned, about the significance and scope of this principle of the sovereign equality of States, \?rh@ permits any
independent State, in accordance with &he ,reqtiirements
laid down in the Charter, to knock a’t the ‘doors bf this
Organization. Nevertheless, we share,$bc,con’cern expressed
by the representative of the United,, States about the need
to study the problems posed for the United Natiohs by the
possibility of admitting a large number of States with very
limited resources.

64. Secondly, I wish to extend to all members of the
Council our deep appreciation for the positive spirit they
have evidenced and the support
they have given for the
agreement reached in establishing a Committee to examine
all the questions involved in the relationship between the
micro-States and the United Nations. We regard this action
today and the numerous statements we have heard as clear
evidence that the Council is in fact unanimous in recognizing that this is a serious subject and one which deserves our
most careful attention. If I may say so, I think that the
representative of Paraguay put it very well when he said
that in taking this step we discharge a duty not only to the
Secretary-General but also to the United Nations as an
institution.

59. In the view of my delegation, it is appropriate and
timely to heed the appeal of the Secretary-General and
thoroughly examine all the legal, political and economic
implications of the question, in order to arrive at solutions
beneficial both to the United Nations and to the States
which may eventually aspire to membership in the Organization.
60. Consequently, in our opinion, what we must try to do
is to offer an alternative to those sovereign States which,
because their resources are limited, may consider that the
advantages they can derive from participating in the
activities of the United Nations, without having to become
full Members, are such that they should feel satisfied,
without this placing an excessive economic burden on
them. We do not, however, believe we are in a position to
judge a priori whether a State should be a full Member, on
the basis of criteria different from those already established
in Article 4 of the Charter which, as we know, lays down
necessary and sufficient conditions for membership in this
Organization. In other words, with that reservation, it is
certainly not for us to judge whether, for economic reasons
or because of the excessive economic burden involved, we
can bar a State from membership in the United Nations.
This would require an alteration of the Charter; so long as
the Charter remains in its present form, however, the only
course open to us would be the one I have just mentioned:
to let the sovereign State decide for itself which alternative
to adopt.

6.5. I would recall briefly that my delegation had considered this to be an ideal time to raise this subject siticc
there is no concrete application for membership pending.
Accordingly, while the time is right, we wish to see this
matter pursued urgently, and indeed we would hope fhf
the first meeting of the Committee of Experts will take
place during this coming week. As indicated in Ambassador
Yost’s statement 011 27 August, our objective would be to
see the work of the Committee concluded in time for this
Council to consider the matter again in order that it may
recommend appropriate action during the next session of
the General Assembly.
66. The PRESIDENT (tmnslated jram Spanish): I thank
the representative of the United States for the kind words
addressed to me.

61, Speaking again as PRESIDENT of the Council I would
say that following consultations on the subject, I understand there is no objection to the establishment of a
committee of experts, consisting of all members of the
Security Council, to study the question considered at our
1505th and 1506th meetings.

67. If no other representative wishes to speak, since this is
probably the last meeting over which I shall preside this
month, I should merely like to thank each and every
member for the exceptional co-operation they have extended to me in the discharge of my duties.

It is so decided.
62. The representative of the United States has asked to
speak and I now call on him,

68. Before adjourning the meeting, I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General and the entire Secretariat which he
represents for their co-operation.

63. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): First of all,
Mr. President, I should like to thank you very much for the

The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

822

I s-December

1972-2,050
