A /ES-10/PV.37

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

37th meeting

Thursday, 21 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Resumption of the tenth emergency special session
The President: I declare the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, on illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory, resumed.
Members will recall that, in paragraph 6 of its
resolution ES-10/18, of 16 January 2009, the General
Assembly decided
“to adjourn the tenth emergency special session
temporarily and to authorize the President
of the General Assembly at its most recent
session to resume its meeting upon request from
Member States”.
In that connection, I should like to draw the attention
of delegations to the following: document A/ES-10/769,
which contains a letter dated 18 December 2017 from
the Permanent Representatives of Turkey and Yemen
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
General Assembly, requesting the urgent resumption
of the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly in accordance with the “Uniting for Peace”
procedure pursuant to resolution 377 (V), of 1950; and
document A/ES-10/771, which contains a letter dated
19 December 2017 from the Permanent Representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the General
Assembly, also requesting that the tenth emergency
special session be resumed as soon as possible.

17-45861 (E)

I intend to conduct the proceedings of this meeting
in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly and past practice of the tenth emergency
special session.
In accordance with rule 63 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, the President
and Vice-Presidents of the seventy-second session
shall serve in the same capacity at the resumed tenth
emergency special session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to decide that the Credentials Committee of
the seventy-second session should serve for the resumed
tenth emergency special session?
It was so decided (decision ES-10/101 I).
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (Article 19 of the
Charter) (A/ES-10/770)
The President: In keeping with established
practice, I should now like to invite the attention of
the General Assembly to document A/ES-10/770,
concerning Member States that are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
The President: In that connection, may I further
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1745861*

A/ES-10/PV.37

follow the provisions of resolution 72/2, by which the
Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe and
Somalia are permitted to vote in the General Assembly
until the end of its seventy-second session and to also
allow these Member States to vote at the emergency
special session?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.22)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen to introduce draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.22.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express our sincere appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly in the light
of the sensitive circumstances in our region that
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
in line with resolution 8221, adopted by the Ministerial
Meeting of the Council of the League of Arab States at
its extraordinary session held in Cairo on 9 December
2017, and with the holding of the extraordinary session
of the Islamic Summit Conference of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, held in Istanbul on 13 December
2017. We would also like to express our sincere gratitude
to all States members of the Non-Aligned Movement
for supporting the holding of this emergency special
session, which is consistent with its firm position on
the question of Palestine.
We express our regret over the fact that the United
States of America exercised its right to veto in the
voting on draft resolution S/2017/1060, submitted by
Egypt to the Security Council on behalf of the Arab
Group (see S/PV.8139). The draft resolution sought to
protect the city of Jerusalem and reject any attempt to
change its legal and historical status, which is deeply
entrenched in international law. We also condemn the
opposition by the United States of America to 14 votes
in the Security Council, which represent international
consensus on the status of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
in accordance with the principles of international law
and relevant United Nations resolutions.
The decision taken by the United States
Administration on 6 December 2017 on the status
2/22

21/12/2017

of Jerusalem is considered to be null and void and
provides no legal basis for changing the status of
occupied Jerusalem. We consider it a blatant violation
of the rights of the Palestinian people, the Arab nations
and all Muslims and Christians of the world. It is a
dangerous violation and breach of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, which provides
for the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by
force. It is a serious threat to stability and international
peace and security in the region and in the world, not to
mention the fact that it undermines any possibility for
peace and a two State-solution and serves only to fuel
violence and extremism.
East Jerusalem, which is an inseparable part of the
land of the State of Palestine, continues to be occupied.
We affirm that Palestine has the full right to exercise
its sovereignty over all Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem. We therefore call
on all States, including the United States of America,
not to recognize any measures that run counter to that
fact. We ask that they refrain from the establishment
of diplomatic missions in the holy city, pursuant to
Security Council resolutions and as endorsed by draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.22 before us and the General
Assembly’s position on this question, which it has
steadfastly held for many decades.
We strongly condemn all illegal Israeli policies,
practices and plans that seek to annex occupied
East Jerusalem and to change its Arab identity and
demographic composition. We reject all attempts to
change the historic and legal status of the Islamic and
Christian holy sites in the city, including Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. In this regard, we appreciate the role being
played by the Kingdom of Jordan, as custodian of the
city’s holy sites, in providing protection and in opposing
all such illegal attempts.
Furthermore, we appreciate the role being played
by the Al Quds Committee, led by the Kingdom of
Morocco. We also welcome the resolve of the sisterly
Palestinian people, who defend their land, holy sites,
history and culture against oppression, injustice,
aggression and anyone who tries to deny their national
right to exist in a holy Arab city.
The Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including
Palestinian land, is the root cause of all tension in
the region. There will be no security or stability in
the region without a solution that does justice to the
Palestinian people by granting their legitimate rights
17-45861

21/12/2017

in freedom and dignity and an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Such a
solution must be based on the land-for-peace principle
and the two-State solution, in accordance with the
Madrid terms of reference as well as the Arab Peace
Initiative, which has been in existence since 2002 and
forms the just basis for a peaceful solution, as agreed
today by the international community, including the
Security Council.
In its capacity as Chair of the Arab Group for this
month, the Republic of Yemen, together with Turkey,
as Chair of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
submits to the General Assembly draft resolution A/ES10/L.22 on the status of the city of Jerusalem, under
resolution 377 A (V), “Uniting for Peace”. The draft
resolution stipulates that any decisions and actions
that purport to have altered the character, status or
demographic composition of the Holy City of Jerusalem
have no legal effect, are completely null and void and
must be rescinded in compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. In this regard, the
draft resolution calls upon all States to refrain from the
establishment of diplomatic missions in the Holy City
of Jerusalem, pursuant to Security Council resolution
478 (1980).
Moreover, it demands that all States comply with
Security Council resolutions on the Holy City of
Jerusalem and not recognize any actions or measures
contrary to these resolutions. It reiterates its call for
the reversal of the negative trends on the ground that
are imperilling the two-State solution and for the
intensification and acceleration of international and
regional efforts and support aimed at achieving, without
delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map, and an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967.
We take this opportunity to express our sincere
gratitude for the great efforts exerted by the sisterly
Arab Republic of Egypt in its capacity as the Arab
delegation in the Security Council in submitting draft
resolution S/2017/1060 to the Council and in promoting
the necessary support for it. We thank all Member
States that voted in favour of the draft resolution and
commend their principled position on the question.
We also thank all delegations that sponsored the draft
resolution that we submit today for supporting the

A/ES-10/PV.37

principles for which the draft resolution stands, which
reflects their strong position on the rule of law and the
just cause of Palestine.
We call upon all peace-loving countries that truly
want peace to stand steadfastly in favour of the rule
of law. We ask them to support draft resolution A/ES10/L.22 and to vote for what is right, to vote for peace,
and to vote for stability in the Middle East and the
entire world.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We have
called for the resumption of the tenth emergency special
session so that the voice of the international community,
embodied in the reactions of peoples and countries
throughout the world to the vote that took place in the
Security Council on draft resolution S/2017/1060 — in
which an overwhelming majority confirmed the legal,
political, historical status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and
declared that any attempt to change its status would
be null and void (see S/PV.8139) — may be heard. We
thank the Group of Arab States and the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and of the
Non-Aligned Movement for calling for this emergency
special session after the exercise of the right of veto
prevented the Security Council from carrying out its
duty in the maintenance of international peace and
security, despite the fact that 14 members of the Council
supported the draft resolution submitted by Egypt, for
which we are grateful.
The General Assembly is now acting within its
prerogatives under the Uniting for Peace principles set
forth in resolution 377 A (V) and has called for today’s
emergency session in order to fulfil its responsibilities.
This session comes after resolution adopted by the
Ministerial Meeting of the Council of the League of
Arab States at its extraordinary session held in Cairo,
at the request of the State of Palestine as well as of the
Kingdom of Jordan, as the guardian of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. It also comes pursuant to the extraordinary
session of the Islamic Summit Conference of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation held in Istanbul
under the chairmanship of Turkey, and in the light of
the international consensus on the dangerous nature of
the decision taken by the United States of America and
its repercussions on peace and security at regional and
international levels.

17-458613/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

We meet today not because of any animosity
towards the United States of America, but because of
its decision, which constitutes an aggression against
the genuine and natural rights of the Palestinian people,
the Arab nations and all the Muslims and Christians of
Jerusalem and of the whole world, to the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. It is an aggression against the exceptional
religious and cultural status of Jerusalem. We hereby
affirm that the American decision will have no impact
on the status and position of the Holy City in any way
whatsoever. Rather, it affects as a matter of course the
status of the United States as a mediator of peace, as it
has failed the test of Jerusalem despite our warnings
and those of the entire world that it should take this
test seriously, despite our warnings that the taking of
positions and decisions that ignite religious feelings
could end the possibility of a political solution and lead
to a full-blown religious war that would jeopardize the
future of peace.
We cannot help but ask who benefits from
this decision. It serves the Israeli Government in
implementing its colonial plans. It serves the powers of
extremism and terrorism in the region and the world.
Who could imagine that there would be any credibility
to a peace plan from which Jerusalem is excluded?
Is there any credible voice for peace that supported
this decision? How has this decision been described
by States, regional and political blocs, parliaments
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
himself, as well as the Christian and Islamic religious
establishments and authorities around the world? Not
one has upheld the American decision. Does the United
States not wonder why it stands isolated in a position
that has been rejected by everyone, near and far, when
even its closest allies cannot bear to turn a blind eye to
its decision?
The answer is clear. Al-Quds Al-Sharif is the cradle
of civilization. It is the land of divine religions, the path
of the Prophet, the gateway to heaven, the city of the
nativity of Al-Aqsa, which is the first of two points of
prayer and the third of the holy mosques. Jerusalem
cannot be misrepresented or falsified. It will not fall
under any siege or surrender to domination or any form
of monopolization. It belongs to the world. It is the key
to war as well as the key to peace in the Middle East
and the entire world. For these reasons, international
law and international consensus are clear on Jerusalem.
All States want the special status of Jerusalem as well
4/22

21/12/2017

as the historical status of the holy sites, including
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, to be respected and preserved.
Today, the United States is once again squandering
an opportunity to reverse its provocative and illegal
decision, join the international community and put an
end to its isolation. Instead, the United States insists
on ignoring the dangerous repercussions of its decision,
despite the calls of the international community for
it to respect the international law that governs our
world, prevents the escalation of conflict and offers a
framework of reference for just and peaceful solutions.
The State of Palestine respects the sovereignty of
States as long as it is in line with international law. We
refuse, however, to see sovereignty being used as an
excuse to violate international law and trespass on the
rights of our Palestinian people. We have inalienable
rights, and no one can deny our right to live on our land.
We and the countries of the world stand here today,
united for freedom, for justice, for peace. The veto will
not stop us. We will not be threatened. We are facing
up to our challenges in reliance upon international
law whose judgment we seek. Unlike some, we do not
seek advice, information or religious counsel to justify
colonialism and the seizure of land by force. Indeed,
we wonder how Israel, the occupying Authority, has
not yet understood that the States Members of the
United Nations represent peoples who for decades
suffered under the burden of colonialism, apartheid,
oppression, domination and aggression. They know
very well the difference between colonialist desires and
legitimate aspirations, and they will refuse to allow any
justifications for these crimes, whether they be made
on security, religious or national grounds.
The hollowness of these justifications has been
exposed by the experience and struggle of suffering
peoples, and the countries and peoples that have
experienced that suffering remain loyal to the
Palestinian people. The Palestinian people will not
forget the support they have received in their struggle to
regain their freedom and attain peace. Moreover, States
that have known suffering recognize and understand
the rationale for which this international Organization
was established, over 70 years ago, in the aftermath of
the Second World War. Theirs is a logic that is based on
justice and collective will, as embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.
Our Organization is now facing an unprecedented
test, with Palestine in the headlines. All international
17-45861

21/12/2017

frameworks, including the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Human Rights Council, the
International Court of Justice and the Conference of
the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, have agreed on our rights and on the
justice of our Palestinian cause. We trust that in voting
today States will lean on these firm foundations which
themselves are rooted in a logic consistent with the
flowering of human civilization.
History records and remembers names. It remembers
both the names of those who stand by what is right and
the names of those who speak falsehoods. Today, we
are seekers of rights and peace, despite the oppression
and injustice that has befallen our people — children,
women and the elderly. Ours is an oppression that began
with the Balfour Declaration 100 years ago, continued
with the catastrophe of 70 years ago, through to the
occupation of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem
and the Gaza Strip 50 years ago, to this very day.
Despite our march on the path of the pain for over
a century, we never wavered in our will to achieve
peace whenever we were given the chance. However,
colonialism and peace cannot coexist; those who choose
peace must renounce colonialism, and those who
choose colonialism are the enemies of peace. Israel is
not hiding its policies and intentions. The mediator has
decided to take its side and thereby embraces what is
wrong and ignores what is right. What is needed now is
the formation of a multilateral international mechanism
under the auspices of the United Nations, built on the
basis of international legitimacy and the frameworks
of reference for the Middle East peace process. This
mechanism would embody the international will that
exists to put an end to occupation and conflict, so
that a just, comprehensive and lasting peace could be
achieved and the security and peace of all peoples in
the region guaranteed.
The peace process is not the exclusive property
of one party, and the question of Palestine is the
responsibility of the international community as a
whole, including the United Nations, if we are to
achieve a just solution that would fully guarantee the
rights of the Palestinian people without depending on
the intentions of the international community or the
occupying Power. No State should use the support for
dialogue as an excuse to manipulate others or dodge
responsibilities and duties under international law. No
State can ignore the illegitimate status quo that Israel
has engendered or fail to contribute to the continuation

A/ES-10/PV.37

of this process. The peace process must distinguish
between the occupied territories and the occupying
Power. It must hold accountable those who commit and
perpetrate violations. It must support the Palestinian
people in their just struggle to achieve freedom and
independence, including the recognition of a Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, as well as our resolve to
live in our historic lands, our desire to do so in freedom
and dignity, and our hope — which is renewed every
day — to secure the safety and welfare of our people
and of future generations.
However, the barbarism of the Israeli occupation
is stealing the dreams and the future of the Palestinian
people. All we have to do is describe what we have
seen in the past few days to know this is true — a
wheelchair-bound disabled Palestinian was shot by a
sniper, a child was shot in the face, an entire battalion
of soldiers surrounded an unarmed young man, and a
brave girl was kidnapped from the arms of her parents
in the middle of the night. When will this catastrophe
end? When will we achieve our freedom and live in
dignity, peace and security on our land — the land of
our forebears and ancestors?
The world will be celebrating the birth of Jesus
Christ over the next few days, but the lights will not be
lit in the land of Christ, in Jerusalem, in Bethlehem or
in Nazareth — as a response to attempts to eliminate the
Palestinian, Arab, Christian and Islamic identity of the
city and in affirmation of the unity of the Palestinian
people around their cause. History has taken its position
on colonialism and apartheid, on settlements and
walls. The Palestinians cannot remain the sole hostage
of tragic historical phases that humankind has now
rejected. The Palestinians will continue to stand firm
in the streets and alleys of Jerusalem, as their organic
relationship with one another cannot be broken.
We note that the Palestinian people uphold the
same values that States Members of the United Nations
have come to this Hall to defend. I call upon them to
vote in favour of the draft resolution A/ES-10/L.22 in
order to make the voice of an inalienable right heard, in
order to do what is right and just in recognition of the
principles of international law and the Organization’s
own resolutions, and in order to combat attempts at
fraud, blackmail and intimidation and wholly reject
them. Those who want peace must vote for peace today.
Mr. Çavuşoğlu (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s historic meeting of the General

17-458615/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

Assembly. I would also like to welcome Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State
of Palestine.
We have come together in this Hall so many times
and said that the Palestinians had the right to live like
the rest of us, the right to be free and secure, the right
to be prosperous and the right to enjoy what is theirs.
Yet our words did not effect any change. The illegal
occupation continues and Palestinians cannot enjoy
their basic rights. Generations of Palestinians are subject
to systematic violence and discrimination. Today’s
vote is important to remind us that the Palestinians
are not alone. This vote is important to show that the
Palestinian cause is still our cause. Therefore, today,
we will speak up for justice and peace. Today, we will
speak up for Al-Quds — Jerusalem — the city of three
divine faiths. We will show that different ethnicities
and religions can coexist in peace in Palestine.
The Palestinians have a right to their own State
based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
This is the main condition and only hope for a just and
lasting peace in the region. However, the recent decision
of a State Member of the United Nations to recognize
Jerusalem, or Al-Quds, as the capital of Israel, violates
international law, including all relevant United Nations
resolutions. This decision is an outrageous assault on
all universal values.
As the Summit Chair of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), we convened an extraordinary
summit in Istanbul on 13 December. As the world’s
second-largest intergovernmental body, the OIC
unanimously rejected the decision as null and void,
in accordance with Security Council resolution 476
(1980), which censored, in the strongest terms, a similar
decision taken by the Israeli parliament in 1980. The
OIC also declared East Jerusalem as the capital of the
State of Palestine.
Al-Quds — Jerusalem — is a holy city for all three
monotheistic religions. It is the responsibility of all of
humankind to preserve its historical status. Unilateral
decisions on its status threaten the multi-ethnic
and multicultural fabric of the city and undermine
prospects for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. They thwart the prospects for a two-State
solution. Regrettably, the Security Council failed to
deliver on its responsibilities — once again through
the exercise of the veto. Now, the duty falls upon the
General Assembly to bring justice.
6/22

21/12/2017

Before this meeting, a State Member of the United
Nations threatened all the other Members. We were all
asked to vote against draft resolution A/ES-10/L.22
or face the consequences. Some were even threatened
with a cut in development aid. Such an attitude is
unacceptable. This is bullying, and the Assembly will
not stand for it. It is unethical to think that the words
and dignity of Member States are for sale. Let me put it
this way — we will not be intimidated. A country may
be strong, but that does not make it right.
This is a critical moment in history. A vote in favour
of the Palestinian people today will place us on the
right side of history. We have cast such a vote before,
when we granted Palestine the status of non-member
Observer State at the United Nations, back in 2012.
It is our sincere hope that this vote will pave the way
for much-needed peace and justice in the Middle East.
As a Chair of the OIC Summit, Turkey has submitted
the draft resolution together with Yemen. We also
requested, along with the League of Arab States, that
the President of the General Assembly convene this
emergency special session.
In conclusion, I affirm, on behalf of the entire
Turkish nation, that Turkey will never let Al-Quds
down. The Palestinian people will never be left alone.
The world is bigger than five nations.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): To its
shame, the United Nations has long been a hostile
place for the State of Israel. Both the current and
the previous Secretaries-General have objected to
the disproportionate focus of the United Nations on
Israel. It is a wrong that undermines the credibility
of the institution, and that, in turn, is harmful for the
entire world.
I have often wondered why, in the face of such
hostility, Israel has chosen to remain a Member of the
Organization. Then I remember that Israel has chosen
to remain in this institution because it is important to
stand up for oneself. Israel must stand up for its own
survival as a nation. But it also stands up for the ideals
of freedom and human dignity that the United Nations
is supposed to be about. Standing here today, being
forced to defend the sovereignty and integrity of my
country, the United States of America, many of the
same thoughts have come to mind.
The United States is, by far, the single largest
contributor to the United Nations and its agencies. We
do this, in part, in order to advance our values and
17-45861

21/12/2017

A/ES-10/PV.37

our interests. When that happens, our participation in
the United Nations produces great good for the world.
Together, we feed, clothe and educate desperate people.
We nurture and sustain fragile peace in conflict areas
throughout the world. And we hold outlaw regimes
accountable. We do this because it represents who we
are. It is our American way.

America will put its embassy in Jerusalem. That is
what the American people want us to do, and it is the
right thing to do. No vote in the United Nations will
make any difference on that. But this vote will make a
difference on how Americans look at the United Nations
and on how we look at countries that disrespect us in
the United Nations. And this vote will be remembered.

But let me be honest. When we make generous
contributions to the United Nations, we also have
a legitimate expectation that our goodwill will be
recognized and respected. When a nation is singled
out for attack in this Organization, that nation is
disrespected. What is more — that nation is asked to
pay for the privilege of being disrespected. In the case
of the United States, we are asked to pay more than
anyone else for that dubious privilege. Unlike some
United Nations Member countries, the United States
Government is answerable to its people. As such, we
have an obligation to acknowledge when our political
and financial capital is being poorly spent. We have
an obligation to demand more for investment and, if
our investment fails, we have an obligation to spend
our resources in more productive ways. Those are the
thoughts that come to mind when we consider the draft
resolution before us today (A/ES-10/L.22).

Mr. Danon (Israel): It is shameful for the United
Nations that I must stand here today. It is shameful
that this meeting is even taking place. Jerusalem is
the holiest place on Earth for the Jewish people. It is
the capital of the State of Israel, period. It is a fact
that simply cannot be disputed. King David declared
Jerusalem the city of the Jewish people 3,000 years
ago. The Jewish Bible mentions Jerusalem 660 times.
Our prayers recall Jerusalem’s holy name over and over
again. As our first Prime Minister, David Ben Gurion,
said, Jerusalem “is an inseparable part of the history of
Israel, of the faith of Israel”.

The arguments about the President’s decision to
move the American embassy to Jerusalem have already
been made. They are by now well known. The decision
was made in accordance with United States law dating
back to 1995, and its position has been repeatedly
endorsed by the American people ever since. The
decision does not prejudge any final-status issues,
including Jerusalem’s boundaries. The decision does
not preclude a two-State solution, if the parties agree to
that. The decision does nothing to harm peace efforts.
Rather, the President’s decision reflects the will of the
American people and our right as a nation to choose the
location of our embassy. There is no need to describe
it further.
Instead, there is a larger point to make. The United
States will remember this day, in which it was singled
out for attack in the General Assembly for the very act
of exercising our right as a sovereign nation. We will
remember it when we are called upon once again to make
the world’s largest contribution to the United Nations.
And we will remember it when so many countries come
calling on us, as they so often do, to pay even more and
to use our influence for their benefit.

I am holding right now an original coin. It dates
from 67 C.E. It says, in Hebrew, “Freedom of Zion”.
I ask delegations to look in the envelopes in front of
them. They will see that they have a replica of the coin.
It is clear evidence from the time of our second temple.
It proves the ancient connection of Jews to Jerusalem.
Our bond to Jerusalem is unbreakable. No UNESCO
declaration, no empty speeches, no General Assembly
resolution will ever drive us from Jerusalem.
Those are the facts that this body does not want
to hear. Those are the facts that this body wishes to
ignore. So, today, I will tell members about another
unbreakable bond — the unbreakable bond of hypocrisy
between the Palestinians and the United Nations.
Some have cautioned that the United States decision is
one-sided and harmful to peace. The opposite is true.
It is the one-sided steps of the Palestinians and the
United Nations that have pushed peace away for years.
With every anti-Israel resolution and every attack
against my people, the United Nations has perfected its
double standards.
We are now sitting in an emergency session of the
General Assembly that has been open since 1997. We
live in a world that is full of conflict and war, but only
when it comes to Israel — the one true democracy in the
Middle East — does the Assembly remain in a constant
open session. How many times has Israel reached out
its hand in peace since 1997? How many times have
we offered the Palestinians to join us in dialogue? How

17-458617/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

many times have these calls for peace been rejected?
All of us have lost count.
When Prime Minister Barak offered the
Palestinians a State in 2000, we were met with suicide
bombers on our buses and shootings in our streets. In
2005, Prime Minister Sharon disengaged from Gaza.
He removed every single Israeli home. There is not a
single settlement — there is no occupation — to be
found in Gaza any more. Since then, we have been
attacked repeatedly with rockets and missiles aimed
at our civilians. Yet the General Assembly has
remained silent.
The United States simply stated a fact. It officially
declared what has always been true — Jerusalem has
been and always will be the capital of the State of Israel.
Those who support draft resolution A/ES-10/L.22
today are like puppets. They are puppets whose strings
are pulled by their Palestinian puppetmasters. They are
like marionettes forced to dance while the Palestinian
leadership looks on with glee. They are blind to the
light — unaware of the manipulators surrounding
them, just like puppets. This vote is nothing more than
a performance of delusion.
The Palestinians know that the draft resolution is
a fraud. They know that it does absolutely nothing for
the lives of the Palestinian people. They know that it
will not create jobs for their people. They know that
it will not provide better health care for the people of
Ramallah or Gaza. No, this draft resolution is nothing
more than a distraction. All that it will do is tell the
Palestinians that they can continue to reject peace, and
if the Assembly votes in favour of it, that is the view
that will be sanctioned.
I thank those brave countries that do not support
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.22. They have not fallen
prey to the puppet show before us. They are the
defenders of real peace. They are the leaders that prove
that no United Nations resolution can rewrite history.
For, when a United Nations resolution designates
Israel’s presence in parts of Jerusalem as illegal, in
reality, it designates the presence of the Jewish people
at the Western Wall as illegal as well.
For thousands of years, Jews had only partial access
to or were even completely banned from the Western
Wall. Other nations, kingdoms and empires that
occupied Jerusalem over the centuries had no respect
for freedom of religion, but when Israel was founded
8/22

21/12/2017

we established a strong democracy. Our democracy
is based on individual freedoms, one of which is the
freedom of religion. And all these years later, our
democracy and our commitment to those freedoms
continue to thrive. We know that Jerusalem is sacred to
billions of people around the world. Israel respects all
religions and encourages everyone to visit and pray in
the holy city.
There is a particular irony with respect to today’s
draft resolution. Countries that sponsor it — countries
such as Yemen, where terror groups like Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have found
fertile ground — accuse the United States and Israel
of violating international law. The irony does not end
there. In every other scenario, this body preaches
human rights and peace, but not when it comes to Israel.
In fact, the Assembly completely ignores the horrific
acts of terror that threaten Israeli citizens. In the past
two weeks alone we have seen 23 rocket attacks by
Hamas against Israel, but we have heard nothing from
the United Nations — no Security Council meeting or
General Assembly emergency session was convened.
The Palestinian Authority threatened violence and
days of rage, but the United Nations expressed
no condemnation.
Let me be clear. Violence and terror must never be
tolerated. If this body were really uniting for peace, it
would adopt a draft resolution condemning Palestinian
violence. This draft resolution only encourages more
violence and instability. It encourages the Palestinian
leadership to continue on its dangerous path. The
Assembly permits them to pursue violence in the name
of Jerusalem — the city of Peace.
Israel is an optimistic country. We returned home
after thousands of years in exile. We made the desert
bloom and defended our country from countless attacks.
Some 42 years ago, the General Assembly adopted a
different, shameful resolution (resolution 3379 (XXX)),
which equated Zionism with racism. It took 16 long
years for that hateful resolution to be rescinded. I have
no doubt that today’s draft resolution will also end up
in the trash bin of history. I have no doubt that the day
will come when the entire international community
will finally come to recognize Jerusalem as the eternal
capital of the State of Israel.
Mr. Moncada Acosta (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on
17-45861

21/12/2017

behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
which, together with the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the League of Arab States, requested
that the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly be reconvened in the light of the latest
developments on the question of Palestine, thereby
stressing the importance that we accord to the future
of its heroic people, as well as to the status of the city
of Jerusalem. In particular, we take this opportunity
to express our gratitude to you, Sir, for promptly
responding to our request, which is in harmony with
the call of the free nations of the world.
Likewise, it is important to highlight that this
plenary meeting was called in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 377 A (V), of 3 November
1950, entitled “Uniting for Peace”, given that the
Security Council remains silent and paralysed on the
issue, despite its obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations, as was demonstrated last Monday,
18 December, when the delegation of the United States
of America exercised its right of the veto in the voting
on Security Council draft resolution S/2017/1060 on
the status of the city of Jerusalem, introduced by the
delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries is deeply
concerned about continued violations by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including attempts to alter the character, status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem. In this regard,
we condemn all violations of international law and
provocations in the city, by whomsoever perpetrated
and under whatever circumstances, while stressing that
such actions are null and void and without legal validity
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Furthermore, we subscribe to all the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on
Jerusalem, and we reiterate that the city is an integral
part of the occupied Palestinian territory.
Further, the States members of the Movement
express their deep concern about the plans announced
on 6 December 2017 by the President of the United
States of America, Donald Trump, to move that
country’s embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, as well as
any other such action that would further consolidate
Israel’s control and unlawful de facto annexation of
Jerusalem. We should like once again to warn that
such provocations, which violate the relevant Security
Council resolutions, will increase tensions and have
potentially far-reaching repercussions. Accordingly,

A/ES-10/PV.37

we call on the Government of the United States to end
all violations and provocations, and recall the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, including the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force, all the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, and all applicable
provisions of international law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
Specifically, we recall Security Council resolutions
476 (1980) and 478 (1980), in which the Council,
inter alia, clearly reconfirmed that all legislative and
administrative measures and actions taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, that purport to alter the character
and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem have no legal
validity and must be immediately rescinded. Resolution
478 (1980) also affirmed that the enactment of the Basic
Law by Israel constitutes a violation of international
law and decided not to recognize the Basic Law and
such other actions by Israel that, as a result of that law,
seek to alter the character and status of Jerusalem.
Furthermore, it called on all Member States to
accept that decision, while expressly calling on those
States that have established diplomatic missions in
Jerusalem to withdraw such missions from Jerusalem.
Accordingly, we call for the full respect of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and decisions, which
are legally binding for all of us as States Members of
the Organization.
The Movement warns that, given the extremely
volatile situation and the diminishing prospects for
achieving a just peace, all provocative, unlawful and
unilateral actions in Jerusalem, as well as the pervasive
threat of such actions, in addition to jeopardizing the
possibility of achieving the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders, could seriously destabilize
the fragile situation on the ground, with dangerous
repercussions. The Movement therefore recalls Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), adopted almost a year
ago, in which the Council underlined, inter alia, that
it would not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed by the parties through negotiations. It
also called on both parties to refrain from provocative
actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, with
the aim, inter alia, of de-escalating the situation on
the ground; rebuilding trust and confidence, thereby
demonstrating through policies and actions a genuine
commitment to the two-State solution; and creating the
conditions necessary for promoting peace.

17-458619/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

Therefore, the States members of the Movement
reaffirm their commitment to contributing to achieving
a just, lasting and peaceful solution to the question of
Palestine in all its aspects under international law. We
therefore underline the urgency of undertaking joint
efforts to promote peace and security through ending
the Israeli occupation, begun more than 50 years ago in
1967, without further delay, and call for stepping up all
international and regional efforts to that end, including
those that are relevant to maintaining the viability of
the two-State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders,
in respect of the long-standing terms of reference
of a peace settlement endorsed by the international
community, pursuant to the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, including the landfor-peace principle, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. Moreover, it is important to stress
that only a comprehensive solution to the question of
Palestine will allow us to bring about the longed-for
peace in the Middle East and finally end the ArabIsraeli conflict in its entirety.
In conclusion, the Movement reaffirms its longstanding support for and solidarity with the just cause
of Palestine, and its strong commitment to continue
supporting the heroic Palestinian people in their quest to
achieve their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including their right to self-determination,
freedom and independence in their independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, which is
vital for the establishment of a just, comprehensive and
sustainable peace.
I will share one last thought in my national capacity.
Our message to the current Administration of the
United States of America is the following: The world
is not for sale, and its threats jeopardize world peace.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation joins others in
commending your decision, Mr. President, to promptly
reconvene the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly on the question of Jerusalem.
In the face of this new challenge, wherein the
unilateral actions of one country are set to undo decades
of work of the international community and defy
international law, this Parliament of Man and of the world
is the right and appropriate forum to send a reassuring
message to the suffering and long-oppressed people of
Palestine, who have been losing hope of the possibility
of securing a viable, contiguous and independent State
10/22

21/12/2017

of Palestine, as well as in the effectiveness of the United
Nations to address their plight.
On behalf of the people and the Government of
Pakistan, I reiterate that the United States decision to
recognize Jerusalem as the so-called capital of Israel
and relocate its embassy to the holy city constitutes a
clear violation of international law, and is contrary to
the provisions of several Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. We regret and reject this action
and urge the United States to rescind its decision.
We find ourselves at one of history’s turning
points. The extraordinary developments of the past few
weeks warrant an equally extraordinary response from
us. We must uphold the prevalent and time-honoured
norms, both legal and moral. We must also recommit to
thwarting any and all attempts to violate the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and the ultimate goal of
a two-State solution.
My delegation believes that the United States veto
earlier this week in the Security Council (see S/PV.8139)
represents a dangerously misplaced strategy. The veto
attempted to legitimize a declaration that is already
null and void and lacks any legality. Through draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.22, before us today, the rest of the
world will say clearly and unambiguously that it cannot
and will not be complicit in any act of illegality.
Support for the Palestinian cause and defence of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif has been a pillar of my country’s
foreign policy. Our support remains and will always
remain unwavering despite the kind of threats
that we have received in recent days. My country
has always demonstrated its solidarity with the
Palestinian people and their legitimate aspirations.
Our Parliament — both the Senate and the National
Assembly — have unanimously echoed these
sentiments. We all stand firmly behind the Palestinian
people and support them in their just struggle.
I should like to recall that the first-ever standalone General Assembly resolution on Jerusalem,
resolution 2253 (ES-V), adopted on 4 July 1967, at an
emergency special session of the General Assembly
(see A/PV.1548), was proudly led and sponsored by
Pakistan. Today, equally proudly, Pakistan will join
the rest of the international community in adopting
this landmark draft resolution to collectively reject the
revisionist decision of the United States. We have also
co-sponsored the draft resolution.
17-45861

21/12/2017

In conclusion, let me say that a viable, independent
and contiguous State of Palestine, based on
internationally agreed parameters and the pre-1967
borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
remains the only sustainable guarantee for securing an
enduring peace in the Middle East. No other plan will
ever constitute a just solution. No other plan will work.
No other plan will succeed. And no other plan will be
acceptable to us.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening today’s critical session in response to
the announcement by President Trump recognizing
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the capital of Israel and the
relocation of the Embassy of the United States in Israel
to the City of Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
We also express appreciation to the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC)
for rapidly responding to the failure of the Security
Council earlier this week to adopt draft resolution
S/2017/1060 on this matter. We also thank the members
of the Non-Aligned Movement for their strong support.
Indonesia’s position, as expressed by our
President at the OIC Islamic Summit Conference in
Istanbul, is that the recognition by the United States
of Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the capital of
Israel is unacceptable, and not only offends many
peoples of the world but also is an affront to justice.
This unilateral decision achieves nothing but to take
us further away from the realization of the two-State
solution and to make an independent Palestine seem
increasingly remote if not impossible. In addition, the
decision weakens an already vulnerable peace process
and jeopardizes the efforts in pursuit of peace that the
General Assembly has had to engage in for far too
long. We therefore reiterate that the decision should
be rejected. Furthermore, this unilateral recognition
violates and undermines a number of resolutions of
the Security Council and of the General Assembly and
supports illegal acts committed by Israel in violation
of international humanitarian and international human
rights law.
All resolutions concerning the status of the Holy
City of Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the rest of
the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967
must be respected without exception. Despite the
international consensus recognizing the sensitivity of
the issue of Jerusalem and its centrality to the peace
process, we have unfortunately witnessed over the past

A/ES-10/PV.37

few days statements disrespecting many resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.
I should like briefly to recall history by quoting
paragraph 5 (b) of Security Council resolution 478
(1980), which states that the Council calls upon
“[t]hose States that have established diplomatic
missions at Jerusalem to withdraw such missions from
the Holy City”. This 1980 Security Council resolution
was adopted by 14 votes to none, with one abstention. It
is still valid and will remain so until peace is achieved
in Palestine.
Indonesia once again stresses its position that it
does not accept any statement or action that dishonours
the General Assembly and its achievements reflecting
global recognition of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, especially if such a statement or
action is taken by one or two States alone. I should like
to stress again that any attempt to change the character
or status of the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity
and is considered null and void. Any such attempt also
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and
a major obstacle to the achievement of the two-State
solution and a comprehensive peace.
Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif is a final-status issue
that must be resolved through negotiations between the
two parties. It is up to us in this Hall, as peace-loving
nations, to uphold the rule of law, justice and the dignity
of multilateralism. We must show good faith and
demonstrate our trust in the system for the maintenance
of peace and security.
I call once again on all peace-loving nations to
support the draft resolution that has been introduced
by Yemen and Turkey on behalf of its many sponsors,
including Indonesia. The Indonesian people have
high expectations that the United Nations and its
Member States, whose resolutions have been blatantly
violated, will make the right decision and take a strong
stand against any unilateral recognition contrary to
international law. Indonesia also urges the States
Members of the United Nations not to follow the
unilateral action of the United States in relocating its
embassy to Jerusalem. Indonesia is convinced that we
can still rely on the United Nations to live up to the
world’s expectations.
Finally, let me once again assure my Palestinian
brothers and sisters that Indonesia’s support for the
legitimate aspirations and rights of the people of

17-4586111/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

21/12/2017

Palestine to live in freedom, peace, justice and dignity
in their own homeland has been steadfast and will
continue undiminished. As I stand here in this Hall
representing the people of Indonesia, a sovereign
country and one of the largest democracies in the world,
a master of its own destiny and decisions, I once again
reaffirm our strong and unwavering commitment to
standing with the Palestinian people for their legitimate
and inalienable rights. Our support will never cease
or weaken.

the international system for the illegal occupation and
annexation of a people’s lands.

Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): As a sponsor of draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.22, my delegation wishes
to thank the representative of Yemen for having
introduced it in the General Assembly. We also thank
Turkey and Palestine for their leadership in convening
the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly to consider the status of Jerusalem. My
Government applauds the visionary leadership that
the President of the State of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, is demonstrating on this issue, and in particular
Palestine’s unwavering faith in the United Nations.

My Government appeals to Israel to withdraw from
and end its illegal occupation of Palestine and help create
the conditions for the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine that can coexist, side
by side with Israel, within secure and recognized
borders based on the 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. This is the solution advanced by Security
Council resolutions. The Maldives therefore calls
on Israel to implement the relevant resolutions, fully
respect its legal obligations undertaken in international
agreements, and return immediately to a framework
that could advance the Middle East peace process based
on a two-State solution.

The present international system that emerged with
the establishment of the United Nations is based on
international law. It is a system in which nations of the
world, from the greatest Powers to the smallest States,
have all pledged under the Charter of the United Nations
to respect, defend and abide by international law. Every
State Member of the United Nations, including Israel,
is bound to respect and to implement the resolutions of
the Security Council in good faith.
The Security Council has declared in clear and
simple terms that Israel’s occupation of the State of
Palestine is illegal, its annexation of East Jerusalem is
illegal, and the decision by any country to recognize
Jerusalem as Israel’s so-called capital and the relocation
of diplomatic missions to Jerusalem, are also illegal and
should be construed by the international community as
null and void.
It is reassuring to see that 14 out of the 15 members
of the Security Council earlier this week voted to uphold
international law with regard to the status of Jerusalem.
The General Assembly, in adopting the draft resolution
on Jerusalem today, will demonstrate the international
consensus on the issue. The message to Israel and the
handful of countries that support its illegal actions,
is very clear: the international community is united
in upholding the rule of law, and there is no place in
12/22

Israel needs to understand that the final status of
Jerusalem can be decided only through a negotiated
settlement and that any unilateral action to recognize
Jerusalem would be in violation of international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions on this
matter. This is an opportunity for Israel to make a
strategic decision that will shape the future of its people
and the people of the entire Middle East and beyond.

The centre of gravity in international politics is
shifting towards the rule of law. No Power is too great
to ignore this reality, as the draft resolution we will
adopt today will crystallize. And the Maldives will
continue to work to ensure that this reality is sustained
over time, as we hope to be elected to the Security
Council for the term 2019-2020. We will work with
every Member State to ensure that the United Nations
remains the key actor in finding a lasting solution for
the people of Palestine and in crafting a shared solution
for a shared destiny for all of us.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
condemns the decision of the United States of America
to move its Embassy to the occupied city of Al-Quds and
to recognize it as the capital of the Israeli occupation.
It reiterates that such decisions are a flagrant breach
of the legal, historical and political status of the city
of Al-Quds and nothing but a part of the criminal
usurpation of Palestine and the displacement of its
people with a view to establishing that colonialist
occupying entity on its territory.
These decisions taken by the Administration of the
President of the United States is a flagrant violation of
resolutions of the Security Council and of the General
17-45861

21/12/2017

Assembly calling on Israel to withdraw from the
territories that it occupied in 1967, including Al-Quds.
These decisions are therefore mere unilateral actions
that have no legitimacy or impact on the legal status
of the city of Al-Quds. However, their gravity lies in
the fact that they constitute an official declaration of
the United States Administration that the country is not
and will not be a neutral party or qualified mediator in
any effort to reach a peaceful settlement to the ArabIsraeli conflict.
The Syrian Arab Republic vehemently condemns
the recent exercise of the veto in the Security Council by
the United States against draft resolution S/2017/1060,
on the status of Al-Quds. This action provided further
confirmation of the disdain of the United States for
international law, in flagrant violation of international
legitimacy. It also unmasked its limitless support for
the racist and colonialist entity, to the detriment of the
rights of the Palestinian people.
Despite the immense challenges of the terrorist war
we are enduring, the Syrian Arab Republic will never
renounce our unwavering position on the question of
Palestine and the rights of Christians, Palestinians
and Muslims in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. My country’s
Government will spare no effort in order to recover all
occupied Arab territories. The Syrian Arab Republic
has stood and continues to stand firm on its position
of principle supporting the rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and the establishment
of its independent State on the entirety of its national
territory, with Al-Quds as its capital. We also support
the right of return of Palestinian refugees pursuant to
resolution 194 (III) of 1948. While the Syrian Arab
Republic welcomes the decision to grant the State of
Palestine non-member observer State status at the
United Nations, we call for the State of Palestine to
be granted full membership in the Organization with
full rights.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the United
Nations to assume its responsibilities in implementing
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly with a view to ending the suffering
of the Palestinian people and the Israeli occupation of
Arab territories, and to establish a Palestinian State
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. The ongoing
events irrefutably demonstrate that the United States of
America is not interested in a fair and comprehensive
settlement to the conflict to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
They also show that the arrogance of that country has

A/ES-10/PV.37

risen to the level of threatening and intimidating States
should they stand with the Palestinian people and
defend the resolutions of international legitimacy.
What kind of peace can we hope for from a superPower that treats the United Nations as if it were one
of its national institutions and considers its Member
States to be schoolchildren to be punished when they
fail to yield to its authority and hegemony?
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank you, Sir,
for resuming the tenth emergency special session under
the “Uniting for Peace” procedure pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 377 (V), of 1950.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
Our President attended the sixth extraordinary session
of the OIC Islamic Summit Conference, convened by
President Erdoğan in Istanbul on 13 December 2017, to
articulate our views on the Middle East peace process,
including the question of East Jerusalem. Our Prime
Minister also reaffirmed our unequivocal position on
East Jerusalem as the capital of an independent and
viable State of Palestine.
Bangladesh remains deeply concerned over any
decision or announcement that may compromise the
status of East Jerusalem as a final-status issue in the
Middle East peace process and contribute to changing
its historical and legal status, its demographic structure
and its historic Arab-Islamic character. We remain
concerned over the possible grave consequences and
threats to international peace and security that could be
inflamed by any such decision and action, raising new
waves of tension, hostility and violent extremism in an
already-volatile Middle East that are likely to spill over
to other parts of the world.
Bangladesh stresses the need to preserve the legal
status of Jerusalem within the framework of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, including relevant
Security Council resolutions. Bangladesh reaffirms its
position in favour of establishing the State of Palestine
based on the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its
capital. Bangladesh urges all parties concerned to
take a pragmatic approach to the Middle East peace
process in reaching a two-State solution for enduring
peace and stability in the region. As Bangladesh
strives to deal with the continuing massive influx of
forcibly displaced people from Myanmar’s Rakhine
state, we continue to associate ourselves with any call

17-4586113/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

or initiative to bring to closure protracted conflicts
that continue to foment indignation, intolerance and
mindless violence threatening to spare no one in the
international community.
Bangladesh supports the draft resolution, in keeping
with our constitutional obligation, our long-standing
principled position on the question of Palestine and our
commitment to international peace and stability and to
the principles of international law.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba fully endorses the statement delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We also
support the statements delivered by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Turkey on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and by the representative of
Yemen on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
My country’s position on the question before us
today is steadfast, as clearly reflected in the statement
by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Cuba on the
recognition by the United States of the city of Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel, issued on 6 December 2017. In this
regard, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Cuba expressed its deepest concern at and rejection of
the unilateral declaration by the President of the United
States of the city of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,
which constitutes a serious and flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
The intention of the Government of the United
States to alter Jerusalem’s historical status undermines
the legitimate interests of the Palestinian people and
of Arab and Islamic nations. It will provoke serious
consequences for stability and security in the Middle
East and further exacerbate tensions in the region and
hinder efforts to resume Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
Cuba calls on the Security Council to uphold the
responsibilities entrusted to it under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, take the necessary decisions and
demand that Israel immediate bring to an end its
occupation of the Palestinian territories and its policies
of aggression and colonialist practices, as well as that
it comply with resolutions of the General Assembly
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
14/22

21/12/2017

The Ministry for Foreign Affairs reiterated that
Cuba will continue to support a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
based on two States, that respects the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and the ability
to enjoy an independent and sovereign State, within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In conclusion, I should simply like to add that,
in accordance with its established principled position
on this issue, Cuba is among the sponsors of the draft
resolution contained in document A/ES-10/L.22,
entitled “Status of Jerusalem”, and will, of course, vote
in favour of it.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Over
the past several decades, the Israeli regime has
continuously committed a host of crimes by occupying
Palestinian land and killing and displacing Palestinians
while enjoying total impunity. The United States
has aided and abetted throughout by providing its
unconditional support and defending the Israeli regime
in all ways. The Government of the United States has
never hesitated to misuse its veto power in the Security
Council, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, to shield the Israeli regime from the will of the
international community.
Three days ago, when the United States vetoed a
draft Security Council resolution (see S/PV.8139), it
was the forty-third time the United States had exercised
its veto power to protect Israel from facing the
consequences of its heinous crimes and blocked efforts
by the members of the international community to
find a solution to the question of Palestine. The recent
illegal decision by the United States Administration to
recognize Al-Quds as the capital of the Israeli regime
and to move its embassy to this holy city has made it
crystal clear that the United States is interested only in
securing the maximum interests of the Israeli regime
and harbours no respect for the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people, including their right to selfdetermination.
The question of Palestine has been on the agenda of
the United Nations since the Organization’s early years.
Further, the international community has rightfully
recognized the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people for many decades. The Israeli occupation lies at
the centre of all crises and conflicts in the Middle East
and beyond — a fact long acknowledged by the United
Nations. The appalling tragedy and abiding wound of
17-45861

21/12/2017

our region over the past 100 years, which began with
the conspiracy of the Balfour Declaration, has entered
a new phase with the politically incorrect, illegal and
unlawful promise of the President of the United States
to move the American Embassy to the holy city of
Al-Quds. We strongly condemn this reckless unilateral
act by the United States to distort the historical facts
and replace them with fictions. That Administration
has done little to hide its intentions to shift the focus
of the Security Council from the question of Palestine
to fabricated alternative issues in our region in order to
give the Israeli regime more space to freely pursue its
criminal policies and practices.
In that intention, the United States has stressed
several times in Security Council open debates on the
situation of the Middle East that the United States no
longer subscribes to the internationally shared belief
that the question of Palestine is the Council’s priority
in the region. Such reprehensible statements are parts
of a bigger plot to legitimize the Israeli occupation and
expansionist policies and practices, which violate not
only each and every norm of international law, but also
the teachings of all divine religions and prophets that
are based on justice and compassion.
The Member States have never paid heed to this
delusional desire. This meeting of the General Assembly,
as well as the recent Security Council meeting on the
issue (see S/PV.8139), are clear manifestations that the
United States plan has failed and that the occupation
of Palestine and Al-Quds stand at the centre of all
conflicts in the Middle East.
Palestine is in the hearts and minds of all Muslims
and all peace-loving nations around the globe. Denying
this fact is equal to being complicit with the illegal
Israeli occupation and actions and ignoring the human
conscience. The Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its
solidarity with the oppressed people of Palestine during
this difficult time.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Palestinian question is at the core of the situation in
the Middle East and a fundamental problem bearing
on peace in the region. The status of Jerusalem stands
out as an especially complex and sensitive aspect of
any settlement to the Palestinian question. A large
number of resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council contain provisions on the status
of Jerusalem. In the current circumstances, we call
on the international community to remain united in

A/ES-10/PV.37

its joint efforts to pursue peace and to facilitate the
de-escalation of the situation with respect to Jerusalem
in the higher interests of stability, tranquility and the
Middle East peace process.
The two-State solution is the correct path towards
a political settlement of the Palestinian question. The
international community needs to build on the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, the principle of land
for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative and to scale up
its efforts to facilitate the resumption of negotiations,
settle such crucial issues as the final status of
Jerusalem and achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian question. China
firmly supports and facilitates the Middle East peace
process. We support the just cause of the Palestinian
people in recovering their national legal rights and
establishing an independent State of Palestine based on
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and in full sovereignty. China’s position in that regard
will never change.
In July, President Xi Jinping of China put forward a
four-point proposal on the settlement of the Palestinian
question, including the promotion of a political
process based on the two-State solution; adherence
to a vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable security; the further coordination of
international efforts to enhance synergy for peace;
and the promotion of peace in a holistic approach and
through development. China will continue to play its
constructive role in promoting a political solution to the
Palestinian question in the interests of peace, stability
and development in the Middle East.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
extend my appreciation and commend you, Sir, for the
timely convening of this important emergency special
session following the failure of the Security Council to
adopt a similar draft resolution on Jerusalem, introduced
by Egypt on Monday, 18 December (see S/PV.8139).
Allow me to also extend my delegation’s appreciation to
Yemen for introducing draft resolution A/ES-10/L.22,
on the status of Jerusalem, at this session.
My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Malaysia joins the international community in
expressing our deep concern and rejecting the decision
of the United States to recognize Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and relocate its Embassy from Tel

17-4586115/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

Aviv to Jerusalem. Such a move undermines efforts
to find a comprehensive, just and durable solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It has caused dismay
and frustration among a majority of Member States,
particularly the Palestinians and within the Muslim
world, including those that wish to see peace, stability
and security in the region. It is also an infringement of
the Palestinian people’s rights and their right to selfdetermination.
The decision goes against relevant Security
Council resolutions, such as resolutions 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016). They have laid the foundations of
the peace process that affirmed the city of Jerusalem
as a final-status issue that must be resolved through
bilateral negotiations between Palestine and Israel in
the framework of the two-State solution.
The issue of Al-Quds Al-Sharif is at the heart of
the Palestinian cause. The recognition of Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel endorses Israel’s brutal occupation
and repressive policies, which have caused immense
suffering to the Palestinian people. We are concerned
that this dire situation will only feed into the agenda
of the extremists and frustrate our collective efforts
towards our greater objective of combating terrorism
and ending the vicious cycle of violence.
The impasse in the Middle East peace process
needs pragmatic solutions based on international law
and norms, and we hope that the United States can
make a helpful contribution by rescinding its decision
and shouldering its responsibility to help achieve a
comprehensive and lasting peace on the basis of the twoState solution. Malaysia continues to believe that a twoState solution, with the Palestinians and Israelis living
side by side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders and
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, is the
only viable solution to this long-lasting conflict.
Mr. Ja (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea):
The international community is strengthening its
cooperation more than ever in order to put an end to the
confrontation and dispute between Palestine and Israel,
which have lasted for over half a century, and to ensure
lasting peace in the Middle East.
At the seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in Venezuela in September, the Heads
of State and Government reaffirmed their commitment
to defending the interests of developing countries
involving issues directly related to world peace and
security, such as the situation in the Middle East,
16/22

21/12/2017

including the question of Palestine, by promoting
multilateralism and especially by strengthening the key
role of the United Nations. Furthermore, in December
2016 the Security Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016), urging Israel to stop the illegal construction of
Jewish settlements in the West Bank and East Al-Quds.
The decision of United States President Trump to
recognize Al-Quds as the capital of Israel and to move
the United States Embassy there well deserves global
condemnation and rejection, as it is in open defiance
of and an insult to international legitimacy and the
unanimous will of international society. The status of
Al-Quds remains so sensitive that it must certainly be
settled fairly by means of restoring the national rights of
the Palestinian people and achieving a comprehensive
and lasting resolution to the Middle East problem.
The United States and Israel bear full responsibility
for all the consequences of the tension and instability
that will arise in the Middle East region owing to that
reckless and high-handed act. The United States and
Israel should pay due attention to the efforts of the
international community to resolve the issue of the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, in
conformity with international law and other relevant
Security Council resolutions for the benefit of the
Palestinian and Arab people, and attend to the Middle
East peace process with honesty and diligence.
My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate its
support for and encouragement to the struggle of the
Palestinian people to regain their legitimate right to
establish an independent State with East Al-Quds as its
capital, and to the struggle of the Arab people for their
cause of justice.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
South Africa’s position with regard to Jerusalem is
a principled one that is represented in the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
We believe that Jerusalem is a final-status issue to be
resolved through direct negotiations between the two
parties on the basis of the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions. That informed our
decision to support and co-sponsor draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.22.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
17-45861

21/12/2017

A/ES-10/PV.37

South Africa is deeply concerned that the unilateral
action of the United States to recognize Jerusalem as
the capital city of Israel undermines the progress that
has been registered within the context of the Middle
East peace process. We believe that the peace process
seeks to secure a lasting, sustainable peace between the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We believe the
decision of the United States Government to relocate
the United States Embassy to Jerusalem is regrettable
and is not constructive in advancing a sustainable
solution through the Middle East peace process.

in order to secure a sustainable solution and a rulesbased international order.

The South African Government remains in favour
of a two-State solution for Palestine and Israel, based
on the international recognition and independence of
the State of Palestine, based on the 4 June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital and with the peoples
of Palestine and Israel existing peacefully, side by side,
in two independent States.

Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): The delegation of the
Holy See wishes to express its appreciation to Member
States for their commitment to averting new rounds of
violence and to promoting dialogue and negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians on the peace process
and the question of Jerusalem. At the same time, it
wishes to recall the obligation of all nations to respect
the historical status quo of the holy city, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions.

We also recall all United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolutions 476 (1980) and
478 (1980), by which the Council, inter alia, reconfirmed
that all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, that
purported to alter the character and status of the Holy
City of Jerusalem had no legal validity and must be
rescinded forthwith; affirmed that the enactment
of the Basic Law by Israel constituted a violation of
international law; decided not to recognize the Basic
Law and such other actions by Israel that, as a result
of the law, sought to alter the character and status of
Jerusalem; and called upon all Member States to accept
that decision and those States that had established
diplomatic missions at Jerusalem to withdraw such
missions from the holy city. In this regard, we call
for the full respect of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and decisions.
South Africa continues to believe that the best
option for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
is premised upon, first, the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and
independence, which entails a principled position
against the military occupation of the Palestinian
people and their land; secondly, the right of the peoples
of both Israel and Palestine to live side by side in peace
in their own States, within internationally recognized
borders; thirdly, a belief that there can be no military
solution to the conflict and that peaceful negotiation is
the only means of ensuring lasting peace, security and
stability; and fourthly, a commitment to multilateralism

Finally, we appeal to the Government of the United
States of America to reconsider its decision to relocate
its Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, as such a move
compromises and undermines the principles of a twoState solution based on peaceful coexistence between
the peoples of Israel and Palestine.
The President: I now call on the observer of the
observer State of the Holy See.

The unique identity of Jerusalem, which is of
universal interest, consists in its particular nature as a
holy city most sacred to the three monotheistic religions
and a symbol for millions of believers worldwide who
consider it to be their spiritual capital. Its significance
goes beyond the question of borders, and that reality
should be considered as a priority in every negotiation
for a political solution.
The Holy See therefore calls for a peaceful
resolution that respects the nature of Jerusalem, its
sacredness and universal value, and reiterates that only
an internationally guaranteed status can preserve its
unique character and be an assurance of dialogue and
reconciliation for peace in the region.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.22, entitled “Status of Jerusalem”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in document A/ES10/L.22, the following countries have become sponsors
of the draft resolution: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,

17-4586117/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

the Comoros, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Gambia, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa,
the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and the State of Palestine.
I should also like to inform delegations that Mali
has withdrawn its sponsorship.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Angola, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
18/22

21/12/2017

Against:
Guatemala, Honduras, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
Togo, United States of America
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Bahamas, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea,
Fiji, Haiti, Hungary, Jamaica, Kiribati, Latvia,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Romania, Rwanda, Solomon
Islands, South Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.22 was adopted
by 128 votes to 9, with 35 abstentions
(resolution ES-10/19).
[Subsequently, the delegation of San Marino
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to those who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting, I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I deliver this explanation
of vote after the voting on behalf of the following
European Union member States: Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom, as well as on
behalf of Albania, Montenegro, Serbia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
We reiterate our firm commitment to the two-State
solution, and in this context the position of our States
on Jerusalem remains unchanged. The aspirations of
both parties must be fulfilled and a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States. We will continue
to respect the international consensus on Jerusalem
embodied in, inter alia, Security Council resolution
478 (1980), including on the location of their diplomatic
representations, until the final status of Jerusalem
is resolved.
17-45861

21/12/2017

Recognizing the special significance of the holy
sites of Jerusalem, we strongly believe that the status
quo for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif must be
upheld in line with previous understandings and with
respect to Jordan’s special role.
Our countries will continue to work tirelessly
with the parties, regional and international partners,
not least within the Middle East Quartet, to promote
a return to a meaningful process towards a negotiated
two-State solution, in line with known parameters,
towards a peace that can be sustained. A negotiated
two-State solution that fulfils the aspirations of both
sides is the only realistic way to bring the lasting peace
and security that Israelis and Palestinians alike deserve.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia has a longstanding commitment to a two-State solution in the
conflict between Israel and the Palestinians. This has
been articulated at the highest levels of the Australian
Government and reconfirmed in recent weeks.
There is much in resolution ES-10/19 with which
we agree. We agree that Jerusalem is a final-status
issue to be resolved through negotiations, and Australia
will maintain its diplomatic representation to Israel
in Tel Aviv and its representation to the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah. We also agree with the call
for an intensification of efforts aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace. Australia does
not support unilateral action on the part of either side of
this conflict; we consider that such actions undermine
the peace process.
We do not, however, consider that this further
resolution — in addition to the many on the peace process
adopted by the General Assembly each year — helps
bring the parties back to the negotiating table. We do
not wish to see any party isolated from the process, and
so we abstained in the voting on this occasion.

A/ES-10/PV.37

Security Council, the organ entrusted by the Charter
of the United Nations with maintaining international
peace and security.
The Government of Paraguay reaffirms its longstanding position that this issue must be resolved
through direct negotiations between the parties, leading
to the establishment of two States living side by side in
peace within secure and recognized borders.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): I should like to make this statement in
explanation of vote on resolution ES-10/19, entitled
“Status of Jerusalem”, just adopted at this emergency
special session of the General Assembly. In particular,
I reiterate El Salvador’s continued support for a
negotiated settlement based on a two-State solution
in which Israelis and Palestinians can live together in
harmony, within the framework of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and pursuant to all the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Over the past several year, as reflected in all
the relevant resolutions introduced in the various
Committees and the General Assembly, El Salvador
has remained consistent in its support for this cause.
Without impugning the content of the resolution just
adopted, introduced jointly by the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, we
note the increasingly frequent practice of submitting
texts for the consideration of the General Assembly
membership without allowing for the minimum time
needed for prior discussion, including in cases in which
draft resolutions are put to the vote.

We also wish to see the United States of America
continue to play a leadership role in seeking a resolution
to the conflict. Although we are under no illusions that
finding a resolution to the conflict will be easy, our
firm and sincere hope is that Israel and the Palestinians
will return to the negotiating table as soon as possible,
and we continue to encourage them to do so.

We believe that the introduction of draft resolutions
before the General Assembly must be predicated upon
a minimum amount of open consultations with all
States Members of the Organization, irrespective of
and without prejudice to the emergency nature of this
session. El Salvador believes that such a failure to allow
room for prior and open discussions within the General
Assembly cannot be allowed to set a precedent for
carrying out the work of the most representative body
of our Organization. Therefore, without undermining
the position that it might have taken as a consequence of
consultations on the text, El Salvador decided to abstain
in the voting to express its disapproval of the process.

Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Paraguay abstained in the voting on resolution
ES-10/19, on the status of Jerusalem, in the light of
the fact that this issue is under consideration by the

We reiterate once again that our vote should cast no
doubt on our support for dialogue and multilateralism
as the only path leading to the settlement of conflicts
and dealing with global challenges, or on El Salvador’s

17-4586119/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

appeal to all the involved parties to step up consultations,
dialogue and mulitlateralism so as to move closer
towards concrete solutions on the ground.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina abstained in the voting on
resolution ES-10/19 at this resumed emergency special
session as we believe that it will not help to advance
a resolution of the conflict between the parties. That
does not imply a change in Argentina’s position with
regard to the fundamental issue. Argentina once again
reiterates its firm support for a peaceful, definitive and
comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine,
based on the two-State solution within the pre-1967
borders, and to be determined by the outcome of
negotiations between the parties.
Argentina firmly supports all efforts aimed at
bringing peace and stability to the Middle East. We
urge regional stakeholders and countries friendly to
Israel and Palestine to contribute constructively to
helping the parties move forward in settling their
differences so as to resume negotiations. That demands
our collective effort in working to achieve the two-State
solution pursuant to the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, and as set out by the road
map and Arab Peace Initiative.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania underlines the
need for a just and long-lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict through the implementation of
the two-State solution with Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace and security as the only viable
solution capable of ensuring the fulfilment of both
sides’ aspirations. Jerusalem represents a central issue
in peace negotiations, and its status must be decided by
a direct agreement between the two parties involved, as
underlined by both the European Union and the United
Nations, as well as the United States Administration.
Romania’s position concerning the status of the city
of Jerusalem complies with the relevant provisions of
international law and the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. Expressing its concern
about the possible negative repercussions with regard to
the security climate in the Middle East, Romania calls
for calm and encourages the parties to resume direct
dialogue so as to move forward the peace process. We
believe that the time has come to revive international
efforts so as to relaunch the peace process in the Middle
East, and, in that regard, we look cautiously towards the
moment of implementing resolution ES-10/19.
20/22

21/12/2017

Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada chose to abstain in the voting. Canada remains
firmly committed to achieving a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East that includes the
establishment of a Palestinian State living side by side
with the State of Israel in peace and security. As has
been its long-standing position, Canada believes that
the status of Jerusalem is part of the final status issue,
and that the question of the status of Jerusalem can be
settled only within the framework of a comprehensive
settlement of the Israel-Palestinian conflict.
(spoke in English)
Canada continues to support establishing the
conditions necessary for the parties to find a peaceful
solution. We are disappointed that resolution ES-10/19
is one-sided and does not advance the prospects for
peace to which we aspire, which is why we abstained
in the voting today.
We also take this opportunity to emphasize the
importance of the city of Jerusalem to three monotheistic
religions. Denying the connection linking Jerusalem
and the Jewish, Muslim and Christian faiths undermines
the integrity of the site for all. We also reiterate the
need to maintain the status quo at Jerusalem’s holy
sites. Canada calls for calm,and firmly condemns the
violence, terrorism and targeting of civilians witnessed
during the past several weeks.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): In explanation of its vote in favour of resolution
ES-10/19, Nicaragua expresses its deep concern about
and rejection of recent unilateral actions aimed at
modifying the character, status and demographic
composition of Jerusalem, in flagrant violation of
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), which
clearly states that no changes to the 4 June 1967 lines
will be legally recognized, including with regard to
East Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties.
It is regrettable that Security Council draft resolution
S/2017/1060, on the status of Jerusalem, introduced
by Egypt on 18 December, was not adopted by the
Council, which resulted in the voice of the international
community being ignored and established a dangerous
precedent for matters of peace and international law.
Resolving the question of Palestine and the status of
Jerusalem urgently requires fully committed and
determined negotiations in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. Nicaragua reiterates that
17-45861

21/12/2017

such unilateral actions jeopardize international peace
and security in that region and increasingly move us
farther away from finding a solution to the situation in
the Middle East.
It is necessary to avoid any measure that might
hinder the establishment of two States. The only
solution involves the establishment of two States — a
State of Israel and a State of Palestine within the pre1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital of
the State of Palestine — whereby both countries are
able to coexist in full enjoyment of their aspirations,
security, cooperation, harmony and lasting peace, and
both States and peoples enjoy the same right to peace,
security and sustainable development.
As a peace-loving country respectful of
international law, Nicaragua reiterates its full support
for all initiatives aimed at dialogue and negotiations
leading to peace, unity and cooperation in the region.
We call for stepping up efforts to finding a solution to
the question of Palestine at the national, regional and
international levels.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico abstained in the voting because it is concerned
about the way in which the legitimate search for peace
between Palestine and Israel has been distorted.
Today, we are farther away from, rather than closer
to, reaching an agreement. Mexico does not believe
a unilateral declaration recognizing Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel to be positive or useful in terms of the
peace process. However, convening a Uniting for Peace
or emergency special session of the General Assembly
to condemn such a declaration is neither a useful or
proportionate reaction. The United States must be part
of the solution to the conflict between Palestinians and
Israelis and not be made into an additional problem that
hinders progress. We call on all sides to exercise calm
and reason.
Mexico supports dialogue as the means to settle
the conflict between Israel and Palestine, based on
the two-State solution, which includes the right of
Israel and Palestine to live in peace within secure and
internationally recognized borders, as agreed in the
Oslo accords and endorsed by the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. Israel must
respect the character and the special status of the holy
city of Jerusalem and preserve the unique spiritual and
religious attributes of the city’s sacred sites.

A/ES-10/PV.37

As it has done thus far, Mexico, like other countries
that enjoy diplomatic relations with Israel, will keep
its embassy in Tel Aviv pursuant to Security Council
resolution 478 (1980), as well as to the relevant
General Assembly resolutions concerning the status
of Jerusalem. We recall that Jerusalem is also an
integral part of Palestine, and the eastern part of that
city should therefore be its capital. Mexico reiterates its
firm conviction that a political and peaceful solution to
the conflict must take place through direct negotiations
without preconditions between the parties that resolve
the substantive issues, including the final status
of Jerusalem.
Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic fully supports the common European Union
position on Jerusalem, as articulated in the most recent
statement by the European Council. Nevertheless,
we decided to abstain in the voting today because,
in our view, resolution ES-10/19 does not contribute
to the Middle East peace process. On the contrary, it
contributes to widening the differences between both
sides — the Israelis and the Palestinians. The Czech
Republic firmly believes that it is important to reach
an outcome regarding the issue of Jerusalem at the
negotiating table.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia has
already expressed its position on the status of Jerusalem
and has not changed it. The status of Jerusalem is
one of the most important issues on the international
agenda and should be determined through negotiations
within the context of solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict that are acceptable to the parties. That could
pave the way for the establishment of lasting peace
and security.
Jerusalem has a centuries-old Armenian presence
and rich Armenian historical and cultural heritage.
The Armenian Apostolic Church is one of the major
guardians of Christian holy sites. We are therefore
attentively following all developments with regard
to Jerusalem. We took note of the positions on
Jerusalem expressed earlier and recognize that they
do not prejudice the determination of its final status
through negotiations.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): The position of the
Hungarian Government has been consistent. Hungary
does not comment on the foreign-policy decisions of
the United States Administration. The position of the

17-4586121/22

A/ES-10/PV.37

Hungarian Government regarding the Middle East
peace process remains unchanged.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): Latvia’s position remains
unchanged. Latvia believes that peace in the Middle
East can be achieved through the two-State solution
to be realized through Israeli-Palestinian talks, while
taking into account the interests of both sides. Latvia
believes that the status of Jerusalem must be decided
through direct talks, and Jerusalem must become the
capital of the two States. Within the European Union

22/22

21/12/2017

(EU), Latvia, together with other EU member States
and institutions, will pursue an active dialogue in order
to find a positive outcome to the Middle East process. It
is important not to escalate tensions in the political and
security situation in the region. Latvia does not believe
that resolution ES-10/19 will contribute to determining
the status of Jerusalem, and therefore abstained in
the voting.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

17-45861
