S/PV.8419

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8419th meeting

Wednesday, 12 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ndong Mangue
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Albanai
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (S/2018/1059)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43363 (E)
*1843363*

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (S/2018/1059)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Serge
Christiane, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1059, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms.
La
Lime
(spoke
in
French):
I
thank
you,
Mr.
President,
for
this
opportunity
to
brief
the
Security
Council
on the situation in Haiti for the first time since I took office
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1059), which was transmitted to the members
of the Security Council on 28 November, provides an
update and analysis of developments pertaining to the
political situation, the operating environment in Haiti
and the efforts of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to implement its
mandate. My briefing will focus on the most important
points covered by the report and some of the major
events that have occurred since its publication.
(spoke in English)
The political crisis triggered by the violent
demonstrations in July has been exacerbated by
2/19

12/12/2018

numerous allegations of mismanagement of public
funds by the Government. Despite the appointment in
September of a new Cabinet led by Prime Minister JeanHenry Céant, tensions grew further as the population
continued to demand improved governance and
accountability, and as elements of the opposition called
for the resignation of President Moïse. While there
were some tense moments during the demonstrations
of 17 October and 18 November, the Haitian National
Police (HNP) showed professionalism in its handling of
large crowds simultaneously — even during the smaller,
but somewhat more violent, protests of 18 November,
which were followed by a two-day general strike that
paralysed the country.
Since then, however, calls from the opposition
for new protests have failed to garner much popular
support. Concurrently, there were worrying episodes of
violence in some of the most notorious neighbourhoods
of Port-au-Prince, areas where State authority is limited.
Investigations by both the authorities and human rights
organizations are ongoing, while our human rights
service is also working to determine what happened.
It is against that backdrop that MINUJUSTH
strives to implement its mandate. Even though progress
has been slow, the visuals before the Council show
the incremental, yet positive, impact that the Mission
has had on reinforcing rule-of-law institutions,
increasing the capacity of the Haitian National Police
and promoting human rights in Haiti. At the request of
the Prime Minister, we established a joint commission
composed of his advisers and MINUJUSTH staff, with
the participation of other United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, to remove several bottlenecks
in the implementation of MINUJUSTH’s mandate
and to provide a technical forum for transition-related
issues. The joint commission has already met three
times in constructive dialogue. The law on the creation,
organization and functioning of the National Council
on Legal Aid was finally promulgated on 26 October,
after months of discussion. If fully implemented, it
will greatly contribute to alleviating the protracted
phenomenon of prison overcrowding. Likewise,
following a series of nominations made in the fall by
the executive branch, we now estimate that only an
additional 60 to 70 judges are required for the tribunals
in the country’s 18 jurisdictions to operate at capacity.
The work undertaken by MINUJUSTH to increase
the capacity of human rights actors in the country is
also yielding results. The fact that the Government
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

now has a dedicated ministerial-level focal point for
human rights indicates Haiti’s readiness to engage with
international human rights bodies and to prepare a
national action plan. Another encouraging development
is that the Office of the Ombudsperson for Human
Rights is slowly increasing its presence outside of PortAu-Prince. In that connection, the space for human
rights organizations to operate in a more conducive
environment is expanding.
However, much remains to be done. Successful
pilot projects, such as the one that brings together the
principal actors in the penal chain to directly tackle
the problem of pre-trial detention in the jurisdiction of
Port-Au-Prince, must now be replicated throughout the
country. The inspection mechanisms in the judiciary
need to be made more robust in order to increase the rate
at which cases are adjudicated by judges. The issue of
gang violence, endemic to a number of neighbourhoods
of the Port-Au-Prince metropolitan area, must be
addressed in a systemic manner to avoid the types of
worrisome episodes that have occurred in recent weeks.
In that respect, the executive branch and the Haitian
National Police recently committed to increasing their
engagement in order to find sustainable solutions to
that problem.
A more assiduous and focused Parliament will
be required to pass essential legislation, such as the
organic law on the Haitian National Police, a new
criminal code and a new code of criminal procedure.
Finally, it would behove not only on the Government
of Haiti but also the international community to fulfil
their commitment to fully fund the five-year strategic
development plan of the HNP so as to ensure the
continued build-up of human, logistical and material
capacity of that institution. MINUJUSTH will focus
on fulfilling those objectives in the coming months, a
period during which the country is expected to prepare
for and hold constitutionally mandated parliamentary
and municipal elections. Following a request by Haitian
authorities, a needs assessment mission was recently
deployed to Port-au-Prince to determine the extent to
which United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
would be able to provide technical assistance and
logistical support to the process.
While the totality of the benchmarks will not
be achieved by 15 October 2019, with careful and
responsible planning all options for the reconfiguration
of the United Nations presence in Haiti are still
feasible. Close collaboration with the Government and

S/PV. 8419

its partners will be essential to achieve a successful
transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in the country. I am pleased to report that,
in accordance with resolution 2410 (2018), this month
MINUJUSTH will be reducing the footprint of its
formed police units (FPUs) from seven to five. The
Bangladesh FPU, currently stationed in Miragoâne, and
the India 1 FPU, based in Port-au-Prince, ceased their
activities on 1 December and will have left Haiti by the
end of this year. Their departure is accompanied by a
series of measures to ensure civilian populations do not
experience a decrease in security. The Rwanda FPU,
currently stationed in Jérémie, will be relocated to
Miragoâne, thereby giving it easier access to the entire
south-west region, as well as to Port-au-Prince. The
progressive withdrawal of the two FPUs is being offset
by a redeployment of HNP forces to the affected areas.
The departure of the other formed police units, which
has been planned for in an updated security transition
plan, will take place in 2019 if conditions permit.
The success of the MINUJUSTH’s efforts,
however, is conditional on the good functioning of the
Government. That is why in the past weeks I have used
the good offices of the Secretary-General to reach out to
the President and the Prime Minister, as well as leaders
from across the political spectrum and key players
of the private sector, to advocate for a de-escalation
of current tensions and respect for the constitutional
order. I am encouraged by the initial signals sent out
by the Moïse-Céant Administration to start a genuine
dialogue with the political opposition and civil society,
while also launching a number of social appeasement
initiatives to address popular grievances.
Let me conclude by saying that the country’s
current context is laden with challenges, but also hope.
The popular call for greater accountability in the use of
public funds provides a clear sign of the strength and
vibrancy of Haitian civil society, and of its desire to
actively participate in shaping the future of Haiti. The
prompt and efficient response of the Government to the
6 October earthquake, which struck the northern part of
the country, demonstrates the true capacity for action
of the Haitian State when it is united. It is therefore
important that we collectively assist the country in
emerging from the current political impasse. Through a
constructive and peaceful dialogue, the democratically
elected Government of Haiti could set the stage for
the next cycle of elections and continue to implement
programmes that will improve the lives of its citizens.

18-433633/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

12/12/2018

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. La
Lime for her briefing.

United States support, the HNP has grown from a force
of 6,000 in 2010 to more than 15,000 in 2018.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

Twelve months into the projected two-year
lifespan of MINUJUSTH, the Mission — together
with international partners, including the United
States — has helped build Haiti’s security and justice
sector capacities. Furthermore, the Haitian Government
has advanced key justice sector legislation, reinforced
Haitian National Police crowd-control capabilities
and made progress towards addressing international
human rights concerns. However, progress is not
even across all benchmarks and more needs to be
done, particularly on strengthening rule-of-law and
anti-corruption institutions. Other challenges include
renewing judicial mandates, filling vacant Supreme
Court seats, strengthening judicial oversight to combat
impunity and establishing a permanent electoral
council. We expect MINUJUSTH to continue its work
with Haiti to achieve the necessary progress that will
permit it to transition to a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence by October 2019. We are optimistic
that benchmarks to complete a peacekeeping mission
can be achieved by the end of MINUJUSTH’s projected
lifespan. Work on other benchmarks may be continued
after its drawdown.

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative La Lime for her briefing and
for being with us today. We appreciate the update on
the efforts of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and its preparation
for a successful drawdown of operations by October
2019. We also always appreciate the excellent handouts,
which give us a very good graphic representation of the
progress that is being made in the Mission.
Let me start by expressing our support to the people
of Haiti, who faced a volatile security situation over
the past several weeks. We extend our condolences to
the families and friends of the victims, including the
Haitian National Police (HNP) and customs officers
who perished in the line of duty. We support the rights of
individuals to freely express themselves and peacefully
protest, but we condemn acts of violence. The United
States encourages meaningful dialogue to address
points of disagreement and find lasting solutions
without violence. We urge all parties and leaders to
work together to move the political dialogue forward in
ways that advance the interests and aspirations of the
Haitian people.
The United States will continue to support the goal
of a safer, prosperous future for all Haitians. However,
change must come from the ballot box. We know that
Haiti is preparing for legislative and local elections next
year. Elections can take place only in a climate of peace,
tranquillity and transparency and in accordance with
Haitian law. Haiti must adhere to the electoral timetable,
or risk further instability. We also commend the
professionalism demonstrated by the Haitian National
Police in maintaining security and preserving public
order during the demonstrations on 18 and 23 November,
and in the days before and after. However, for the sake
of transparency and accountability, we call on the HNP
General Inspectorate to investigate all allegations of
human rights abuses. That will further strengthen the
HNP’s ability to carry out its vital mission. The future of
Haiti’s security depends on well-trained and adequately
resourced police. As such, since 2010, the United States
has invested more than $250 million to increase the
size and professionalism of the HNP through training,
equipment and infrastructure. As a direct result of
4/19

This is the time to start planning the transition. We
look forward to the strategic assessment report due by
1 March 2019. In order for MINUJUSTH’s drawdown
to succeed, it will require fine-tuned coordination, the
full transition of responsibility to Haitian authorities
and the planning of legislative elections. The United
Nations will continue to play a role in Haiti, but a
peacekeeping operation under chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations will not be necessary
after October 2019. Until then, continued efforts from
MINUJUSTH and the Government of Haiti are essential
to achieve the Mission’s benchmarks and the common
goal of a safer, more secure and prosperous country for
all Haitians.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
informative briefing on the most recent events in Haiti
and on the activities of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Haiti.
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

Bolivia expresses its condolences for the loss of
life during the earthquake that struck the island on
6 October. We hope that the affected population can
recover quickly from that unfortunate event. In that
regard, we commend the humanitarian agencies of the
United Nations and MINUJUSTH for their support to
the Haitian Government following that event.
Given recent events, we believe Haiti must work
towards dialogue and political consensus to allow
it to overcome its current obstacles and boost its
economic development. We reiterate our commitment
to that brotherly country and call upon the international
community to continue its efforts to confront the
current challenges, mainly related to the security sector,
the rule of law and development. That support must
be carried out in close consultation and coordination
with the Haitian Government, in strict respect for its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Similarly, we commend the progress in the areas
I just mentioned, in particular with regard to the law
for the creation, organization and functioning of the
National Council on Legal Aid, enacted on 26 October,
which is an important milestone for reducing pretrial
detention, thereby easing overcrowding in Haiti’s jails.
We encourage the Government to take the necessary
measures for its implementation. Additionally, we urge
them to avoid delays in the appointment of judges so
as to preserve the rule of law and avoid overcrowding.
We also welcome the fact that the Haitian
Government has completed the evaluation phase of the
population and housing census, which will provide the
necessary information for putting in place sustainable
policies that will help it eradicate extreme poverty
and meet the challenge of achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. We reiterate that doing so requires
that external cooperation be better aligned with
Government priorities, keeping in mind the scope of
those Goals and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
Similarly, it is important to strengthen State
capacities to cope with natural disasters. In that regard,
we commend humanitarian actors such as UNICEF, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination Team for their coordinated assistance.
We call on the international community and donors
to provide financial support to consolidate the
humanitarian response plan.

S/PV. 8419

We appreciate the progress made in the fight
against cholera through the Secretary-General’s new
approach, and we welcome the Organization’s continued
support to the Haitian authorities to help combat this
epidemic under the framework of the National Plan
for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti. We stress that
the Organization and its Members bear the collective
responsibility for eradicating that disease. In that
connection, we reiterate our call to the international
community to work and comply with its commitments
and to cooperate with the Republic of Haiti to build
robust sanitation and health systems. Cholera continues
to be a central problem that affects not only sanitation
and access to water but all areas of development and
stability in Haiti.
With regard to the progress on reaching the
benchmarks, we reiterate that work to that end must be
carried out in strict compliance with MINUJUSTH’s
mandate in the areas of the rule of law and security,
in accordance with resolution 2350 (2017), in order to
consolidate stability in the country and make progress
towards sustainable development.
We commend the Mission’s work on the community
violence-reduction programme, which involves at-risk
women and youth in activities that give them the tools
and training to generate revenue, while also fostering
community dialogue. We encourage the Mission
to continue that work, which has proven useful in
reducing crime.
Moreover, we welcome the support provided to
Government institutions in the areas of justice, human
rights and security, and commend the Mission’s work
in assisting victims of sexual abuse and exploitation.
We encourage MINUJUSTH to continue those efforts
and, in line with the zero-tolerance principle, we
urge that the people responsible for those crimes be
punished accordingly.
Finally, we stress that there can be no development
without peace or peace without development. As such,
we believe that the international community should join
forces and enhance synergies with the Government in
the framework of the MINUJUSTH mandate.
As this is my delegation’s last statement on this
issue as an elected, non-permanent member of the
Security Council, I would like to underscore that the
situation in Haiti — as described by various officials as
well as by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral — is clearly not a threat to international peace

18-433635/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

12/12/2018

and security. Therefore, it will no longer the purview
of the Security Council following the planned closure
of MINUJUSTH.

and material damage. In that regard, I extend our
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Haiti for the victims.

Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her valuable briefing
regarding developments of the situation in Haiti as well
as the role of MINUJUSTH. I would like to focus on
three key aspects concerning our topic today, namely,
political, humanitarian and security aspects.

We have also followed up on the progress
achieved to address the cholera epidemic. The United
Nation continues to support the Haitian authorities in
implementing the national plan to eradicate the cholera
epidemic. Both the authorities and the United Nations
must continue their efforts until the epidemic is fully
eradicated as planned.

We followed with concern the demonstrations
and protests that took place in October and November
following two reports by the Senate in Haiti regarding
mismanagement of the PetroCaribe Fund. The
protesters called for fighting corruption and improving
social services. Although those demonstrations led to
several deaths and many wounded, the Haitian National
Police demonstrated professionalism and succeeded in
preventing vandalism, which could have led to more
civilian casualties.
We support the measures taken by Government
authorities under the leadership of President Moïse to
meet the demands of the protesters. That resulted in
the dismissal of many Government advisers and the
setting up an independent committee with the purpose
of overseeing investigations relating to corruption.
The Parliament recently adopted a revised general
budget law for the period 2017-2018, following the
reinstatement of fuel subsidies. The Parliament also
adopted a law establishing the National Council on
Legal Aid. Despite the importance of those two laws,
the present legislative activity of the Parliament has
not yet risen to the aspirations of the Haitian people
vis-à-vis the creation of an integrated legal environment
that enables national institutions to shoulder their
full responsibilities.
During our previous meeting on Haiti (see
S/PV.8342) I addressed several issues that could
improve the humanitarian situation, including
providing capacity-building for national institutions
to increase their effectiveness in addressing natural
disasters. Accordingly, we view the determination
of the Haitian Government to establish a standing
mechanism for crisis management as a positive step
in that direction, especially after the earthquake that
struck northern parts of the country and led to human
6/19

Expediting the implementation of judicial reforms
will help reduce pretrial detention rates, thereby also
decreasing overcrowding in prison facilities and
improving the humanitarian situation.
The Haitian National Police demonstrated
competence in dealing with the many demonstrations
that took place recently in various parts of the country.
The ongoing reduction in the crime rate is further proof
of the competence of the police despite an increase
in the challenges they face, including the presence
of various armed groups and gangs that jeopardize
citizen safety and security and negatively impact
upon the steady improvement in security throughout
the country. It is therefore imperative to proceed with
the implementation of the strategic development plan
for the Haitian National Police, notwithstanding the
difficulties that obstruct its implementation, including
scarcity of the financial resources needed to safeguard
the success achieved on the security front.
I would like to commend the efforts made by
MINUJUSTH, especially those related to implementing
the exit strategy according to its mandate when it was
established, despite the difficulties facing the various
benchmarks for implementing the exit strategy. Finally,
we reiterate our gratitude to Ms. La Lime and extend
our full support to her and the Mission.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Helen Meagher La
Lime, for her briefing on the situation in Haiti and the
work of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We are now approaching the transition period at
the end of which the United Nations and Haiti will
open a new chapter in their history, one that will be
written outside the peacekeeping framework. In that
regard, France welcomes the progress made in the
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

training of the Haitian National Police. A total of more
than 15,000 officers have been trained, demonstrating
their professionalism during the frequently violent
demonstrations of recent months.
MINUJUSTH’s contribution to the country’s
stability since it was established, a little over a year
ago, has been crucial, including its support for
strengthening the rule of law, police training and the
good offices provided by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. However, the volatility in
recent months also highlights how fragile the situation
in Haiti remains. In that context, and in the run-up to
the withdrawal of MINUJUSTH, I would like to focus
today on three points.
First, all political actors must fully commit
themselves, as appropriate and in conjunction with the
Special Representative’s good offices, to strengthening
the rule of law in Haiti and responsibly defending the
interests of the Haitian people. The adoption of the legal
aid law and Haiti’s accession to the Convention relating
to the Status of Stateless Persons should be welcomed
as encouraging steps. However, much remains to be
done to strengthen the legislative framework necessary
to protect the rights of Haitian citizens and ensure
an independent and impartial judiciary. An inclusive
political dialogue is needed to reach agreement and ease
tensions. France supports the efforts made to that end
by the Prime Minister, on behalf of the Head of State.
While the efforts of the authorities and the
mobilization of the population in favour of the
development of a State governed by the rule of law are
real, we nevertheless condemn in the strongest terms
the use or threat of the use of violence. In its press
release issued of 2 November, the core group on Haiti
recalled
“the democratic legitimacy of the Government
of Haiti and that in a democracy, change must be
through the ballot box and not through violence.”
We deplore the loss of human lives caused by
that violence.
My second point focuses on the essential reforms
needed to move towards sustainable prosperity and
entrench democracy in Haiti. At times we hear voices
that defend the idea that economic goals should take
priority over the legitimate demands of the people,
including when they fight for their fundamental rights
and against impunity. That is a false dichotomy. In the

S/PV. 8419

current context, stability in Haiti and, by extension, its
prosperity, now depends more than ever on strengthening
its judicial institutions, providing greater access to
social services and improving detention conditions in
prison facilities, where there is still work to be done.
Dealing with corruption, which is an issue often
condemned at the highest level, must be a major part
of the various reforms that are crucial to the country’s
recovery. France encourages the Haitian authorities to
ensure that the management of public funds is entirely
transparent and do their utmost to see that justice is
served, particularly where the PetroCaribe affair is
concerned. The sense of impunity must be addressed
with determination in the courts.
Thirdly and lastly, France attaches tremendous
importance to the vibrancy of Haitian democracy, and
in that regard welcomes the commitments made in
preparation for the holding of legislative and senate
elections in October 2019, in particular the request
for election assistance from the United Nations.
Haiti’s ability to ensure that its elections are held in
accordance with its published calendar will increase
the Government’s credibility. We therefore hope
that the elections will be held as scheduled, and that
the preparations for them will be conducted in the
best conditions possible and with the support of the
international community. All the relevant political
actors must take advantage of the elections to launch a
dialogue with civil society that takes into account the
aspirations of the people.
It is our collective responsibility to help the Haitian
authorities prepare for MINUJUSTH’s withdrawal
next October in order to ensure a smooth transition.
That is why we must meanwhile redouble our efforts
to strengthen the rule of law and democracy in Haiti.
Haiti can depend on France’s support. My country
rejects in the strongest terms any violence aimed at
destabilizing the country. It is up to Haiti’s leaders
from its three branches of Government and across the
political spectrum to meet the crucial challenges faced
by Haitian society, particularly its young people, and
to strengthen democracy and the rule of law so as to
ensure stability and a decent standard of living for all.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for her update today and for the charts reflecting
the mandate implementation dashboard, which really
help to illustrate the progress on the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti

18-433637/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

(MINUJUSTH) and on her work in Haiti. Let me also
take this opportunity to thank MINUJUSTH as a whole
for its committed work for Haiti and for its people.
Sweden commends Haiti for the progress made in
consolidating democracy and stability over the past
two years. We are hopeful that it will continue to make
progress throughout the elections in 2019 and beyond.
The past few months have shown that there is a need
for renewed, broad-based political support for reforms.
Accountability must be a key component in delivering
on the priorities that the President and his Government
have set out. The rule of law and respect for human
rights, and improvements in economic development,
infrastructure, resilience and security are also important
factors in Haiti’s ability to further advance on its path
to long-term stability. The benchmarks presented in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1059) will help focus
efforts to support those goals. It is crucial to ensure
an integrated rule-of-law approach that encompasses
the whole justice chain, from police and corrections to
prosecution and courts, and with adequate capacity. The
Haitian National Police have made good progress. We
also welcome the appointment of a delegate minister
for human rights. Other Haitian authorities, with the
support of MINUJUSTH, now need to make similar
progress in the areas of the judiciary and corrections.
MINUJUSTH plays an important role and should
continue to fully integrate gender throughout its
mandate as a cross-cutting issue. That includes, not
least, establishing measures to increase security for
women, and assisting the Government in ensuring
women’s participation in political processes at every
level. We expect the upcoming strategic assessment
of the Mission to include gender expertise. We would
also like to underline the importance of efforts to
strengthen the prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse in the Mission. We need to continue ensuring
that alleged cases of sexual exploitation and abuse are
reported and investigated, and that all necessary steps
are taken to apply disciplinary measures and undertake
criminal prosecutions to hold perpetrators accountable.
The Secretary-General’s new approach to eradicating
cholera and building resilience in Haiti should also be
supported. We were happy to be a sponsor of General
Assembly resolution 71/161B in that regard. Sweden
has supported the United Nations-Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund and encourages
others to contribute.
8/19

12/12/2018

Next year’s elections in Haiti will be crucial. We
encourage the Haitian authorities to swiftly adopt
the new electoral law and take all other necessary
steps. Needless to say, we welcome the Government’s
commitment to ensuring that the elections are held,
as scheduled. Credible, transparent and inclusive
elections will be a decisive factor for the country’s
long-term stability.
MINUJUSTH is one of the first missions making
a transition from traditional peacekeeping in the era
of sustaining peace. The Peacebuilding Commission
could provide a useful platform that can be explored in
that regard. A successful transition would be important
for Haitians first and foremost, but would also serve
as an example for the United Nations system. The
international community must remain committed to
supporting Haiti as it moves forward on its path towards
peace and prosperity for its people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing on the situation in Haiti and the work of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.
In our view, the second of the series of quarterly
reports (S/2018/1059) mandated by resolution 2410
(2018) is a remarkably objective reflection of a complex
situation in a critical period for the country. The closer
we get to the time when the Council must consider
the issue of the Mission’s closure, the more frequently
Haiti and its people are encountering challenges
that they will soon have to deal with by themselves
and take national ownership of. The already very
fragile security situation has been subjected to new
stresses. The mass protests, which reached a peak on
17 October and again on 18 November, emphasized that
resolving any of the issues between the people and the
Government must be done through direct, constructive
and, most importantly, peaceful dialogue, and strictly
within the framework of Haiti’s legal arena. We believe
that its citizens’ inalienable right to peaceful assembly
and freedom of expression must be exercised solely in
compliance with their national legislation. We support
our colleagues who have urged the demonstrators to
respect the law and refrain from violence or action that
undermines Haiti’s stability and social order. We hope
that our Security Council partners will take a similar
position on all such situations, wherever they may
happen to take place.
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

We are pleased with the report’s positive
assessment of the process of transferring responsibility
to the Haitian National Police. We were interested in
the description of the fact that the work of dealing
with the mass protests enabled the police to display
the professional skills they have gained. While those
complimentary assessments give rise to optimism, we
were surprised that the report made reference in that
regard to some so-called international stakeholders who
remain nameless. We would like to see the SecretaryGeneral’s own assessments in his reports, based on
information provided by the Mission. We cannot ignore
a statement in the section of the report on human
rights to the effect that during the reporting period the
Mission cited 15 violations allegedly committed by the
police. In every instance, for example in paragraph
56, there are references to allegations of the excessive
use of force by police officers. We want to stress that
this wording is too vague for a report on an issue as
critical as human rights. We would like to point out
that in April (see S/PV.8226), our American colleagues
insisted that resolution 2410 (2018) should apply
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations to the Mission’s entire mandate, which
undermined the Council’s long-standing consensus
on Haiti. Was that really done so that we now have to
discuss certain proposals?
We are extremely alarmed by the report’s
assessments of the rapidly deteriorating economic and
humanitarian situation. The plight of a significant part
of the population is being compounded by continuing
outbreaks of cholera, while only 11 per cent of this
year’s humanitarian response plan has been funded. On
top of that, the earthquake that occurred on 6 October
resulted in 18 deaths and has either destroyed or
damaged around 11,000 homes.
In these exceedingly difficult circumstances, the
Government, led by President Jovenel Moïse, has made
serious efforts to make progress in accordance with the
Secretary-General’s benchmarks, including in the areas
of political reform, security, the strengthening of the
judicial system and, of course, the police. However, we
believe that it is crucial to ensure that the legislative,
executive and judicial branches of the authorities work
together. Needless to say, neither can the international
community remain indifferent. It must help the
Government and the people of Haiti to establish their
national ownership of post-conflict peacebuilding. The
United Nations staff still have a great deal to do in their

S/PV. 8419

task of providing the Haitian authorities with as much
assistance as possible.
Russia supports Port-au-Prince and will continue to
work to ensure that the Security Council’s efforts will
result in genuinely normalizing the situation in Haiti
and strengthening its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting, and Special Representative La Lime
for her briefing.
The recent political situation in Haiti has been
marked by instability, with demonstrations and violence
occurring in various parts of the country. The security
situation therefore remains fragile. Meanwhile, the
economic situation and people’s livelihoods in Haiti are
in urgent need of improvement. In addition, the cholera
epidemic and the grim humanitarian situation persist.
China takes note that in his latest report (S/2018/1059)
to the Security Council, the Secretary-General calls
on the Haitian Government to pay more attention to its
people’s demands and take concrete action to address
corruption. China urges the Haitian Government to take
a more serious attitude to engaging in political dialogue
with all parties in the country with a view to properly
resolving their differences through consultations.
The international community should continue
to increase its focus on the political, economic and
humanitarian situation in Haiti and help the country
maintain national stability, promote economic
development, improve its people’s livelihoods
and implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. China appreciates the recent efforts
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General La Lime, and supports MINUJUSTH
and the United Nations country team in continuing to
provide justice support to Haiti in accordance with
their mandates to help the Government strengthen its
legislative and judicial functions and strengthen the
capacity of the Haitian National police with a view
to enabling the Government to effectively assume the
responsibility of maintaining the country’s security and
stability. The Haitian Government should continue to
strengthen coordination with the United Nations and
cooperate with the United Nations in the work needed
to achieve MINUJUSTH’s exit strategy.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands)
(spoke in French): I would first like to thank Special

18-433639/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

Representative Helen La Lime for her efforts on behalf
of Haiti and for her first briefing to the Council.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
We are following the situation in Haiti with
particular attention. Three of the four countries that
make up our Kingdom are located in the Caribbean,
including Sint Maarten, a neighbour of Haiti, and the
Prime Minister of Sint Maarten, Ms. Marlin-Romeo,
addressed the Council during our September meeting
on Haiti (see S/PV.8342). We have been encouraged by
the positive path that Haiti has taken with the support of
the United Nations and the international community in
the past few years. It is now at a crossroads where it is
essential to consolidate and develop the gains made so
far. Today I would like to address three issues — threats
to political stability, the establishment of the rule of law
and prospects for the future.
In recent months, many Haitians have protested
about the Government authorities’ lack of control and
accountability. The Government must take its citizens’
grievances seriously. At the same time, it is important
that all political stakeholders engage constructively
and act in the interests of the Haitian people, while
respecting democratic institutions. We are concerned
about the violence that has occurred during some of
the demonstrations, partly provoked and committed by
armed gangs. Such acts are unacceptable and undermine
the fragile political situation in Haiti.
Those developments underscore the importance of
improving the efforts to achieve the benchmarks outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1054)
for consolidating the rule of law. In the past few years
Haiti has made significant progress in establishing
the rule of law in a challenging environment. The
progress of the national police in terms of its capacity
and professionalism, which has been reflected in its
management of the recent mass demonstrations and
in the increase in its numbers of female officers, is
a positive example in that regard. The achievement
of several of the established goals therefore seems
within reach. We also welcome the recent appointment
of a delegate minister for human rights, who will be
responsible for the speedy development of a national
human rights action plan.
Despite the progress in those areas, it is clear that
we have to step on the gas. In that regard, we welcomed
10/19

12/12/2018

the establishment of the joint commission. In order to
meet the goals of MINUJUSTH’s exit strategy, it will
be vital to adopt and implement legislative reforms
in a number of key areas quickly and effectively.
The country must redouble its efforts to address the
major problems of overcrowded prisons, prolonged
pretrial detention, corruption and the lack of control
and accountability in the public sector, including the
police. That requires a total political commitment and
the allocation of adequate financial resources.
That brings me to my last point, on prospects for the
future. The rule of law must be consolidated in order
to strengthen the people’s trust in the justice system
and promote sustainable peace and development. The
efforts in that regard must be redoubled to enable the
transition from MINUJUSTH to another form of United
Nations presence to take place next year. Developments
in the coming months will inform the debate on the
form that such a presence might take. To that end, it
will be necessary to assess the risk of destabilization,
with a view to ensuring the peaceful holding of
elections in October. We look forward to the strategic
assessment that should guide that debate. Whatever
form the transition eventually takes, it will be crucial
for the Haitian Government, the Mission and the United
Nations country team to maintain close cooperation.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
firmly supports the aspirations of the Haitian people to
achieve peace, justice and development. The conditions
necessary for achieving that goal are clear. They are
the strengthening of the rule of law, including through
increased police, judicial and prison capacity, the rapid
implementation of priority measures and respect for
human rights. The Haitian Government must take full
advantage of the presence of MINUJUSTH to make
progress along that path. For its part, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands will continue to support the engagement of
the United Nations in Haiti.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her briefing,
and in particular for the mandate-implementation
benchmarks dashboard of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which is
very useful and helpful. I hope that we will see similar
dashboards for other United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the future.
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

It is now approximately 18 months since the
Security Council visited Haiti under the leadership
of the Permanent Representative of Bolivia, and it is
encouraging to hear that progress has been made in
a number of areas. The United Kingdom continues to
appreciate the work of MINUJUSTH and its support
for the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule of
law and further develop the capacities of the Haitian
National Police. I also wish to recognize the efforts of
President Moïse to finding a constructive solution to
the recent tensions. It is clear that the situation on the
ground remains fragile. I will limit my statement to
three main points.
First, with regard to the progress made against
the benchmarks, I want to specifically acknowledge
some of the important milestones reached. The United
Kingdom has been greatly encouraged by the progress
made, ranging from the promulgation and roll out of
the legal aid law to the recent graduation of 692 police
cadets and an increase in the number of women police,
which is now close to the benchmark’s target. Both
MINUJUSTH and the Government of Haiti can justly
celebrate those successes.
However, progress is still needed in critical
areas. With legislative elections on the horizon, the
promulgation by Parliament of the draft electoral
law — already highlighted today by the representatives
of France and Sweden — remains vital, as does the
reconstitution of the permanent electoral council and the
updating of the electoral roll. If the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police is to be sustained, then
its oversight and accountability mechanisms need to be
properly functional. That is paramount to increasing the
trust between the State and the Haitian people in order
to cement the social contract. And if Haitian rule-oflaw institutions as a whole are to stand up effectively
and turn new laws into a better reality, then budgets and
implementation plans need to be finalized.
Secondly, if political and security efforts to build
peace are to succeed, they will need to be accompanied
by efforts to address the structural issues that have
exacerbated or sustained the grievances of the Haitian
people, including with regard to economic opportunities
and access to basic services. Dialogue at all levels is
essential, and the United Kingdom encourages the
Haitian Government, together with its international
partners, to intensify dialogue among all stakeholders,
including the private sector and civil society, in order
to reach greater consensus on shared peacebuilding

S/PV. 8419

priorities, including the adoption of measures that can
respond to the immediate needs of people and minimize
the risk of destabilization or relapse into violence.
Thirdly, and finally, with regard to the MINUJUSTH
transition, I want to say, quite simply, that it is critical
that we all get this right. We now have a little more
than nine months before MINUJUSTH is expected to
leave Haiti and be succeeded by a non-peacekeeping
United Nations presence. As others have already said
today, Haitian ownership and the delivery of critical
reforms are essential for the transition to be a success.
I was encouraged to note in the report (S/2018/1059)
the establishment of a joint commission by the Haitian
Prime Minister and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. It is vital that all parties now
intensify their efforts to ensure that the benchmarks
are met.
I was also encouraged to learn that efforts are being
stepped up with regard to the MINUJUSTH-United
Nations Development Programme joint rule of law
programme and its sustainability in the post-peacekeeping
phase. The United Kingdom would welcome similar
efforts to ensure the sustainability of MINUJUSTH’s
community violence-reduction programme.
With the United Nations strategic assessment
process now under way, we look forward to engaging
closely with all stakeholders on how to make that
transition a success. We continue to urge the SecretaryGeneral to be realistic and clear about the division of
responsibilities across the United Nations system and
to support the United Nations to fill the gaps identified
in the capacities and capabilities of the United Nations
country team, which is key to a successful transition.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her
informative briefing and dedicated service as Head of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).
Poland associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
In recognizing Haitian efforts to ensuring the
stability of the Government and the prosperity of its
people, I must underline our concerns about the ongoing
fragility of the situation. The violent events that took
place in October and November in Port-au-Prince and
other cities in Haiti reflect the ongoing volatility of

18-4336311/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

the situation faced by the Haitian people. We further
reiterate our call on all parties to abstain from the
use of violence in trying to achieve political goals, as
well as to respect the rule of law and continue efforts
to find a consensual solution to the problems faced
by the country. Poland encourages the Government
of Haiti to continue undertaking concrete actions
to address the demands of the population, including
through a constructive dialogue with civil society and
the opposition. Such dialogue should result in the longterm stability of the country.
Let me underline that we fully agree with
the observation in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1059) that the holding of elections in 2019
will be a significant milestone in stabilizing Haiti.
We recognize and support the Government’s request
for electoral assistance from the United Nations. In
that spirit, Poland encourages Haiti to strengthen
good governance, build up public confidence in
national institutions and promote private investment,
as those measures are critical to fostering sustainable
development and ultimately achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Turning to the presence of MINUJUSTH in Haiti,
we believe that a smooth and effective transition to a
non-peacekeeping presence is possible only through the
sustained efforts of Haiti’s leaders and people, with the
support of MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country
team and the wider international community. We
welcome the continued contribution of MINUJUSTH
to ensuring public security by providing capacitybuilding services to the Haitian National Police,
including operational support and equipment. We note
the positive role of MINUJUSTH in the improvement of
the Haitian justice system. However, durable solutions
will emerge only if the justice sector is reformed along
the lines established by resolutions 2350 (2017) and
2410 (2018).
The fragile political and economic situation
amplifies the conditions in which human rights
are exposed to the risk of abuse and violation. The
persistent problems of prison overcrowding and gang
activity only add obstacles to the malfunctioning
justice system. We therefore believe that paying special
attention to ensuring respect for human rights in the
work of the security forces and correction officers, as
well as impartial justice for all, is truly essential. The
Secretary-General’s report shows that much remains to
be done to achieve the objectives of MINUJUSTH’s exit
12/19

12/12/2018

strategy. Efforts must be multiplied to ensure that the
benchmarks are reached. Bearing in mind the fragility
of the situation and the vastness of work to be done, we
believe that the presence of the United Nations in Haiti
should not be withdrawn excessively or too early.
In conclusion, I would like to underline our
continued support for the Government of Haiti and
efforts towards a non-peacekeeping presence in
the country. Democratic transitions can be difficult, but
we believe that, with determination and the constructive
engagement of the international community, Haiti will
enjoy a stable, secure and democratic future.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2018/1059) pursuant to
resolution 2410 (2018). We are grateful to Special
Representative Ms. Helen La Lime for her briefing on
the latest situation in Haiti and the activities related to
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).
We note the socioeconomic difficulties that Haiti
continues to face, and we agree with the SecretaryGeneral that there is a need to find a consensual
solution to some of these difficult challenges, within the
framework of the existing constitutional dispensation.
We believe that strengthening the rule of law and
democratic institutions, ensuring political stability
and improving socioeconomic conditions are the key
elements needed to achieve greater security, stability
and future prosperity in Haiti. It is essential that actors
from across the political spectrum and from all branches
of Government work together for the common good.
We welcome the commitment of the Haitian
Government to hold the 2019 elections on schedule.
The provision of electoral assistance by the United
Nations remains significant, as the elections will be a
crucial milestone for the stability of the country. The
swift adoption of the electoral law will pave the way
for credible, timely and inclusive elections. All political
actors should be encouraged to engage in a constructive
dialogue towards peaceful elections. We would also
like to commend the Haitian National Police for their
professionalism and the manner in which they have
carried out their activities in a challenging environment.
Ethiopia recognizes the important contribution
of MINUJUSTH and we concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that much remains to be done to
ensure a smooth and effective transition of the Mission.
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment
to and solidarity with the people and the Government
of Haiti as they continue striving to consolidate the
progress made in recent years, and our confidence in the
Haitian people’s determination to persist and succeed
in their quest for stability, democracy and prosperity.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefing given by Ms. Helen La Lime. We
also wish to welcome the presence of Ambassador
Denis Regis, Permanent Representative of Haiti.
Peru has closely followed developments in
Haiti — a friendly country of our Latin American and
Caribbean region — and supports the vital role of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
in strengthening national institutions mandated to
guarantee security, the rule of law and human rights
in the country, in line with the targets and indicators
proposed by the Secretary-General to drawdown the
Mission in a sustainable manner.
The earthquake of 6 October reminded us of Haiti’s
high vulnerability to natural disasters. We reiterate
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Haiti in the wake of that tragedy. While acknowledging
the Government’s efforts to prevent the risks that such
disasters entail, including its fight against cholera
and food insecurity, we underscore the need for
the international community to continue providing
humanitarian aid to this country.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the lack of progress in key areas. The climate
of instability and social tensions make the work of the
Mission difficult. We are alarmed by the recurrence of
violent protests which, in recent months, have resulted
in the unfortunate loss of human life.
The strengthening of the operational capacities of
the Haitian National Police should be reflected in more
effective action against the proliferation of armed gangs.
It is necessary to prevent protests from degenerating
into episodes of violence. To that end, we highlight the
important programmes aimed at reducing community
violence and in particular the work of mobile teams and
the development of quick-impact projects. We consider
it important to incorporate the gender approach and
include youth in the design and implementation of such
projects, and to ensure their adequate funding.

S/PV. 8419

We believe that the implementation of the
strategic development plan for the police should
serve to strengthen respect for oversight procedures
and capacities and facilitate access to justice, when
appropriate. Reports of abuse and corruption among
bad apples in the police force must be duly investigated.
In that connection, we reiterate our concern about the
persistence of prolonged pre-trial detentions, as well as
prison overcrowding, which has led to an unacceptable
number of deaths in prison. We encourage the full
implementation of the law on legal aid and reiterate the
need to complement it with other essential pieces of
legislation that remain pending, including with respect
to the penal code, the code of criminal procedure
and the law on prisons. We also believe it necessary
to overcome problems within the Ministry of Justice
and appoint more judges in order to facilitate access
to justice.
The fight against corruption is a key element
in strengthening the rule of law and building the
confidence of the population in its institutions. In
this regard, we note the announcement to create an
independent commission to monitor the investigations
of the PetroCaribe case. We hope to have more
information on this in the next report.
Bearing in mind that the Mission’s withdrawal is
scheduled for 15 October 2019, coinciding with the
elections scheduled for that same month, we consider
it important to provide the required electoral assistance
and that the Haitian authorities move forward with the
adoption of the electoral law and updating the electoral
rolls. We also consider it important that the transition
take into account the evolution of security conditions
and the overall capacity of Haitian institutions to
guarantee stability. Even if the National Police is able
to maintain internal order without the support of the
Mission, the impact on the other areas of support must
be considered, particularly in the area of the rule of law.
We wish to highlight the important role played by
the Mission and the United Nations country team in
all of these pending tasks, as well as the coordination
role of the Secretariat in the framework of the reform
process of the Organization’s peace and security pillar.
In this context, we believe it is important to strengthen
cooperation with the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community.

18-4336313/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

I conclude by reiterating Peru’s commitment to
continuing to support the efforts of the Government
and the people of Haiti to forge sustainable peace.
Mr. Ndong Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): In thanking the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire
for including this important item on the December
programme of work, I would also like to welcome
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, the new Special
Representative for Haiti and Head of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
for her clear, detailed and most informative briefing.
We also assure her that the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is entirely at her disposal, in the confidence that
her academic profile and professional experience will
add great value to the responsibilities entrusted to her.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea is alarmed
by recent events that have taken place in Haiti over
the past quarter, characterized by popular revolts that
have caused loss of human life, numerous injuries
and considerable material damage. Our most heartfelt
condolences go to the Government of Haiti and the
families affected. The July protests targeting fuel
subsidies, as well as more recent ones denouncing
the mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds and a lack
of improvement in the provision of social services,
underscore the importance of a socioeconomic policy
that covers all social strata and demands more from
those responsible for its management.
We note the efforts of President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, and his Government
to resolve that situation through a series of measures,
such as the decision to eliminate subsidies for
petroleum products and the subsequent presentation
of his approach to the Prime Minister to provide all
the necessary support to the relevant institutions, in
particular the judicial system, in the investigation
of complaints concerning the mismanagement of
PetroCaribe funds. Such efforts show his willingness
to positively respond to the demands of the population.
In that regard, we call on the parties involved to remain
calm and support the Government’s initiative, which
has opened a space to investigate the complaints that
have been raised.
We welcome the enactment in October of a bill
on the creation, organization and functioning of the
National Council for Legal Aid, which establishes the
legal framework for Haitians to access legal advice,
regardless of their social status. That bill represents an
14/19

12/12/2018

important milestone in the effort to reverse the increase
in pretrial detentions. The importance of the presence
of women in the State’s strategic decision-making
circles must be stressed. To that end, the Government
must achieve the minimum 30 per cent set forth in the
Constitution, and not only in departments traditionally
occupied by women.
As we near the end of the pre-election year, my
delegation urges political actors, civil society and the
Government not to influence action that could incite
the population to violence, with a view to guaranteeing
a safe environment to facilitate the holding of next
year’s elections, which will be an indicator for the
stability and development of the country. In that regard,
we commend both the Government’s commitment to
holding elections on time and its request for United
Nations electoral assistance.
With regard to the humanitarian situation,
it is important to highlight the important role of
MINUJUSTH and other United Nations agencies,
which, following the earthquake of 6 October,
collaborated on national rescue activities by providing
support to the Haitian National Police in the affected
areas. Similarly, we commend the support provided
during the rainy season, which significantly thwarted
the anticipated increase in cholera cases, with new
suspected cases declining nationally to an average of 46
per week in September and the first week of October,
compared with 301 suspected weekly cases during the
same period in 2017.
Despite the efforts of the Government and the
United Nations system in Haiti, we are convinced that
much remains to be done to achieve the objectives of
MINUJUSTH’s exit strategy. It is therefore obvious that
important aspects remain difficult to achieve, such as
the adoption and, above all, the implementation of laws
that are considered to be indispensable to strengthening
the rule of law in Haiti. To that end, the leaders and the
general population, with the support of MINUJUSTH
and the United Nations country team, as well as the
international community, should make continuous
efforts to ensure an effective and safe transition
that ensures sustainable and lasting development in
the country.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): First of all, we join
others in thanking Special Representative Helen La
Lime for her informative briefing. Since this is her first
briefing as Special Representative, we would like to
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

congratulate her on assuming this important position
and wish her every success in all her endeavours.
Kazakhstan would like to commend the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) for implementing a number of
important projects and initiatives, in close cooperation
with the Government and civil society of Haiti. We
also commend the professional operations of the
Haitian National Police (HNP) during the nationwide
demonstrations on 17 October and 18 November. We
call upon the Government of Haiti to make sure that
the HNP strategic development plan is implemented
efficiently and in a timely manner in order to further
enhance professional training and experience. With
a view to consolidating security and stability in the
country, it is critical that MINUJUSTH maintain its
focus on HNP capacity-building.
The recent massive demonstrations have
underscored the importance of building broadbased political support to implement key economic
reforms and rebuild trust and public confidence in
the Government’s institutions, thereby creating the
necessary conditions and legal framework to attract
investments. We consider all those steps essential for
fostering development.
In that regard, we encourage the Government to
redouble its efforts to strengthen the rule of law, fight
impunity and address corruption, which are the basic
prerequisites for long-term stability in Haiti, especially
in the light of the upcoming elections in 2019. That
will require the concerted efforts of key actors from
all branches of the Government, Parliament, judicial
system and civil society to work together towards that
common goal.
It is necessary to focus on ensuring that the objectives
of the MINUJUSTH exit strategy are implemented in
a coordinated manner. As the United Nations system
prepares for a smooth and effective transition towards
a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence, we also
draw the attention of the different United Nations
entities on the ground and at Headquarters to continue
working as One United Nations through a more
integrated and coordinated approach. It is necessary to
break down silos so as to achieve optimal results for
sustainable development in Haiti.
In conclusion, we strongly believe that the
Government, the Mission, the United Nations country
team and all international and regional partners should

S/PV. 8419

continue to work together to plan for the transition and
beyond. It will also be absolutely vital to anticipate,
address and mitigate all challenges that may emerge
from the transition towards a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence in Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Côte d’Ivoire.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), for her presence and the quality
of her briefing. Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about
developments in Haiti. Indeed, the violent social
demonstrations of recent months, which have resulted
in the loss of human lives and significant material
damage, clearly show that this precarious situation
requires continued joint national and international
efforts for lasting stability in Haiti. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes MINUJUSТН’s commitment
to working with the Haitian authorities to carry out
the activities related to its mandate, as outlined in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2018/1059).
The Secretary-General’s report calls for our
comments on the following points: the sociopolitical
and economic situation, the security situation, and the
implementation of the MINUJUSТН withdrawal and
the transition strategy.
On the sociopolitical and economic level, the
persistent crises in Haiti often reflect the socioeconomic
difficulties and political tensions that characterize the
country. Unfortunately, they jeopardize the ongoing
reconstruction efforts. In response to that worrying
situation, my delegation reiterates the need to address
the root causes of the crisis. It therefore recommends
that concrete measures be considered to alleviate the
daily difficulties of the people, combat corruption
and shed light on allegations of mismanagement of
PetroCaribe funds.
My delegation also welcomes the appointment
of a Minister-delegate for Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme Poverty and urges
the Haitian authorities to pursue their relentless
efforts to restore stability in their country.
We also call for the promotion of an inclusive
national
dialogue
that
would
contribute
significantly to easing the political climate and to
implementing the principle of accountability, and

18-4336315/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

a guarantee of the independence of judges who
must conduct the necessary judicial proceedings.
It is therefore imperative that the international
community continue to support the Haitian authorities
in order to help them establish conditions conducive to
political stability and the holding of peaceful, credible
and transparent elections in October 2019.
With regard to the security situation, my delegation
welcomes the joint initiatives undertaken by the Haitian
authorities, in liaison with MINUJUSTH, to reduce the
level of violence and significantly strengthen security.
In that regard, we welcome the implementation of the
community violence reduction programme in hotspot areas.
My delegation encourages the continuation
of these beneficial initiatives, which contribute to
strengthening stability and security efforts by
raising public awareness of security and rule of law
issues and improving people’s confidence in the
Haitian National Police and rule of law institutions.
However,
Côte
d’Ivoire
remains
concerned
about the persistent violence carried out by
criminal
gangs,
recurring
violent
protests
and
the
conditions
in
Haitian
prisons.
In view of this situation, my delegation urges the
various parties, in particular the Haitian authorities, to
redouble their efforts to maintain a stable environment
and to accelerate the necessary legislative reforms in
order to ensure the strengthening of the rule of law.
With regard to the MINUJUSTH exit and transition
strategy, my delegation welcomes the Mission’s support
for Haitian Government institutions in the areas of
justice, human rights and security. It also welcomes the
outstanding work done by MINUJUSTH in combating
violence and sexual exploitation. We are particularly
pleased by the progress made in the implementation
of the Mission’s mandate, in line with the previously
defined objectives.
However, we remain concerned about the report’s
conclusions with regard to the difficulties encountered
in improving the benchmarks. To that end, my delegation
urges the Government of Haiti to fully cooperate with
the United Nations for the success of the priority tasks
identified in advance in order to create the conditions
for a successful, smooth and effective transition without
a United Nations peacekeeping presence. It calls on
the international community to support the Haitian
Government in achieving the objectives of the 2030
16/19

12/12/2018

Agenda for Sustainable Development and to support
it in the implementation of the 2018 humanitarian
response plan.
I congratulate all United Nations staff who are
working tirelessly and sometimes in difficult conditions
to build peace and development in Haiti. I also express
my country’s solidarity with the Haitian people and
Government in their quest for stability, peace and
development.
In conclusion, I urge all parties to work towards
the success of the goals that have been set for the exit
strategy of MINUJUSTH in 2019.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to thank the President of the Security Council
for having generously invited the Haitian delegation
to share its views and comments on the report
(S/2018/1059) submitted by the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), in accordance with resolution 2410
(2018). My delegation has given its utmost attention
to the findings, observations and recommendations of
that report.
While taking into account the difficulties and
problems encountered, such as the recent unrest in the
country, the Secretary-General also details the progress
made by the Government of Haiti in achieving, as it
has pledged to do, the various objectives, targets and
deadlines jointly established under the Council’s
mandate for MINUJUSTH. The Secretary-General’s
report highlights the significant improvements and
successes in the transition to a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence in Haiti. They also build on the major
progress made by the country in recent years in all the
areas that are considered vital to strengthening the rule
of law — be they justice, security, corrections or human
rights protection. The results speak for themselves.
The Secretary-General rightly underscores the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police (HNP),
which has demonstrated its ability to professionally
manage the mass protests throughout the country, as
seen on 17 October and 18 November.
The adoption of
certainly
another

the legal aid law is
important
milestone
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

in improving access to justice. Critical steps have
been taken in other areas, as evidenced by the
measures taken to strengthen human rights protection
mechanisms within the executive branch, as well as
the improvement of the managerial and operational
capacities of the penitentiary system. The decline in
the homicide rate is one noteworthy indicator. The rate
decreased by 4.2 per cent to 6.22 homicides per 100,000
inhabitants, one of the lowest levels in the Caribbean,
as noted in the report. Meanwhile, elsewhere in Latin
America and the Caribbean, homicide rates are 10 to 20
times higher than the global average, at more than 80
per 100,000 inhabitants, according to a recent study by
the Inter-American Development Bank.
There are certainly grounds to welcome the progress
achieved thanks to the joint efforts of the Haitian authorities
and the United Nations Mission. However, with regard
to certain indicators considered to be essential to the
strengthening of the rule of law, the delays clearly
underline the urgent need to redouble efforts at
various levels. The Government is fully aware
of that. Indeed, much remains to be done, as the
Secretary-General points out, to fully achieve all the
objectives agreed for the MINUJUSTH exit strategy.
The Government has taken note of those concerns
and renews its firm commitment to doing its utmost
to honour all its commitments, accelerate change and
complete the agreed reforms in order to remedy the
persistence of the noted shortcomings, failures and
delays, particularly with regard to the dysfunctions
of the justice system; the issue of prolonged pretrial
detention, and its corollary, overcrowded prisons; the
effective implementation of the national police strategic
development plan for the period 2017-2021, including
through an improved mobilization of resources at both
the national and international levels; and allegations
of human rights abuses by State institutions and law
enforcement officials.
The Secretary-General also echoes some concerns
about the overall situation in Haiti and the corresponding
risk of destabilization. Everyone agrees that the country
has been sorely tried of late. Beyond the allegations
related to the PetroCaribe case, the turbulence of the
past four months undoubtedly reflects a deterioration
in the economic situation, exacerbating the difficulties
faced by the vast majority of the population, which
suffers extreme poverty. In addition, the prevailing
humanitarian situation is complex, as evidenced by

S/PV. 8419

the tragic lack of essential infrastructure, the impact
of the cholera epidemic, and the massive repatriation
of tens of thousands of Haitian migrants from the
Dominican Republic, not to mention the consequences
of the environmental crisis and the country’s extreme
vulnerability to natural disasters.
Fortunately, the crisis is being contained through
the Government’s dialogue with key stakeholders.
My delegation reiterates its deep appreciation for
the international community’s unwavering support
following the recent events, especially in the light of
the unreasonable demands of a fringe of the opposition.
My delegation highly appreciates the support provided
by the United Nations system and other partners in
the area of security, including in the disarmament of
gangs and the reintegration of individuals who have
not committed violent crimes. It should be stressed that
neither political stability, nor democratic achievements,
nor the rule of law, to which the Haitian people remain
deeply attached, have ever been threatened.
The President of the Republic, Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
has solemnly pledged to undertake the necessary
reforms, including by waging a relentless fight against
corruption. That fight has begun to bear fruit. The recent
actions taken by Prime Minister Jean Henry Céant and
the judicial authorities leave no doubt of the Haitian
Government’s unwavering resolve to fully investigate
allegations of mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds
and to ensure that justice is rigorously and impartially
carried out in the full respect for the rule of law. A
calm social environment within the framework of
growth and the creation of economic opportunities is
essential to the consolidation of the rule of law and
democratic achievements.
My delegation has repeatedly sounded the
alarm about the adverse effects of the sustained
decline in official development assistance to Haiti in
recent years, especially at a time when problems are
particularly acute. Humanitarian aid is no exception.
The Secretary-General rightly deplores the fact that
the 2018 humanitarian response plan, which earmarks
$252 million in assistance to more than 2 million people
in need, has so far been funded only to 11.2 per cent.
The same applies to the new United Nations
approach to cholera. At this critical stage, it must be
recognized that assistance to victims and their families,
as well as the provision of essential health, sanitation
and drinking water infrastructure, remain severely

18-4336317/19

S/PV.8419

The question concerning Haiti

underfunded. The Secretary-General’s appeals for
adequate funding for the United Nations Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund have remained
largely unanswered. This situation is a cause for
concern. The Haitian delegation has therefore endorsed
the Secretary-General’s renewed call on all relevant
actors, including Haiti’s cooperation partners, to take
short-term measures to meet the immediate needs of the
Haitian people and to alleviate their difficult situation.
A renewal of international solidarity is crucial at
this juncture.
Beyond humanitarian assistance and above all,
the country needs a real international mobilization of
resources to ensure stable, substantial and predictable
financing for its development; the rapid revival of public
investment in infrastructure and social programmes,
which have stalled for too long; and the rebound of
strong growth, which will help to reduce poverty. That
is undoubtedly a prerequisite for achieving the longterm political and institutional stability desired by the
Haitian people and the international community.
The Secretary-General’s midterm review of
MINUJUSTH highlights the important milestones
achieved over the past 14 months in the long-term
process of strengthening the institutions that guarantee
the rule of law and the protection of human rights in
Haiti. At the same time, the Secretary-General’s report
also highlights the magnitude of the problems, needs
and short- and long-term challenges facing the country.
There is total agreement between the Government of
Haiti and the United Nations system on the scope of
the task ahead and the efforts required to achieve the
agreed targets and benchmarks established as part
of MINUJUSTH’s exit strategy. Happily, none of the
remaining obstacles is insurmountable.
For its part, the Government reiterates its
commitment to ensuring that it will overcome
the obstacles that may have delayed the carrying
out of certain scheduled activities, resulted in the
postponement of certain deadlines or hindered the
achievement of certain benchmarks that the SecretaryGeneral has correctly identified as essential. New and
significant challenges lie ahead in the coming months.
In particular, next year’s parliamentary elections will
be a major test of the maturity, consolidation and
stability of our institutions. The Government is already
doing everything in its power to enable the nation
to successfully meet that challenge. In that regard,
18/19

12/12/2018

it is counting on the full cooperation of the United
Nations system.
Lastly, the Government assures the Council that
it will take the necessary action to follow up on the
recommendations of the Secretary-General. It will
spare no effort to strengthen the population’s trust
in the institutions of the Republic of Haiti, pursue
priority reforms, intensify cooperation with the
Parliament and the country’s political actors in order
to meet the immediate needs of the people. It will
remain determined to work to strengthen the rule of
law and maintain a stable political climate, thereby
ensuring a smooth transition to a post-MINUJUSTH
era in Haiti — no longer on the basis of Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations on peacekeeping,
but on that of the Haitian people’s just aspirations for
sustainable development by 2030.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Christiane (spoke in French): The former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the candidate countries; as well as the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.
I sincerely thank you, Sir, for giving me the floor
at today’s debate on Haiti, in which the European
Union is always honoured to participate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/1059) and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. La Lime, for her briefing.
The European Union is concerned about the overall
situation in Haiti, which could be described as an
economic, financial, social, security and governance
crisis. Since July, Haiti has again been experiencing
a period of political and security-related instability.
Challenges to the new Government and President Moïse
have emerged against a backdrop of demonstrations
and riots in the country’s main cities. Several instances
of violence resulted in loss of life and looting in July,
as people protested against rising fuel prices and the
mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds. Other protests
were organized in October. They were better planned
and included the deployment of the Haitian National
Police, which managed to curb tensions and reduce
collateral damage, despite some instances of violence
and repression. Another demonstration took place
on 18 November, followed by sporadic outbreaks of
violence orchestrated by armed gangs, although that
18-43363

12/12/2018

The question concerning Haiti

call to violence was not heeded to the same extent as
those before it. The country also faces soaring inflation,
which is tied to the national currency’s loss in value
against the United States dollar.
In that regard and given the political instability in
the country at the end of the former President’s term
of office and throughout the last electoral cycle, the
European Union believes that it is essential to hold
parliamentary elections for the Chamber of Deputies
and the Senate, within the time limits provided for
in the Constitution. Respect for the legitimacy of
democratically elected institutions and the regular cycle
of elections appears, in parallel and in complementarity
with national dialogue, to be sine qua non to the
functioning of democracy in Haiti.
As indicated in the benchmarks for an exit strategy
prepared by United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, consensus-based and far-reaching
reform of the electoral system would be a key element
in preventing further crises and regaining the trust of
the population. It appears that the adoption of the two
draft electoral laws, prepared by the executive branch,
could be complicated. It is therefore essential that the
Haitian authorities and parliamentarians work together
to organize legislative elections in October 2019. We
hope that the elections will be held as scheduled and in
the best possible conditions.
The European Union is and will remain a faithful
partner of the Republic of Haiti. It remains committed
to supporting the country at this sensitive juncture,
in consultation with other partners, including in the
much-needed reform process. We expect the Haitian
authorities to promote the political dialogue required to
reach an agreement and ease tensions. To that end, we
support the efforts of the Prime Minister.
The European Union supports the work done by
MINUJUSTH in support of the development of the
Haitian National Police, justice, the rule of law and the
protection and promotion of human rights. However,
we share the concerns expressed in the latest report
of the Secretary-General that the security situation
remains fragile and that progress on many benchmarks

S/PV. 8419

is insufficient. The continued failure of the Haitian
National Police and national authorities to control gang
violence, along with accusations of collusion and other
problems, is of particular concern. The European Union
is concerned about the ability of the Haitian National
Police to operate effectively after the withdrawal
of MINUJUSTH. It is therefore crucial to complete
the work of strengthening and professionalizing the
Haitian National Police and to continue focusing on
the reform and strengthening of the justice and prison
systems and the consolidation of human rights. The
departure of MINUJUSTH is scheduled for the same
month as the scheduled elections, which have always
been linked to instability throughout Haiti’s history.
That is why it is so important that the elections be held
on the dates scheduled.
In conclusion, I reiterate the European Union’s
gratitude to MINUJUSTH for its contribution in the areas
of security, conflict prevention and the strengthening
of democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. We believe
that the structural causes of instability in the country
have not been addressed and that, unfortunately, the
political and security situation remains very fragile.
Special attention to ensuring respect for human rights
in the work of the security forces, as well as access
to impartial justice for all, which will be especially
necessary. It is essential that the Haitian police and
judicial system be effectively prepared to assume in
the future all of the duties currently discharged by the
United Nations Mission. We believe that organizing
the transition of MINUJUSTH will be fundamental
in that respect. Together with the United Nations and
the international community, the European Union
will support the Haitian authorities in building on
their commitment and efforts to ensure a better future
of peace, democracy, stability and well-being for the
Haitian people, who, after so long, deserve nothing less.
The father of Alexandre Dumas, author of The
Count of Monte Cristo, was born in Haiti. Following in
his footsteps, the time has come for the Haitian people
to gain access to the treasure trove of happiness after
having endured the unjust prison of misfortune.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-4336319/19
