General Assembly- -Thirty-ninth Session
98
---- - - --- - - - - - - - -----

cemed as well as other governmental and non-governmen­
tal organizations,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secre­
tary-General 14 1 prepared in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 36/ l 04,
I. Solemnly reaffirms the lasting validity of the pur­
poses and principles enshrined in the Declaration on the
Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace, based on the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Invites all Governments, the United Nations and
the concerned organizations of its system, other interna­
tional as well as national organizations, both governmental
and non-governmental, to incorporate active promotion of
the ideas of the preparation of societies for life in peace in
their programmes, including those concerning the observ­
ances of the International Year of Peace, 1986;
3. Reaffirms the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations to establish lasting conditions of world
peace, international understanding and mutually beneficial
co-operation;
4. Recognizes the role and great historic responsibility
of Governments, heads of State or Government as well as
other statesmen, politicians, diplomats and civic leaders
for the establishment, maintenance and strengthening of a
just and durable peace for present and future generations;
5. Solemnly invites all States to further intensify their
efforts towards the implementation of the Declaration on
the Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace by strictly
adhering to the principles enshrined in the Declaration and
by taking all necessary steps towards that end at the
national and international levels;
6. Reiterates its appeal for concerted action on the part
of Governments, the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, as well as other interested international and
national organizations, both governmental and non-gov­
ernmental, to give tangible effect to the supreme impor­
tance of and need for establishing, maintaining and
strengthening a just and durable peace for present and
future generations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to consider conven­
ing in 1986, within the programme of the International
Year of Peace, a panel of peace research experts to con­
sider, in a comprehensive manner, questions pertaining to
the implementation of the Declaration;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue
following the progress made in the implementation of the
Declaration on all planes and in the light of the observ­
ances of the International Year of Peace, and to submit a
report thereon to the General Assembly not later than at
its forty-second session.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/158. Implementation of the collective security
provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of interna­
tional peace and security
The General Assembly,
Reca//ing its resolutions 371119 of 16 December 1982
and 38/191 of 20 December I 983 on the implementation
141 N39/143 and Add. I.
142 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

143 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Sesswn. Sup

p/ement No. 1 (N37/I).
144 Jbid., Thirty-eighth SeSS1on. Supplement No. I (A/38/1).
145 Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session. Supplement No. I (A/39/1).
146 S/15971. For the printed text, see Otfinal Records u{the Security Cow,
cil, Thirty-eighth Year, Resolutions and Deciswns, IW/3. part II. ''Considera-

of the collective security provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Reaffirming that the primary function of the United
Nations. in particular through the Security Council, is the
maintenance of international peace and security,
Stressing that the purposes of the United Nations can be
achieved only under conditions in which States comply
fully with their obligations assumed under the Charter,
Alarmed over the growing tendency of States to resort to
the use of force, intervention and interference in the inter­
nal affairs of other States, thus ignoring the Charter and
the Declaration on Principles of International Law con­
cerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 142
Concerned that the Security Council has not always been
able to take decisive action for the maintenance of interna­
tional peace and for resolving international problems,
Recognizing that fundamental approaches to genuine
security include, inter alia, the strengthening of the Charter
system of collective security,
Conscious of the important role with which the Security
Council is entrusted in enhancing the collective security
provisions of the Charter for the promotion of peace and
security in the world in accordance with the Charter,
Regretting that the provisions of the Charter relating to
collective security measures have not been fully imple­
mented.
Taking into account, in this connection, the reports of
the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh, 143 thirty­
eighth 144 and thirty-ninth sessions, 145
Also taking into account the note by the President of the
Security Council dated 12 September 1983, 146
Recalling the Political Declaration adopted by the Sev­
enth Conference of Heads of State or Government ofNon­
Aligned Countries. held atNew Delhi from 7 to 12 March
1983, 147
Also recalling the views of the Governments of the five
Nordic countries on the strengthening of the United
Nations, 148
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the collective security provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security, 149
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of
the collective security provisions of the Charter of the
UnitedNations for the maintenance of international peace
and security",
I. Regrets that the Ad Hoe Committee on the Imple­
mentation of the Collective Security Provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations which the General Assem­
bly decided to establish by its resolution 38/ l 91 has not
been constituted;
2. Requests the Pre.sident of the General Assembly, as
a matter of urgency, to undertake consultations with the
regional groups to appoint fifty-four Member States to
constitute the membership of the Ad Hoe Committee 150 on
the basis of equitable geographical representation and
including the permanent members of the Security Council;
uon of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization,
1982".
147 A/38/1 32-Si 156 7 5 and Corr. I and 2, annex, sect. I.
148 A/38/271-S/15830, annex. For the printed text. see O.ffa:1al Records q{

the Security Council. Thirty-eighth Year. Supplement for April. May and June
I 983, document S/15830, annex.
149 A/39/144 and Add.I

1 Sil The memhersh1p of the Committee will be announced subsequently.

Ill. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committe_e
___

3. Requests the Secretary-General urgently to invite
those Member States that have not yet done so. to com­
municate to him not later than 30 April 1985 their views
and comments on the matter and to transmit those views
and comments to the Ad Hoe Committee as soon as possi­
ble;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in considering the
matter, to take due account of the views and comments of
Member States, including their recommendations, and to
submit a progress report to the Security Council for its
consideration and comments and to the General Assembly
at its fortieth session, and a final report to the Assembly at
its forty-first session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Implementation of the
collective security provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
39/159. Inadmissibility of the policy of State terror­
ism and any actions by States aimed at
undermining the socio-political system in
other sovereign States
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of any State, as well as the inalienable right
of all peoples to determine their own form of government
and to choose their own economic, political and social sys­
tem free from outside intervention. subversion. coercion
and constraint of any kind whatsoever,
Expressing its profound concern that State terrorism has
lately been practised ever more frequently in relations
between States and that military and other actions are
being taken against the sovereignty and political indepen­
dence of States and the self-determination of peoples,
Noting that all this seriously endangers the independent
existence of States and the possibility of ensuring peaceful
relations and mutual trust between them and leads to a
sharp exacerbation of tensions and a growing threat of war,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples freely to
determine their own destiny and the course of their devel­
opment,
Convinced that the interests of maintaining peace
require that relations between States, regardless of ideolo­
gies, should be based on strict observance of the Charter of
the United Nations. as well as on generally recognized
principles and norms of international relations, inter alia.
renunciation of the threat or use of force against the terri­
torial integrity or political independence of any State, non­
intervention and non-interference in the internal and
external affairs of States, permanent sovereignty of States
and peoples over their natural resources and self-determi­
nation and independence of peoples under colonial domi­
nation, foreign occupation or racist regimes.
Categorically rejecting all concepts, doctrines or ideolo­
gies intended to justify actions of States aimed at under­
mining the socio-political system of other States,
l5I See also sect. X.B.I, dec1s1on 391424
152 Resolution S-10/2.
153 Official Records o(the General .-ll1c111/,/1 /"111n, mnrh Snrn>n, S1,r111/e
ment No. 42 (A/39/42).

___

_
____ _
9 9

l. Resolutely condemns policies and practices of terror­
ism in relations between States as a method of dealing with
other States and peoples:
2. Demands that all States take no actions aimed at
military intervention and occupation, forcible change in or
undermining of the socio-political system of States,
destabilization and overthrow of their Governments and,
in particular, initiate no military action to that end under
any pretext whatsoever and cease forthwith any such
action already in progress;
3. Urges all States to respect and strictly observe, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the
sovereignty and political independence of States and the
right of peoples to self-determination. as well as their right
freely. without outside mterference and intervention, to
choose their socio-political system and to pursue their
political. economic, social and cultural development.
102nd plenarv meeting
17 December 1984
39/160.

Relationship between disarmament and
development 111

!'he General Assemh, r.
Recalling its resolution 38/71 B. of 15 December 1983.
Recalling the provisions of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 152 con­
cerning the relationship between disarmament and devel­
opment.
( ·ons1dermg-.
(a) That world-wide military spending has acquired a
staggering magnitude and the global trend continues to be
towards a faster rate of annual increase in these expendi­
tures.
(h) That this situation stands in dramatic contrast to
the sombre state of the global economy and has serious
implications for the economic prospects of the world, par­
ticularly those of the developing countries,
(c) That the world economy, particularly that of devel­
oping countries, would benefit from appropriate interna­
tional action that took into account the close relationship
of disarmament and development,
4/so considering that in view of the importance and
urgency of giving international consideration and practical
expression to that relationship, the time has come for a
comprehensive discuss1,on of the subject at a high political
level,
Taking note of the report adopted by the Disarmament
Commission at the end of its 1984 session. 151
l'akmg note, in particular, of the recommendation con­
tained in the report of the Disarmament Commission
according to which efforts should be continued to enable
the General Assembly to reach, at its thirty-ninth session.
a broad measure of agreement on the subject. taking into
account the views expressed in the report, 154
I. Decides to convene an International Conference on
the Relationship between Disarmament and Develop­
ment, which should be preceded by thorough preparation
and should take decisions by consensus;
2. -J/so decides thal the purposes of the Conference
should be:
-,.,1 lh11 i, para 27
