TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 1 NOVEMBER 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 145 6) . . . . . . ‘1’. . . , . . . . , . . . , . . . , . . . , . .

Page

Expression of thanks to the retiring Presidents and welcome to the representative
of the United States . . . , . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8878);
(b) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8879) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1456

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 1 November 1968, at 8.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Otto R. BORCH (Denmark),

month. Time haserasedthe memoryof my exertions Over a
month ago, but you were so kind asto say that in some
way I might be an example to you of courtesy and
efficiency. I feel that the Canadiandelegationalwayslooks
to the Danish delegation for examplesof both those
qualitiesand I have no doubt that you will setan example
to the Councilin the month of November,and I wish you
every goodfortune.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1456)

5. The PRESIDENT: I thank AmbassadorLiu and AmbassadorIgnatieff for their remarks.I shouldlike to take
this opportunity to welcome to the Council table the
representativeof the United Statesof America,Ambassador
Wiggins,who is attending his first meeting in his new
capacity as United States representativeon the Security
Council. I am sure I speak for all my colleaguesin
extending a cordial welcometo AmbassadorWiggins and
assuringhim that we look forward to working with him in
the samespirit of friendlinessand co-operationthat we
enjoyed when working with his distinguished
predecessors,
AmbassadorBall and Ambassador
Goldberg.

1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8878);
(b) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8879).
Expression of thanks to the retiring Presidents and
welcome to the representative of the United States

6. Mr. WIGGINS (United States of America): Mr. President, I want to thank you very much for your kind words
of welcome and to expressthe hope that your cheerful
expectationsof future relationsmay be fulfilled by events.

1. The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed with the business
for this evening’s meeting I wish, in my capacity as
President of the Council, to say a word of appreciation to
my predecessor who bore the responsibility of the presidency during the month of October. As no meetings were
held during that month, I wish furthermore to express my
appreciation to Ambassador Ignatieff of Canada who
presided with such distinction over our meetings during the
month of September. His courtesy, skill and dedication
have provided me with an example which I shall endeavour
to live up to.

7. The PRESIDENT: As I havealreadyinformedmembers
of the Council, I receivedthis morning a requestfor an
urgent meetingfrom the representativeof the United Arab
Republic,in a letter which hasbeencirculatedin document
S/8878. Subsequently, as membershave also been informed, I received a request for an urgent meeting,
submittedby the representativeof Israelin hisletter which
hasbeencirculatedin documentS/8879.
Adoption of the agenda

2. In my capacity as President of the Security Council I
call upon the representative of China.

The agendawasadopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
/al Letter dated 1 November1966 from the Permanent
I-.’ Representativeof the United Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressedto the President of the
Security Council(S/6676);
1’) Letter dated 1 November1966 from the Permanent
Representativeof Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

3. Mr. LIU (China): May I thank you, Mr. President, for
your courteous reference to me as your predecessor for
October. I should like to take this opportunity to associate
myself whole-heartedly with the tribute which YOU have
paid to my predecessor,
AmbassadorIgnatieff of Canada.
4. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada):Mr. President,in offering to
you the very best wishesof the Canadiandelegationand
our co-operation with you in your capacity as President
being assured,I wish also, of course, to recognize the
servicesof your predecessor
in the consultationshe carried
out and the functions he performed during the preceding

(S/8879)
8. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the usual practice of the Council, I propose,if I hear no objection, to
1

i

ture of the United Arab Republic clearly denotes that the
intention of those who planned and initiated this want04
aggression was to deal a blow at the economy of the United
Arab Republic by attempting to paralyse some of its
constituent elements.

invite the representatives of the United Arab Republic and
Israel to take places at the Council table in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. A. El Kony
(United Arab Republic) and Mr. Y. T’koah (Israel) took
places at the Council table.

19. Furthermore, the selection of civilian installations aa
targets for aggression is undoubtedly a clear indication as to
the scope and content of Israel’s policies. Worse still, these
civilian targets are far removed, by hundreds of miles, fro%
military positions and concentrations of troops. It certain&
demonstrates that in pursuance of its aggressive policies
Israel sets no limitations on itself and does not hesitate tb
resort to the most immoral practices, regardless of the$
consequences to either human lives or material property, bl
order to satisfy its leaders’ lust for expansion,

9. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the question before it.
10. The first speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the United Arab Republic, on whom I now call.
11. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Mr, President,
I should like to express my deep appreciation to you, Sir,
and to the members of the Council, for your having
convened the meeting this evening. At the same time, I
should like to apologize for the inconvenience I may have
caused.

20. The systematic manifestations of these destructive and
expansionist policies are, and remain, at the root of the
grave situation prevailing in the area. The Israeli authoritieg
should realize that such acts of aggression aimed at
intimidating the people of the United Arab Republic
cannot succeed in daunting their will to live in peace>
dignity and freedom. If there is any success in this latest
Israeli venture, it lies only in the fact that it exposes the
real nature of the Israeli policies and bares the illegal,
immoral and inhuman tactics with which those policies are
pursued.

12. The United Arab Republic has requested this urgent
meeting of the Security Council because an already grave
situation in the Middle East has been further aggravated by
a wanton act of aggression by the Israeli armed forces
against the territory of the United Arab Republic.
13. This latest act of aggression is rendered even more
ominous by its premeditated nature. The premeditation is
borne out by the statements of several Israeli Cabinet
Ministers, among them Mr. Moshe Dayan, who did not shy
away from declaring only last Tuesday: “The Egyptians will
be hit where it hurts”.

21. It may seem ironic that, while Israel continues to
initiate aggressive acts against the neighbouring Arab States
and to launch wanton attacks against civilian installations, a
whole campaign of publicity and propaganda js being
conducted about the peaceful intentions and constructive
approaches of Israel towards a settlement in the Middle
East. This is not in the least surprising, for this is the real
attitude: words of peace and acts of war. This has always
been, and will always remain, the pattern of Israeli
behaviour.

14. Mr. Yigal Allon also had something to say on the
matter. He stated in the Knesset last Wednesday: “Egyptian
commandos should not delude themselves into thinking
that war can be confined to the Canal area”.
15. But it is not only the premeditation that presages ill
for the future; it is also the blatant admissidn of the Israeli
Government and its gloating over the crime. It might be
interesting to note that the confession of their wanton
aggression has this time been embodied in a statement from
the office of the Prime Minister, so as to indicate once and
for all the aggressive official policy of the entire Israeli
Government.

22. Peace is not a matter of declarations void of content,
or of eloquent speeches. Peace consists fundamentally and
basically of concrete acts and deeds.
23. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Arab
Republic has stated to Ambassador Jarring, “Every day that
elapses without the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the
Arab territories constitutes, in fact, a new aggression and a
new violation of the rule of law”.

16. Last night, at 2200 hours, local time, an Israeli plane
violated United Arab Republic air-space and infiltrated
deep in the Nag-Hamadi area, bombing two civilian targets:
a large transformer station, and the well-known
NagHamadi Bridge and barrage, damaging the latter and setting
fire to the former. One civilian was killed and two were
injured.

24. Israel’s refusal to declare its acceptance of and its
readiness to implement Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 is a disservice to the
cause of peace in the area.
2.5. On the other hand, the Minister of Foreign Affairs Of
the United Arab Republic has plainly stated to Ambassador
Jarring that the United Arab Republic: (a} accepts the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967; (b)is
ready to implement its obligations arising from that
resolution; (c) believes that a time-table for the imple
mentation of all the provisions of the resolution should bfl
set up by Ambassador Jarring; (d) believes that the Security
Council should undertake the supervision of and guarantee
the implementation of the 22 November resolution.

17. The situation is clear and the facts speak for themselves. They do not require any further elaboration on my
part.
18. As I have already said, the situation in the Middle East
has become even more grave as a result of this latest Israeli
aggression. The fact that the bombing was aimed at
installations constituting part of the economic infrastruc2

26 At a time-indeed on the same evening-when the
worId at large had noted with relief the recent tendency to
refrain from the use of force in the settlement of conflicts,
it is to be deplored that Israel not only pursued but
intensified the use of military force, and in its most
unlawful form, to attain its sinister ends. This is certainly
bound to fail. In the light of this treacherous attack we
would be entitled to question the validity of all claims as to
the peaceful intents and contents of the Israeli manoeuvres.
What type of peace is Mr. Eban carrying to New York when
it is preceded by a dastardly act of aggression?

sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. Verbal condemnations do not suffice; Israel is the
subject of the longest list of such condemnations. Its
response to the Council’s resolutions has been manifested in
continued defiance and disregard.
33. It is therefore incumbent upon the Council not to
content itself this time with another condemnation to be
disregarded by Israel ‘or another warning to go unheeded by
it. The Council must discharge the authority entrusted to it
in the Charter and apply the required enforcement measures which will put an end once and for all to Israel’s
lawlessness, aggression and disregard for all norms of
civilized conduct.

27. It is satisfying and equally heartening to note that the
debates in the twenty-third session of the General Assembly
have shown in no ambiguous terms that the international
community demands from Israel the prompt withdrawal
from the Arab territories it has occupied since 5 June 1967.
That.is the verdict of the collective will of world society.
This verdict, which has been widely endorsed, is the
cornerstone of ‘any settlement in the area. We sincerely
hope that the Council, in its consideration of this wanton
Israeli aggression, will examine the situation iu the light of
this just verdict.

34. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeron my list is the
representativeof Israel, on whom I now call.
35. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, permit me to
expressto you my delegation’srespectsand to extend our
best wishesfor successin your high office. We should also
like to convey our respects to your distinguishedpredecessors.

28. On previous occasions the Security Council, dis.
charging its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security, has condemned Israel’s policy of
aggression and military attacks. More than once during the
last six months Israel has been condemned, called upon,
and warned to desist from all aggressive military actions.

36. During the last few weeks the entire world has
watched and waited in rapt attention for signsof progress
toward peacein the Middle East. It is a long-delayedpeace.
As far back as 1948, when Egypt and other Arab States
launched war against Israel and invaded its territory, the
United Nations called on the parties to conclude a
permanent, peaceful settlement. The Arab States refused,
and have waged war against Israel ever since. Israel found
itself defending its sovereignty, independenceand life from
behind truce lines, then from behind armistice lines; and
sinceJune 1967 it hasbeen compehedto repel Arab attacks
carried out acrosscease-firelines.

29. In fact, when the Council adopted resolution
248 (1968) on 24 March 1968 it declared: “that such
actions of military reprisal and other grave violations of the
cease-fire cannot be tolerated and that the Security Council
would have to consider further and more effective steps as
envisaged in the Charter to ensure against repetition of such
acts.” Israel, however, did not desist.

37. On 22 November 1967 the Security Council called
again on the parties to the Israel-Arab conflict to establisha
just and lastingpeace in the area. Nearly a year haspassed,
but Egypt still adheres to the Khartoum decision:1 no
peace, no negotiations, no recognition of Israel. Its President continues to reiterate this belligerent position in his
speeches.Its army persists in its acts of aggressionagainst
Israel.

30. Again the Council, on 16 August 1968, when faced
with new aggression, considered Israel’s action as endangering the maintenance of the peace, and the Council’s
condemnation was on that occasion expressed in this stern
language:
“Condemns the further military attacks launched by
Israel in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter
and resolution 248 (1968) and warns that if such attacks
were to be repeated the Council would duly take account
of the failure to comply with the present resolution.”
[Resolution 256 (1968).]

38. Sanctimoniousdeclarationsof Egyptian acceptanceof
the November resolution remain valuelesswhen they are
accompaniedby a refusal to make peacewith Israel, by a
rejection of agreementwith Israel and by unabatedwarfare
againstIsrael.

31. This latest brutal and wanton military attack by Israel
against civilian targets in upper Egypt is of a far graver
nature. I hardly need to emphasize to the Council the
serious and criminal character of this phase which the
israeli aggression has assumed. The armed attack of Israeli
aircraft on civilian targets far away from the cease-fire areas
or scenes of military concentrations confronts the Council
with a deteriorating situation fraught with, imminent
danger.

39. Throughout this period, however, peace-makingefforts have not ceased. The Secretary-General’s Special
Representative,Ambassador Jarring, has pursued his mission of peace with boundlesspatience and tirelessdedication. Lately some seemedto find a little more hope and
encouragement in those efforts. Every indication that
progresswaspossiblewas welcomed; every hint of willingnessto seekunderstandingwascarefully nurtured.

32. It is therefore high time for the Council to enforce the
measures envisaged in its previous resolutions and apply the
..--

1 Resolution of the Arab Summit Conference held at Khartoum
from 29 August to 1 SeptemLw 1967.

3

50. The reports submitted to the Security Council by
GeneralOdd Bull leaveno room for any reasonabledoubt
whatsoeverconcerningEgypt’s full and exclusive responsibility for this premeditatedaggression.

40. People everywhere asked themselves whether the
United Arab Republic was not ready after all for peace,
despite the Khartoum decisions, despite its avowal of terror
warfare, despite an ominous resurgence of violence along
the cease-fireline, despitePresidentNasser’swarlike pronouncements,and despitethe harshlyjntransigent attitude
adoptedby its ForeignMinister in the GeneralAssembly.

51. Despite that fact, and despitearousedworld opinion
and general condemnation of this aggression,Egyptian
warlike acts continued after 26 October and, asrecorded in
General Bull’s report of 30 October [S/793O/Add.97/
additional incursionsacrossthe Canaloccurred on 29 and
30 October.

41. Then in a suddenand sinisterassaultalongthe entire
cease-fireline Egypt dealt a grievousblow to the peace
efforts and to the hopesthat it might be willing at longlast
to abandon the courseof war. The answerto the world’s
prayers for peace in the Middle East came in a hail of
Egyptian shellsand rockets.

52. On 27 October a military spokesmanof the United
Arab Republicdeclaredthat the massiveEgyptian attack on
the previous day was “in line with Cairo’s new policy of
‘preventivedefence’“.

42. On 26 October, at approximately 1650 hours local
the, the United Arab Republicforcesopeneda co-ordinated
and sustainedartillery, mortar androcket barrageacrossthe
entire length of the Canal on Israelipositionssituatedon
the east bank. The fire was premeditatedand without
provocation of any kind from the Israeli forces. Ten
thousand Egyptian shellswere pouredinto the Israelilines.

53. Those assaultswere the climax of a seriesof carefully
preparedattacksby the United Arab Republic, carried out
recently in pursuanceof that policy of so-caIled“preventive” military operations.

54. The policy was first appliedon 26 August 1968, when
a United Arab Republic commandounit crossedthe Canal,
43. A proposal of the United Nationsmilitary observers laid an ambushon the east bank and killed two Israeli
for a cease-firewas agreedfor 1745 hours. Israeli forces soldiersand abducteda third[S/8788].2 That incident was
complied. The United Arab Republic forces, however, followed by the massiveEgyptian artillery assaultalong the
continued their attack. Fire ceasedonly at 1820hours.
Canalon 8 September1968 [S/SSOS].z On that day the
United Arab Republic Armed Forces General Command
44. Then at 1920 hours the United Arab Republicforces formulated, in a public announcement,the new doctrine of
resumedtheir artillery shelling,The Israeliforces did not
“preventive” operations.
return fire. Egyptian firing ceasedat 1955hours, only to
start again at approximately 2150 hours. This time the
55. It was described as “preventive defence” and exartillery barragewas meant also to provide cover for an plained as follows by a spokesmanof the United Arab
attempt by Egyptian forcesto crossthe Canal.
RepublicArmed ForcesCommand:
45. At 2200 hourslocal time an Israelipatrol encountered
an Egyptian army force that had crossedto the eastbank,
south of the Little Bitter Lake, and penetratedbehindthe
Israeli cease-firelinesin the Mitla crossroads
area.Following an exchangeof fire the Egyptian force retreatedto the
Westbank, leavingbehindoneEgyptiansoldierkilled.

“The execution of preventive defensive actions means
that Egyptian forces will no longermake it possiblefor
the enemy to attack and that Egyptian forces will launch
offensive actions.They will scrutinize the movementsof
the enemy and the reinforcement of his troops so as to
strike at him before he attacks. . , . From now on the
initiative will be Arab.”

46. An Israeli truck was blown up the next morningby
one of the mines laid by the raidingforce. Other mines
were discovered before they could causedamage[see
S/793O/Add.95, paras. 4, 9; Sf793O/Add.96].

56. The implications of this policy are further illustrated
by a report in the authoritative Cairo daily AZ-Ahram of 29
October 1968, which in quoting the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Republic, Mr. Gohar,
declaresthat this policy will entitle the United Arab
Republic to react even to the strengtheningof the Israel
forces ori the eastbank, The papergoeson to state that the
doctrine of preventive defence implies freedom of action
for the United Arab Republic to openfire.

47. Also at 2200 hoursanother attempt wasmadeby the
United Arab Republic forces to crossthe Canal in the
vicinity of Port Tawfiq. That attack wasrepelledbefore the
Egyptian force succeeded
in landingon the eastbank.
48. The United Nations military observersproposed a
cease-fire for 2400 hours. Israel agreed,The Egyptian
forces, however, continued the artillery barragein the Port
Tawfiq and Mitla crossroadsareas.Firing ceasedonly at
0130 hours.

57. That policy has been pursuedby a seriesof, unprovoked, hostile Egyptian acts of opening fire, mine-laying
and incursionsby land and air acrossthe cease-firelines. I
have given the Council details of those attacks in my letter
of 30 October[S/8877].

49. In this grossand treacherousaggression
fifteen Israeli
soldierswere killed and thirty-four wounded,In addition,
one civilian resident of Kantara waskilled and two others
were wounded. Most of the casualties
were inflicted in the
early stageof the attack. Someof them werecausedamong
soldiersparticipating in or watching a Saturday football
match.

58. It will be recalled that on 23 October, that is, three
daysbefore the Egyptian attack of 26 October, the United
2 See Official Records of the Security Council, menty-thid
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1968.

4

Arab Republic Air Force attempted to carry out reconnaissance flights over Israeli positions on the east bank of the
Canal, resulting in an air clash in which the intruding
Egyptian planes were driven back-1 refer representatives to
General Odd Bull’s report of 24 October [S/7930/.4&.94].

Ambassador Jarring was striving to achieve progress
h his
task of Promoting agreement between the parties for the
establisha
of a just and lasting peace. Whatever the
%ptim
motive may have been in deciding upon, plmhg
and carrying Out the military operation of 26 October, the
United Arab Republic Government could not have been
unaware of the fact that its inevitable consequence must be
to prejudice the peace-making efforts,

59. On the morning of 26 October the semi-official Cairo
newspaper A/&bar El-Yom interpreted the air incident as
an expression of the determination of the General Command of the forces of the United Arab Republic to pursue
its previously announced policy of “preventive defence”,
and observed that an additional confrontation was soon to
be expected in the Suez Canal zone.

65. Ever since the adoption by Egypt of the policy
of
preventive military operations-the ambush of 26 August
and the artillery attack of 8 September-it has been clear
from which side came the unprovoked blows on the
cease-fire. It was clear from which side originated the
mine-laying raids, the ambushes, the wide-front assaults by
artillery, mortar and tanks. It was clear on which side
vehicles were being blown up, people killed, maimed and
captured. It was clear which party refused to respect the
cease-fire.

60. In fact, on the afternoon of that day, the United Arab
Republic forces launched their large-scale attack along the
entire cease-fire line. As reported in my letters to the
President of the Security Council and as substantiated in
General Odd Bull’s reports of 27 and 28 October [S/7930/
Add.95 and 961, there is no doubt about the offensive and
unprovoked nature of the Egyptian action. The United
Arab Republic forces were the first to initiate fire and the
last to comply with the United Nations cease-fire proposals.
Moreover, the United Arab Republic gravely escalated the
dimensions of the military confrontation by introducing
the new element of ground-to-ground rockets. That is
recorded in General Bull’s report. The artillery and rocket
barrage served also as cover for attempts by Egyptian
military forces to cross the Canal to the east bank and to
carry on their operations from there.

66. Yet the SeCUrity Council was unable to condemn the
murder of Israelis. It was helpless to call for an end to
Egyptian military attacks against Israel. It ignored the
avowed United Arab Republic policy of continued warfare
against Israel.
67. After prolonged and patient restraint Israel was left
with no choice but to act itself in self-defence and in order
to impress upon the United Arab Republic the necessity of
respecting the cease-fire. Israel decided nevertheless not to
respond in kind to Egypt’s murderous attacks. It decided
not to seek to inflict on the United Arab Republic the loss
of human lives. Israel confined itself to a measure designed
to bring home to the Government of the United Arab
Republic the fact that the policy of cease-fire violations is a
perilous one. Israel took a measure aimed at disabusing the
United Arab Republic of the notion that the Egyptian army
might ignore its cease-fire obligations with impunity, that
Egypt could claim security for itself and deny it to Israel.
Israel acted to remind the United Arab Republic Government that the aggressor is not beyond reach.

61. The premeditated character of the United Arab
Republic initiative is furthermore reflected in the advance
co-ordination between the military operations in the field
and the propaganda organs in Cairo. Within fifteen minutes
after the Egyptian forces opened their simultaneous and
concerted fire along the 100 kilometre cease-fire line, Cairo
radio was already broadcasting a complete, carefully worded Egyptian version of the incident, including the prefabricated claim that Israel had attacked first, a claim disproved
completely by the findings of the United Nations military
observers.

68. Last night an Israel commando unit blew up a power
station and two bridges on the Nile between Aswan and
Cairo. It sought to avoid bloodshed. It carefully avoided
densely populated areas, nor did it attack troops. It struck
in an effort to persuade the Egyptian Government that the
continuation of its aggressive actions is fraught with danger
and hat the maintename of the cease-fire agreement is a
common interest of both the United Arab Republic and
Israel.

62. The Egyptian attempts to deny responsibility and
distort the facts ring as hollow as indeed they are in the
light of the evidence adduced in General Bull’s report.
Criticisms of the report by the United Nations military
observers, attributed in the Egyptian information media to
United Arab Republic Government officials are a weak
camouflage for the United Arab Republic’s inability to
offer a reasonable and acceptable response to the fact that
General Bull places on Egypt, and on Egypt alone, the
responsibility for the aggression of 26 October.
63. The large-scale; planned and wanton Egyptian attack
of 26 October was launched at a time when the situation
had been completely quiet along the Suez Canal cease-fire
line. It coktitutes
a most serious assault against the
cease-fire and casts serious doubts on the willingness of the
Government of the United Arab Republic to ensure its
continuation.

69. The people of Israel is a small people, but it too has a
right to life Eke 0th nations. Israel is a small nation, but it
too has a right to independence, security and peace. It has
taken my people
twenty centuries of subjugation, exile,
suffering and carnage to retrieve our birthright and reestablish the sovereignty wrested from us by the Roman
conqueror. We shall not allow Arab conquerors with
imperialist ambitions to deprive us of it. In lands all over
the world the Jewish people has paid too high a Price for
survival to bend or weaken or falter now in its own land.

64. It becomes even more sinister when one considers that
the attack was made at a time when in New York

peace,

70. Of me Arab States we ask nothing but to leave us in
to live and let live. Let USbuild, not wage war. Let us

5

/.

,

i

disrespect for past decisions and indifference to the
demands and even implorings of this Council, which stem
not from narrow national interests but from the collective
responsibility of this Council under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

construct, not destroy, If, however, the Arab States refuse
to recognize our rights, if they continue to shed our blood,
they must understand that we shall defend and protect
ourselves as best we can, until they end their twenty-year
war of aggression and live at peace with us. Repelling Arab
attacks, thwarting Arab aggression, is to us not a matter of
military exercises, but of life and death and survival, and
the people of Israel cannot allow its fate to become the
plaything of hate and warmongers.

76. These new violations .have more serious political
implications than any since those of October 1967.
Moreover, they come only two months after other incidents
in the same sector of the cease-fire-incidents which led this
Council, through a presidential declaration [1448fh meeting, para. 73/, to require of the parties strict observance of
the cease-fire and then, through a resolution, to insist that
the cease-fire be rigorously respected 1268 (1968#.

71. Much of the Middle East tragedy is due to the
irresponsible attitude of the Egyptian Government which
has time and again become prisoner of its own hate
propaganda and led its people to frenzies of war lusts and
illusions. This was the situation created by Arab leaders in
1948 when, in an attempt to deny the Jewish people its
right to self-determination and independence, they plunged
the area into a war of aggression, promising to annihilate
the nascent State of Israel and its people. This was the
situation that prevailed throughout the unhappy armistice
period when the Egyptian Government, instead of working
towards peace, as required by its international obligations,
stirred up more hate and more hostility by every means at
its disposal and pursued active belligerency with the avowed
aim of bringing Israel to its knees. This was also the
situation in the spring of 1967 when President Nasser and
other Arab leaders intoxicated themselves and their nations
with the passion for destroying Israel by force of arms.

77. As a national Government and a member of the
Security Council with a deep commitment to the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, we are
deeply distressed by the novel justification for these
cease-fire violations put forward by the United Arab
Republic-“preventive
or protective defence”-and we continue to be distressed, as we have been in the past, by the
Israeli defence of “reprisal” or “retaliation”.
Neither is
acceptable as doctrine or as practice. Both depict a frame of
mind and a pattern of thought which casts serious doubt
upon the determination of those involved to exercise the
restraint, discipline and forbearance which is an absolute
necessity if the integrity of the cease-fire rBgime is to be
preserved and if there are to be further and prompt steps
toward replacing that regime with a permanent settlement,

72. Now again, the United Arab Republic Government
appears to be carried away by the illusion that continued
warfare against Israel is the right road. Influenced by the
unlimited supply of offensive weapons it has received and is
still receiving, it has openly embraced, as a standing policy,
the initiating of military actions against Israel. This is a
grave departure and it may bring about the same unfortunate results as past aggressive initiatives on the part of
Egypt. The United Arab Republic Government must be
aware of this, and if it is not it is surely incumbent on the
Security Council to apprise it of the gravity of persistent
acts of aggression in violation of the cease-fire.

78. Given the evidence placed before us by General Bult
and the statements made by the parties-both
inside and
outside this Council-it would be relatively easy for the
Council to pass judgement upon these cease-fire violations:
to denounce the Canal crossings and the heavy artillery
bombardment initiated along the entire Suez Canal sector
by the forces of the United Arab Republic on 26 October,
and to deprecate the strike of retaliation carried out deep in
the territory of the United Arab Republic by Israeli forces
only yesterday. This is another illustration that violence
begets violence.

73. Israel will continue to observe the cease-fire agreement. The obligations the parties have assumed under the
cease-fire are of a reciprocal nature and must therefore be
mutually observed. The time has come to think of peace
not of war, to seek peace not continued bloodshed. The
strict maintenance of the cease-fire is essential if the parties
are to advance toward peaceful agreement and end the
protracted conflict.

79. But’if we are to fulfil the high responsibility entrusted
to us, we must do better than pass judgement. We must
reaffirm in unmistakable and unequivocal terms our insistence that there should be no violation of the cease-fire for
any reason whatsoever, whether for so-called preventive
defence or for reprisal. We must assert our demand that
both sides urgently take steps, individually and in cooperation with the United Nations cease-fire machinery on
the ground, to ensure that all those under their respective
control, military or civilian, scrupulously and faithfully
observe the cease-fire.

74. Mr. WIGGINS (United States of America): The United
States is both distressed and disturbed that this Council is
again confronted with clear and grave violations of the
cease-fire. This cease-fire, established in June 1967, has
been reaffirmed repeatedly and in terms of increasing
strength. We have collectively insisted more than once that
the cease-fire should be scrupulously observed by all the
parties.

80. This Council also has the right, in fulfilling its Charter
responsibilities, to ask of the parties whether they intend
hereafter not just to adhere to, but to observe scrup~l~~sl~,
the cease-fire; and whether they are prepared to co-operate
with the United Nations machinery to ensure that the
cease-fire violations of the last few days are exceptions or
aberrations which shall not be repeated.

75. As human beings we are distressed by the loss of lives,
the destruction of property and the human suffering which
these violations have caused. As a member of this Council
we are distressed by this demonstrated disregard of and

81. And finally, my Government feels it is incumbent
upon this Council, faced with unsatisfactory observance of ’
6

,,

the cease-fire in the Suez sector, to seek promptly to
determine-with
the help of the Secretary-General and the
Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization-what
if anything can be done to increase the
effectiveness of the United Nations cease-fire machinery
and to prevent future violations of the cease-fire by either
party.

Middle East, other things being equal, to that which existed
at one time on the banks of the Yalu River.
87. A second conclusion which the Algerian delegation
draws from this latest Israeli aggression is that it is useless
to build castles in the air in the Middle East about northern
or southern or other frontiers, or to go on arguing about
the cease-fire of this or that date, so long as the sole and
real problem of the Middle East is not confronted without
equivocation: the problem of Palestine, of the occupied
national territories. Peace, like war, is one and indivisible,
and it is fanciful to hope that lasting peace can be
established on the foundations of extended local cease-fires.

82. Under the present conditions in the Middle East, as
my predecessor stated in this Council less than two months
ago, and as has been all too vividly demonstrated in the last
few days, a cease-fire cannot result in anything better than
a fragile and implicitly explosive situation. As we stated at
that time, a cease-fire is not peace-and it would be a
foolish deception to confuse it with peace. But a cease-fire
is a necessary condition to the shaping and the building of
peace. It follows from this, in both logic and practice, that
this Council must insist upon the integrity and scrupulous
observance of the cease-fire. We must not weaken the
fragile foundation of “no violence” which the SecretaryGeneral’s representative, Ambassador Jarring, is trying to
transform into a just and lasting settlement, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

88. Actually, everything indicates that Israel has gradually
been caught up in its own toils, that it has been trapped in
the myth that it itself has created following its past and
present terrorist actions.
89.. Judging by Israeli reactions and by the satisfaction
which apparently is felt in Tel Aviv, it would seem that the
only important fact in the present situation is that the
aggression of 31 October 1968 was carried out by a
commando group.
90. Without going into the improbability of this business
of a commando group disporting itself, apparently, 230
miles west of the Suez Canal, we find it a source of serious
concern for the future that it should be possible to rejoice
over this type of action without at the same time perceiving
the clear threat that it implies. The threat, indeed, is barely
veiled. The United Arab Republic is in fact being served
notice that, failing unconditional capitulation on its part,
the destruction of the Aswan Dam is not to be ruled out.
My delegation would not wish to dwell on the predictable
consequences, both political and military, of such a threat
at a time of rising tension such as the present.

83. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): I should like, first of alI, to offer the President the
congratulations of the Algerian delegation on his assumption of the presidency of the Security Council, and to
endorse the remarks he addressed to his predecessor,
Mr. Ignatieff, the representative of Canada.
84. Everything today points to the fact that Israel is
engaged in raising the bidding, a policy which, in the end,
can touch off a general conflagration. This is apparent from
the very nature of Israel’s aggressive military operations,
which now seem to be directed less to the destruction of
inhabited places than to spectacular and provocative actions. It is apparent also, from the news which everyone has
read concerning the Israeli raid on the west bank of the
Suez Canal.

91. We shall not expatiate on humanitarian considerations,
for we believe that the unconcealed threat of destruction is
capable of opening the eyes of those who, notwithstanding
all indications, continue blindly to see Israel as a refuge for
the survivors of Auschwitz and Treblinka. Today it is the
Nile; tomorrow why not the Zambezi? Perhaps there is still
time today to attempt a radical solution of the problem of
the Middle East, in all its aspects and all its implications, for
it is hardly necessary to emphasize that, even from the
Israeli point of view, it is hard to understand this escalation
which has already turned the present conflict into a popular
war whose outcome is predictable.

85. There are several reasons. In the first place, Israel
wants to gain a little more credibility for the notion that it
is, allegedly, an invincible, omnipotent and omnipresent
State, capable of making its presence felt at any time and in
any place. In the second place, Israel has to prove to its
domestic public opinion, whipped to frenzy by the Tel Aviv
authorities, that those authorities have no intention of
tempering their warlike ardour and that Israel means to set
itself up as the arbiter of the situation in the Middle East.

92. Perhaps the only explanation that could be given
today lies in the fact that the alliances in the Arab world do
not have the good fortune to please the imperialist States
and that now, as in the past, Israel is prepared to play the
cards dealt it by hidden hands that do not have to be
identified.

86. This is not the first time that the Algerian delegation
has warned the Security Council against Israel’s reckless
undertakings and/or the consequences they may be expected to have. Perhaps my delegation should repeat those
warnings once more, for it seems to us that today a new
step has been taken: that step is the launching of operations
which are completely pointless from a military standpoint
and whose predictable consequence can only,be to create
the conditions for a conflagration which must inevitably
become generalized. Our appraisal of the situation should
indeed be stated in even stronger terms, for it is no
exaggeration to compare the situation now obtaining in the

93. However this may be, the Security Council is invited
to take urgent and decisive measures, not with a view to
calling once again, and vainly, for the implementation of a
ceaseifire which settles nothing, but to confront without
delay the political problem created by the presence of Israel
in the Middle East.
7

.

94. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I wish to take this opportunity,
on behalf of the Soviet delegation, to associate myself with
the good wishes expressed to the President on his assumption of that most responsible office, the presidency of the
Security Council. At the same time, I should also like to
weIcome to the Security Council our new colleague, the
representative of the United States, and to express the hope
that he wilI make a constructive contribution to the
Council’s work.

part of the world, and how imperative it is that the
aggressor’s forces should be withdrawn with all possible
speed from the Arab lands they have occupied.
102. As for the Soviet Union’s position on this question,
the Soviet Union is determined to see to it, together with
all peace-loving States, with all those concerned to strengthen peace in the Near East, that Israel’s aggression is brought
to a halt and that a political settlement is effected in the
Near East on the basis of the aforementioned resolution of
22 November 1967.

9.5. The events in the Near East continue to be central to
the Security Council’s preoccupations, the situation in that
part of the world continues to be fraught with dangerous
problems. The reason for this is the aggressive policy of
Israel, which persists in refusing to carry out the Security
Council’s decision concerning a political settlement in the
Near East and seeks to hold on to the Arab lands which it
has seized.

103. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
first let me congratulate you on the attainment of your
high office. I would only say now that we are happy to put
you to work on this first day of your sentence, a sentence
so I expect of one month’s hard labour. We thank ybur
distinguished predecessor for maintaining a pacific silence
for a month, a pacific silence which leaves us in good heart
and in good voice for the stormy month ahead. It is some
time since we had a Danish President. We remember the last
occasion with respectful admiration. Knowing your own
qualities of persistence, thoroughness and sound judgement,
we know that we shall have equal cause to be grateful to
you. I know that we shall all respond to your leadership.

96. It is precisely Israel’s occupation of the territories of
Arab States that is the constant source of tension and the
reason for ever new outbreaks of hostilities.

:

(

/

”

97, ‘Mr. El Kony, the representative of the United Arab
Republic, has at today’s meeting presented specific facts
showing that Israel’s new acts of aggression against the
United Arab Republic-the Israeli air raid $ee,pinside the
territory of the United Arab Republic and the bombing of
targets in that territory-was
a premeditated act of provocation and therefore constituted a further act of aggression, a
further blatant violation of the decisions of the Security
Council, and a further violation of the cease-fire.

104. I also take this opportunity to welcome Ambassador
Wiggins. He comes from the superior isolation of Washington to the turmoil of New York. He comes from the high
arrogance of the editorial to the low anxiety of parliamentary diplomacy here in the United Nations. We welcome
him whole-heartedly. We shall all compete, I am sure, in
contributing to the completion of his higher public education.

98. In his statement today, the representative of Israel
endeavoured to justify these acts. Indeed, he threatened
that such violations would continue. Quite obviously, the
Security Council cannot remain indifferent to this situation.

105. I doubt if anyone will wish to prolong our debate
tonight. This is certainly not the time to intensify hatred or
to increase tension; nor is it the time for stoking the fires of
partisan belligerency. It will be well to ponder the
statements we have heard. We need time to reflect on the
lessons which we should by now have learned. Nevertheless,
there are three propositions which it may be well to put to
the Council before we go to bed tonight.

99. In the dangerous situation which Israel is creating in
the Near East, the duty of all States which recognize their
responsibility for international peace and security, the duty
of all members of the Security Council, on which the
Charter of the United Nations confers the primary responsibility in this respect, is to condemn Israel categorically, to
demand that it should cease immediately, once and for all,
its acts of aggression against the Arab countries, and that it
should comply without delay with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 concerning political
settlement in the Middle East.

106. The first proposition is an old one. It must be in all
our minds as we listen to the statements made by the two
sides; it is the old proposition that violence is evil, that
violence breeds violence and that violence takes us not
nearer to a settlement but makes a settlement all the more
remote, No one of us can fail to be concerned and
disturbed as bloodshed and destruction go ahead while
conciliation and co-operation fall back. Ingenuity and
energy are devoted not to containing and stopping the
violence but to extending and intensifying it. But both sides
must know that violence can lead only to more hate and
more hopelessness.

100. AS we all know, the Arab States long ago announced
officially-and references to this were made recently from
the rostrum of the twenty-third session of the General
Assembly-that
they accept that resolution of the Security
Council and are prepared to carry it into effect. The Arab
States are loyally and constructively co-operating with
Mr. Jarring, the Special Representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General and most of us desire the success
of his mission. Thus everything hinges on Israel.

107. The second proposition which must be in all our
minds tonight is that thu violence which has occurred
makes more necessary and more urgent the advance to a
settlement. I have long felt that one of the most extraordinary features of the situation in the Near East is that
we endeavour to grapple with a problem on which we all
know very well the eventual answer. We know it in advance.

101. The development of events in the Near East shows
how dangerous it is to delay a political settlement in that
rI
8

In the Far East or in Africa it may still be difficult to see
the outline of just settlements.In the Near Easthoweverwe
have together unanimously declared the ‘purposesand
principleson which a settlementmust be based.Wehave all
acceptedthosepurposesandprinciples.Weknow before we
start what the basisof the ultimate settlementmust be, a
settlementin lastingjustice not to one sidebut to everyone.
The only remainingquestion is whether that solution is to
be achievedwith or without an interval of terrible conflict
and vast human suffering, Consequently, the greater the
bitternessand the worse the bloodshed,the more we should
devoteall our effort hereto the enterp+e which we startedin
this Council nearly a year ago. That enterpriseled to the
appointment of AmbassadorGunnar Jarring asthe Special
Representativeof the Secretary-General.

put it to US how dangerousit is to postponea political
settlement. There has been far too much delay; there has
been far too much bloodshed;and there hasbeenfar too
much suffering. It is not a destinationwe seek,we know
the destination;but we still need to find the road to the
destination on which we all agreeda year ago.That is the
compellingresponsibilitywhich must dominateour debate
and direct all our urgent deliberation.
112. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
Councilthat I havejust receiveda note from the representative of Saudi Arabia stating that he would like to address
the Council this evening on the questionunder consideration [S/8882/. If no member of the Council has any
comment, I would proposeto invite the representativeof
Saudi Arabia to take a seatat the Counciltablein order to
makea statement.

108., Wenow know more clearly than we did then that the
purposesand,principles we laid down arethe only basisfor
a settlkment.Weare all the more sureof that now than ever
we were. And we have since learned that the SecretaryGeneral’sSpecial Representative is a man of unrivalled
integrity and resolution. We have here in New York the
Foreign Secretaries of the United Arab Republic and
Jordan. The Foreign Secretary of Israel is duehere, I trust,
within hours. We trust that we shall turn from the
recrimination of this debateto give AmbassadorJarring in
his dealingswith the Foreign Ministers every support and
encouragementas his mission now enters on its decisive
stage,

At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. M Baroody
(SaudiArabia) took a placeat the Counciltable.
113. The PRESIDENT: If the representativeof Saudi
Arabia is prepared to speaknow, I shouldlike to call on
him.
114. Mr. BAROODY (SaudiArabia): Thank you, Mr. President. I do not know, Sir, whether anyonein the Council
should congratulateYOU or commiseratewith you, especially at this late hour. Hoqvever,I do think it is an honour
for me to speak under your presidency-the more so
becauseyou comefrom a smallcountry; SaudiArabia is a
small country and I am sure you will understandmy
intervention with sympathy.

109. There is a third proposition which I hope will be in
the forefront of our minds. Let us never forget-as wk
deplorethe intensification of violence and aswe trust that
the recent violencewill itself, God willing, give impetusand
urgency to our advance to a settlement-let us not forget
that it is the innocent who suffer first from violence and
they who suffer most. We think of the civilian populations
who live in dangerand in fear. And we do not forget that in
the hills of easternJordan, aswinter now approaches,there
are hundreds of thousands of men, women and children
facing great hardshipand privation and apparently doomed
to the suffering of exposureto another harshwinter. They
are innocent. More than 300,000 of them have homesto
which they can immediately return. There are refugee
campsin the comparative clemency of the climate in the
Jordan valley now standingunoccupied. The familiesnow
facing hunger and cold on the high hillsidesfrom Irbid to
Es-Saltshould, I believe, come first in our compassionand
high on our priorities of action. And I, for one, do not
believe that an appeal for their return to their homeswill
now go unheeded.

115. I had not decided to take the floor this evening.
However, I wascompelledto do so for two reasons.First,
Mr. Tekoah could not restrain himself from throwing
aspersionson the Arab States and the Arab people.
Secondly, it is already 2 November in London, England-2 November, the perfidious date of the Balfour
Declaration, ‘which is at the root of all the trouble with
which you are dealingheretonight. Coincidentally,it fell to
me to addressthis Council on the samedate a coupleyears
ago[1314th meeting/. It is indeedstrangethat thosewho
take a leading part, besidesthe representativeof Israel,
should be our distinguishedcolleaguefrom the United
States, whom I welcome, and my good friend Lord
Caradon, the representativeof the United Kingdom. The
United Kingdom lies about 3,000 miles away from Pales”
tine. The distancehas not change’dsincethe days of the
Balfour Declaration. The United Stateslies at a distanceof
7,000 miles from Palestine.And they take the issueto
heart, both of them, and addressus with the same
platitudes which I have beenhearingsincethe 1920sfrom
the British andsince1947from the Americans.

110. We seek the end of violence; we seek an end to
humansuffering; we seeka just and permanentpeace.
111. Last November we in this Council achieved a
unanimousdecision. I greatly trust that this November it
will be possible,through the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and his SpecialRepresentative,to ensurethat the
purposesand principleswhich we set a year agowill now be
given practical effect. Either we advance together now in
November,or all our efforts over a year will cometo grief. I
certainly agree with what we heard the distinguished
representativeof the Soviet Union say just now when he

116. What have the indigenouspeopleof Palestinedoneto
the United Kingdom or to the United States,or what have
the Arabs for that matter doneto either of thosecountries,
to merit their intervention in successive
yearson behalf of a
7 Have we Arabsinterfered in
usurpingState called Israel.
the affairs of the United Kingdom? The farthestthe Arabs
could go, centuriesago,wasSpain.Now our Spanishfriends
thank us for the culture of the Arabs in Spain.Wedid not
9

go as far as the United Kingdom in”our incursion, and that
was in the Middle Ages, If some Arabs have come here to
the United States, they have come as immigrants and
identify themselves, as good Americans, with the interests
of the .United States.
11’7. This question has lived with me for forty Years and
you gentlemen here talk about it because you are briefed. I
am excepting Lprd Caradon, who was in Palestine as a
magistrate in the twenties. He knows about the question,
but of course he represents his Government and he has to
abide by instructions. But you gentlemen here talk about
this question of Palestine vicariously, from hearsay or in
accordance with the instructions of your Governments,
which are based on the modalities of self-serving national
interest or for no reason other than that you now think
that you can solve this question the way p.~ would like to.
118. Who does not like peace? All of us like peace. We are
committed in this Organization to peace. But peace cannot
come by compulsion. Peace cannot come by coercion. No,
Sir. Every Arab is perturbed by what is happening in
Palestine. I have addressed myself to the Council; from the
days of Abraham to now I have marshalled the facts of the
Holy Land. Tonight again Mr. Tekoah mentions that they
regained the land which the Romans robbed from them
2,000 years ago. I question Mr, Tekoah across the table
with regard to the two interventions. Since when was God
Almighty, our Creator, in the real estate business, that he
allocated Palestine to the Semites of the Jewish faith? We
are Semites too. Let them produce the title deeds. Again I
have to remind him of King Drvid, who said in one of his
psalms: “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness thereof.”
It is a hoax that Palestine belongs to any one religious
denomination since Roman days. Palestine or any other
country belongs to the indigenous people of the land and in
1919 the indigenous people of the land were 94, per cent,
and some of them were Jewish. They were our brothers,
and they were mostly Semites. There were a few who had
come from Eastern Europe and settled there in the 1890s.
But the Jews who were there we had no quarrel with, They
were our brothers. Here come Jeuis from Eastem Europe
who have used Judaism as a motivation for political and
economic ends. They want, in the twentieth century, to
make a nationality out of a religion, when nationalism has
failed and culminated in two world wars.

this trouble. Empires will crumble, and they have crumbled,
when they are not based on justice. Where is the Empire
now? I should like to ask Mr. Wiggins, who is a journalist,
to refresh his memory about the memoirs of a President of
the United States in 1947 and read what he mentioned
about the Palestine question. I do not want to repeat it
now. I have iepeated it chapter and verse from the rostrum
of the United Nations. But Mr, Wiggins is making a case
tonight, and I have to enlighten him to the best of my
ability, having lived with this question for forty years. He
looks a very honest and good man.
120. I do not want to repeat what Mr. Truman said in his
memoirs. Successive American Governments have told me
in the presence of the person who is now the Chief of State
that they did not know what Mr. Truman was doing when
he took that decision, without being briefed enough. He
comes from the Middle West. What does he know about the
Holy Land and its politics? He was skilful in the domestic
politics of the United States and a great President as far as
that was concerned-but what did he know about the Holy
Land? He was ill-advised. Telephones were buzzing for the
dissidents. Israel was created by the pressure exerted in
those days by the President of the United States.
121. Successive American Governments have told me that
that was a mistake. But their policy is making capital out of
that mistake. Mr. Balfour once thought that the presence of
a national home for the Jews might one day redound to the
interest of the British Empire. I must say-and this is to the
credit of the United Kingdom-that
there is no empire
today. For anyone who exercises world power to think that
words such as “peace” or equivalent platitudes can solve
the problem, there will be retribution, my dear Mr, Wiggins.
122. We have been in that area six thousand years, we
Semites. Are they Semites? They have a Semitic religion
and there may be more Semites-and if they are, they are
our brothers. I presume you are a Christian and you have a
Semitic religion but that does not make you a Semite.
Those Zionists from Eastern Europe are no more Semitesthan you or I are Chinese.
123. You come as the arbiters-my
food friend Lord
Caradon and you yourself, Mr. Wiggins-of our destiny. But
not of the destiny of Saudi Arabia, not of the destiny of
Egypt. Egypt is one of the cradles of world civilization.
Unless mankind commits suicide there will always be an
Egy,pt, there will always be a Saudi Arabia-and I hope
there will always be a United States of America. Let us not
get drunk with power.

119. I do not want to go into the history of the Balfour
Declaration, but Mr. Balfour promised the Holy Land for
two reasons. One was that the Zionists were powerful and
in 1917 worked hard to bring the United States into the
First World War. Secondly, he thought the British Empire
was indestructible and that it would be a good thing,
although the Arabs were fighting on the side of the Allies,
to have a wedge in the Arab lands. The British looked far
ahead, in those days at least. Who knew who might court
the Arabs? They wanted a raison d’e^tre for their presence
in the Holy Land. As Mr. Balfour told Sir Ronald Storrs,
who in I916 was a member of the British Agency in Cairo,
when he questioned Mr. Balfour with regard to the equivoca.lity of the Balfour Declaration-and I am paraphrasing:
“Every word of it was judiciously studied for maintaining
the interests of the British Empire.” Where is the British
Empire now? Fifty years later we are here in the midst of

124. Now a word to my good friend Mr. Malik. 1 was
sitting in 1947 at Lake Success when Palestine was
partitioned and we were indeed taken aback when
Mr. Gromyko raised his hand in favour of the partition of
Palestine. But since then the Soviet Union has changed its
policy. “Oh,” you might say, “of course; that is for their
national interests”. But what are you doing yourselves?
Are you not serving your national interests or are you so in
love with the Zionist Jews-you Anglo-Saxons from the
United States and England? I lived in your countries long
enough. I know how you-not you, you are gentlemen-but
how some of your people referred to the Jews or the Arabs.
10

They were second-class or third-class citizens. But of course
attitudes have changed and we are living in an enlightened
age. The Soviet Union has corrected its error. It was a
mistake-at least they tell us so.

here and tell us what we should do and what we should
not do.

125. They serve their interests. Of course they serve their
interests. Is there any State here that does not serve its
interests? We have not got into a federalist world or one
world; we all serve our national interests. But if they are
serving their national interests, at least their national
interests harmonize with the interests of the people of
Palestine, who have been sadly neglected.
126. You talk as if this dispute were between Egypt and
Israel, or Syria and Israel, or tiny Jordan and Israel. Well, of
course it is, but it is largely due to the Palestine people
having been banished from their own land. And Mr. Tekoah
speaks of hatred and atrocities. Has he forgotten the
massacres of Deir Yassin? I do not want to poison the
atmosphere with anything that might spell hatred, because I
think hatred is a disease and we should all try and see to it
that we do not hate even our enemies. I hope we have no
enemies. I submit that the Zionists are their own worst
enemies. They chose to establish a national State in, if I
I-nay use a figure of speech, a hornet’s nest.
127. There are a hundred million Arabs from the shores of
the Atlantic to the confines of Iran; down to the Sudan in
the heart of Africa and to the frontiers of Turkey, an area
that is larger than the United States and has more resources
perhaps than the United States. A hundred million people.
They may bicker-ask
me. They may bicker and quarrel
with one another, but when it comes to the incursion of
those Eastern Europeans,or for that matter any foreign
element, into their midst, they becomeone andwhen they
find that the Palestinianshave been chasedout of their
land, every one of them, every Arab, becomesa Palestinian.

130. I am not talking from books tonight, nor did I talk
from books on other nights. I am speaking from my
personal experience which is drawn from the sufferings of
the’palestinian people and of many Arab people. I do not
come here with typed sheetsof material becauseI have
lived with it for too long. We have no hope that you will
arbitrate in a way that will redound to the benefit of the
Arab world although the interest of both your countries is
in the Arab world. But of coursethe Zionistshave wormed
their Way into your countries,into your Governments; they
control the mass media of information; they are big
financiers; they tip the balance of elections. You have to
court them. Do not court us: for heavenrssake leave us
alone. You have interests in the Arab countries. It is a
wonder that your interests have not been menaced or
threatened. It showsyou how alert are the Governments of
Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Algeria, Tunisia,
Libya, Morocco, Lebanon, Iraq and other countries. They
have restrainedthe people.Do not think that the people are
pieces of clay in their hands. I have been receiving the
young in my office in sit-ins and they have beentelling me
that I should work with them to overthrow my own
Government becauseit is not doing enough to expel the
invaders of Palestine.Do you think that the Governments
are poisoning the people? If you want to believe
Mr. Tekoah, it is your privilege. He is a Zionist; you can
believe him. But it is the people who will tread upon our
Governments if once and for all they do somethingwhich
contravenes the aspirations of the people and what they
expect to be done in order to seeto it that the rights of the
people of Palestinearenot for ever cast by the wayside.

128. Let us not fool ourselves.Arab Governments will
come andgo like other Governments.The Arab peoplemay
have a psychosis-call it a psychosis-but there is no
psychiatrist to treat them in the Security Council. And-I
am talking figuratively-only when the pus goesfrom that
abscessand is squeezedout will there be peacein Palestine.
Mr. Tekoah takesissuewith what happenedon the Suez.I
am not a military man. He talks about aggression
against
Israel. Israel asof now lieson the shoresof the SuezCanal.
When it was partitioned in 1947, and wrongly so, on the
map it looked like a daggerwith a hand. Noti it hasbecome
like a bottle of ink that hasbeenspilt over that Arab region
and has spread to the Suez Canal beyond the Jordan
River-and that is not the end of the story.
129. What have the Arabs done to you, my friends from
the United Kingdom? I am not saying,“my friends”
derisively; I am sayingit becauseI meanit from the bottom
of my heart. I lived in the United Kingdom for many years
and the British are a marvellouspeople.And I must saythat
the American people are lovely people. I have not beento
Russia,but I am sure that from what I have seenof the
Russainsthat they are a big-heartedpeople. But what have
we done to all of you that you shouldsit asarbitersin the
Security Council, in the GeneralAssembly,over the destiny
of the Arab lands? What have we doneto YOU?YOUcome

131. This is not the usual speechyou listen to in this
Council. There are a few of our friends who have suffered
with us and know what it is like, such as our colleagues
from Pakistan and India-Asians, Moslems and nonMoslems. They realize the position becauseat one time
they were the victims of colonialismand this is colonialism
by proxy. Why should you go and colonize if there is
someoneto do it for you? I feel sorry for the Jews who
live in Palestinebecausemany of them are real Semitesand
I feel sorry also for the non-Semitic Jews: they arehuman
beings and we believe in the brotherhood of man. We have
nothing againstthem asJews.On the contrary, we have the
sameGod. For your information, Mr. Wiggins,Jehovah was
the God of the wife of Mosesthe Midianite from Jordan. Of
course, God is invisible and in those pagandays somename
had to be given to Yahweh, Jehovah. Their prophets are our
prophets, but we never knew when we were young that the
day would come when Eastern EuropeanJews-or gentiles,
for that matter-would come under the banner of religion
to claim the land. Yet all of you tell UShere-and you
remind me of preachers-“All of you, you Zionists and you
Arabs, should exerciseself-restraint and be brothers”. HOW
can we? We cannot be brothers when the indigenous
people of Palestine-forget that they are Arab; the indigenous people of Palestine,many of whom may have been
Jews but became either Christian or Moslems,while some
of them remained Jews-are excluded from their country.
132. You do not intimidate th.eArabs by announcingthat
your Government is going to sell Phantoms. The Soviet

11

I
/

5

Union has a lot of sophisticated equipment also, which they
will sell. If you want a conflagration, we warn YOU that
although. we would not have brought it about the Arab
people will fight to the last man, from Morocco to the
confines of Iran down to the Sudan, but not necessarily in
pitched battles. Technologically they are weak but in spirit
they are strong. There is a resilience in Arabism, which is
invincible. The Arabs started in that peninsula, a very few
of them, and we Arabized that whole area. Now there are
100 million of them. The British gave British passports to
the Indians, but they remained Indians, and the people of
the colonies remained people of the colonies. And you, my
dear friend from the United States, call your country a
melting-pot but you have not yet melted all the ethnic
groups. We know that and we hope you will do SO because
there is nothing greater than the ideals of the old America. I
studied in one of your universities abroad and I know what
the ideals of the Americans are-the old fashioned Americans, not the hippie Americans.

any Jewish blood were shed, if any Jews are killed, because
they too are human beings. I am not a believer in blood,
Blood is only for transfusion, not for racial determination.
138. But did we begin this whole thing? It started on
2 November, which is already the date in Europe, the date
of the perfidious Balfour Declaration,
139. A fait accompli you might say. There is no fait
accompli in the Fertile Crescent, in that part of Asia lying
astride three continents. There is no fait accompli. Conquerors have come and conquerors have gone, and the
indigenous people still remain. We have suffered a great deal
throughout the centuries. SO what? Let there be another
spell of suffering, if man has not learned to live in peace.
What shall we do? Shall we come to the Council, as I
mentioned on several occasions, to deal with sanguinary
events in an interminable chain, a chain that has no end?
Of course we can do something. You can-instead of telling
us-prevail on those whom you help usurp Palestine. You
could counsel them to behave and open the door of
immigration to any European Jew who would like to come,
without trying to propagandize all the Jews in Christendom
and elsewhere, urging them to go to Palestine and live under
the banner of Zionism.

133. You cannot do away with Arabism, unless of course
you bring the world to an end. The British went to Africa,
the French went to Africa, and so did others. They could
not Frenchify or Anglicize the people in their colonies. We
did not Arabize by missionary work. The people became
Arab, the people of North Africa became Arab, some of the
black people of the Sudan became Arab, not through
missionaries or by conversion but because Arabism appeals
to them and they are our brothers. We do not look at the
colour of the skin, we Arabs: whether it is black, white or
yellow, they are our brothers and they are all Arabs.

140. I am afraid those Jews who are loyal Americans are
beginning to be brain-washed because of the mass media of
information that the Zionists control in this country and in
Western Europe. And if our friends in the Soviet Union da
not watch out, they Wil try to brain-wash them too, for
they are very capable.

134. You cannot say that about America. This is still a
young country. The “melting pot” has not melted every
ethnic group. Nor did our friends the British succeed in
Anglicizing their colonial peoples when they had the
colonies.

141. Do we hate the Jews? No, we do not hate the Jews. I
repeat and I repeat again: some of my best friends are-not
were, but still are-Jews. But they are not Zionists. Anyone
who wants a list of them, I can give it to him privately. 1
have no quarrel with the Jews. We have a quarrel with a
political movement, a movement of Zionists masquerading
under the banner of the noble religion which is Judaism, for
political and economic ends. That is the whole story. We
have to have a motivation. We thought that religious
motivations were antiquated, ever since 1914. In 1914 the
Allies had such slogans as “the war to save democracy”.
They were fooling themselves. The Second World War was
waged to gain the “four freedoms”. You have to have a
slogan. What four freedoms? There is war now, in the era
of the United Nations, just as there was during the time of
the League of Nations. We thought we could bring an end

135. Here I want to give an example, and it is addressed
across the table to the representative of Israel. He said that
they were there for two thousand years. What about the
Red Indians who are on reservations? They were here in
Manhattan. Would you allow the Red Indians to come from
the reservations and say, “we should have the United States
back”? Would you give it to them, just because they do
not have any arms?
136. Whom are we fooling here? First of all, I proved that
the religious argument is a hoax. These people are secular,
just as we are. I am’secular. My religion is my own concern.
These people from Israel are secular, Oh, they have their
fundamentalists just as every other religion has-the Orthodox Jews. We have fundamentalism in Southern Arabia, we
have fundamentalists everywhere, But they are secular and
they are playing on the sentiments of those poor Jews who
were persecuted by Hitler, thinking that after twenty years
those Palestinians in the camps will have died, and then the
Arab countries will absorb them and everything will be
solved.

tG WU.

142. We still find political arrangements being made
behind the scenes. We salute coexistence between the great
Powers. Sometimes we are lost, we small Powers. We do not
know what that coexistence implies. One day we find them
roaring at each other like two lions-but keeping a safe
distance. And the “hot war”-there
is no hot war mGJlgSt
them, there are “hot lines”-the “hot wars” are in our area.
143. This is what is happening, Mr. Wiggins. YOU are a
journalist; I hope you will cover that in the future in your
newspapers, saying that you met a man who lived with the
Palestine question for forty years and he told you what he
thought about it and told your colleagues also. You may

137. And what do we find? It does not please me,
because, as you said-you, the representative of the United
Kingdom and the representative of the United States-there
will be a lot of innocent blood shed. And I would decry it if
12

not agree with me politically, but if you need more
information YOU do not have to take my word for it. Lord
Caradon knows about these things. He knows us Arabs, he
knows
US better than we know ourselves. We could claim
him as an Arabist; he talks our language, he salutes me in
Arabic. He knows me, but he is just a representative of his
country, as we all are. What can he do?
144. YOU will come again here to the Council and deal
with events that remind me of the tribal wars of yore: “We
killed them and they killed us. They killed Us and we killed
them.” This is what is happening in the Holy Land of
Palestine, the land of Christ, the Prince of Peace.
14.5. I am talking of the political Zionists, not the religious
Zionists. To the religious Zionists Zion is of the spirit. It is
not the territorial Zion. Zion is a mountain. Although they
are secular, they become fundamentalists, the political
Zionists. We have no quarrel with Zion of the spirit. But
these Zionists are Zionists that came from Eastern Europe
in order to colonize that part of the world, with the
motivation that God gave them the land. God does not give
any land. People grab land. No, they grabbed it by
conquest.
146. If there were no resiliency in the Arab people, I
would say that they might succeed as the old pilgrims
succeeded, by decimating the Red Indians. We are not Red
Indians. I have a great deal of admiration for the Red
Indians, for their valour and for their honour. I have read
about them in the books of American authors, who were
not red but white, and who were honourable and who were
honest. Most of the treaties were broken by the white man,
not by the Red Indians. At least honourable American
authors have written about this sad episode.
147. But we are not Red Indians; we are Arabs. Ninetyeight per cent of us are Moslems and there are 600 million
Moslems, or about that number, in the world. What will
you do with them? Antagonize them? “Oh”, you say,
“religion is losing its grip.” But there can be a revival of
religion. And I will decry any religious war. There will be a
revival of religion. Maybe there will be a revival to the good
of religion, to re-establish the moral codes instead of
glorifying in the ritual.

loOk fomd
fi- an era df brotherhood with the Arabs, in
which they can Eve in Palestine as people of the area, not
under the banner of Eastern Zionism, which Usurped a part
of the Arab world. They are welcome there to live with us
as brothers, bUt not under such a banner as Israel
symbolizes.
150. My last word for’tonight, after a lengthy day, is that
we should all ponder what to do in the future. I Ilope
members of the Council will take what I have said seriously;
and if by any chance I have hurt anyone with my talk, I
mUSt assure them that it was not intended, I was speaking
from tiy heart, from the heart of a person who has
laboured for twenty-three years in this United Nations for
the observance of human rights and it saddens me that
human rights are nowadays trampled under foot, because
there can be no observance of human rights, no respect for
human rights, in any bloody conflict, or in any times of
emergency.
15 1. SO I do hope that a new approach will be devised to
deal with this, problem, instead of abortive meetings ending
up with fruitless resolutions or a consensus that is not at all
effective, not even a palliative. The Council should grapple
with the situation squarely to see our point of view, instead
of counselling restraint, to prevail on the Zionists, for their
own good and for the good of the people of the area, to
re-examine their presence in that part of the world. If they
want to stay there, let them stay as part of the Middle East,
like other people, without chauvinism, without any exclusive nationality, but rather, as part and parcel of a
community that reveres the Holy Land because of their
religious associations, without any political gain or any
ulterior motive, economic or otherwise.
152. I must thank you, Mr. President, and the members of
the Council for granting me the time to speak. I apologize
to you, Sir, but I knew that as the representative of a small
nation you would not begrudge me the right to speak. I am
also thankful to the big Powers which have not objected to
these words.
153. The PRESIDENT: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list for tonight. I might therefore perhaps
be allowed first to express my gratitude to all the speakers
who have extended their good wishes to me for the coming
month. I may perhaps be allowed in particular to express
my gratitude to the representative of the United Kingdom
for the generous comment he was good enough to make not
only about my distinguished predecessor, but also about
myself.

148. I come now to the item before us. I think,
gentlemen, that you are wasting your time. You Will
probably meet and reach a consensus which will be read out
by the President and will call upon the two parties to
respect the cease-fire line, They are becoming like clich&
rubber stamps. You will depend on the observations of the
representative of the Secretary-General, the illustrious
General Odd Bull. More observers will be put here and less
observers there.

154. Having consulted members of the Council informallY,
I would venture to suggest that the Council decide to
adjourn now and to reconvene on Monday afternoon,
4 November, at 3 o’clock. If that is generally acceptable, 1
might alsO urge all the members of the Council to remain
available in order that the President may contact them
should any development make either COnWltations or a
meeting necessary before Monday afternoon.

149. But it will not work out. The whole Arab world is
galvanized. The only solution is that the Zionists in
Palestine should come to their senses-and I hope they do
that, for their sake as well as our own-and relinquish that
dream that they can gather the Jews of the whole world in
Palestine. I-et them renounce such ambitions, which really
belong to the colonial days of the nineteenth century, and

me meeting rose at 11.30 p.m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Gekevo.

COMMEtiT
Ler

SE PROCURER

publications

der

LES PUBLICATIONS

Notions

Punier

sonl

diporitoires
du monde
entier.
Informet-vow
Notions
Unier,
Section
des venter,
New York

KAK

tlO/lY’iLtTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publitociones
en todos partes
Venter,

Litho

in United

Nations,

Nuevo

New York

MIAAHMFl

del

PUBLICACIONES

DES NATIONS
en

vente

UNIES

dons

ler

ouprir
de votre
ov Genitve.
’

OPrAHM3Al@M

OSbEAMHEHHbIX

DE LAS NACIONES

de Ias Naciones
Unidor
estdn
mundo.
Consulte
01 su librero

libroiries

librairie

et

les

ogences

ou adressez-vow

b:

HA~IIII

UNIDAS

en venta en librerios
y cosas distribuidorar
o dirijose
q : Nociones
Unidar,
Secci6n

de

York o Ginebro.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35001-October

1972-2,050
