IX
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE
398 (V).

Libya or when considering requests for technical assistance for Libya.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.

Technical assistance for Libya after
achievement of independence

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November
1949,
H avinr/ considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 322 B ( XI) of 15 August 1950, and the
proposal of the Secretary-General 1 as to the procedure
which would enable Libya to continue to receive technical assistance after its independence has been achieved
and before it has become a Member of the United
Nations or of a specialized agency participating in the
expanded programme of technical assistance,
Considering the special responsibliity of the United
Nations for the future of Libya,
Recognizing the need for continuing technical assistance to Libya without interruption, even after the
attainment of its independence, for the development of
its economy, for its social progress and for the improvement of its public administration,
Recogni::ing further the need for immediate study of
a complete plan for the economic, social and cultural
development of Libya,
l. Req.uests the Economic and Social Council and
the specialized agencies concerned to consider Libya, as
soon as it shall be constituted an independent State in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A
(IV), as eligible to continue to receive technical assistance, in such foriv. as the Government of Libya may
request, from the expanded programme of the United
Nations and in accordance with the fundamental principles and other provisions of Economic and Social
Council resolution 222 A (IX) ;

2. Instructs the Technical Assistance Board, when
giving technical assistance to Libya, to be mindful of the
economic unity and independence of Libya in accordance with the aforesaid fundamental principles laid
down in resolution 222 A (IX) of the Economic and
Social Council and in resolution 304 (IV) of the
General Assembly;
3. Recommends that the need for preparing a complete plan for the economic, social and cultural development of Libya shall be borne in mind by the appropriate
authorities when requesting technical assistance for
1 See

document A/1404.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 5, section 28.
8 See documents E/CN.1/80 and E/CN.1/80/Add.1.
• See document E/1584.
6 See document E/1356, part VIII.

399 (V). Technical assistance activities under
General Assembly resolution 200 (III)
The General Assembly,
Having decided at its fourth session ( resolution _305
(IV)) that the regular budget of the United Nations
should continue to provide for the activities authorized
by General Assembly resolution 200 (III),
1. Notes with approval that the Secretary-General
has included in the budget of the United Nations for
the year 1951 the same amount as was appropriated by
the General Assembly in 1950 ;2
2. Recommends that the requests for technical assistance for economic development received by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 200 ( III)
which cannot be financed with funds provided on the
regular budget of the United Nations, should be eligible
for financing from the special account for technical
assistance for economic development established in accordance with General Assembly resolution 304 (IV)
and with the actions of the Technical Assistance Conference convened by the Secretary-General under the
terms of Economic and Social Council resolution 222 A
(IX).
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.
400 (V).

Financing of economic development
of under-developed countries

The General Assembly
Taking note of the report 8 of the fourth session of
the Sub-Commission on Economic Development, the
experts' report 4 entitled "National and International
Measures for Full Employment", the report 6 of the
fourth session of the Economic and Employment Commission to the Economic and Social Council, and the
report 0 of the Economic and Social Council to the fifth
session of the General Assembly,
Taking note further of the studies prepared by the
Secretary-General in pursuance of Economic and Social
Council resolutions 179 (VIII) 7 and 222 D (IX),8
0 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplement No. 3.
7 See Met hods of financing economic development in underdeveloped countries, United Nations Publications, Sales No.
1949. II. B. 4.
8 See documents E/1562 and E/1614/Rev.1.

2

26
