ONITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONS ElL
DE SECURITE

------------,---------OFFICIAL RECORDS
l"OURTH YEAR

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
No. 13

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 13

FOUR HUNDRED ANn TEliTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT DIXIEME SEANCE

on Wednesday, 16 Ftbr1lG"y 1949, at 3 t.m.

Held at Lahc Sl/ccess, New York,

Tcmu Ii LIke Suc<,€SS, Nt'wHYork.
1. 1'1ercredi 16 fivrier 1949, a 15 heures.

Presfdcnt: Mr. T. F. TSIANG (China).

President: M. T. F. TSIANG (Chin(';).

Prc.rmt: The represr>nfatives oi the following
countries: Arg-entina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukraini::ln Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Suda1i~t RepL1blics, United Kingdom, United Sta:es of America.

Presents: r,..,es representants des pays sn:vants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
Fcance, Norvege, Rcpubliquc socitlli~te sovietique cl'Ukraine, TJnion ncs Republiques socialistes sovtetiques, Royaumc-Uui, Etats-Unis

d'AmIHque.

1. Provisional agenda (S/ Agenda 410)

I. Ordre du jour provisoire
(S/Agenda 410)

1. Adop~ion of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 11 February 1949 from the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics addressed. to the President of the
Security CmmciJ cOI:cernillg the application
of the Democratic People's Repl1blic of Korea
for admission to membership in the United
Nations (5/1256).
3. Appointment of a Governor of tl:e Free Terri-

1. Adopli(\!l de ~'ordn: dLl jour.
2. Lc:tre, en date flu 11 fevrier 1949, dt: repre~
sertant de l'Union des Rep:.tbliques sodalistes
sovietiques at. President du Cor-sdI ce ,eeurite concernant la demande d'admiss~on comne
Mem3re de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
de la Repllhlique ]opulaire democratiqtle de
ecree (Sj1256).

tory of Trieste
(a) Letter dated 8 FeCruary 1949 froln the
representative of tlle Union of Soviet Socialist Repnblics to tbe President of the
Secttnty 0lur1cil cmlcerning the appointment of a C..overnor of tbe Free Territory of Trieste (S/1251).

2. Adoption of the agenda
Th.e agenda was adopted.
3.

3. Designation d'un gOl1verneur du Territo:re
libre de Tr\f',tc.
a) Letll'e, en date du 8 fevrier 1949, adressee
a'.! "President d11 Conseil de securite par le
representant de l'Union des RepubJiqttes
socialistes scvi,Wc;ues all sujet de la designation d\m gOL1vcrneur du Tf'rritoire
libre de Trieste (S/12St).

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
Ucrdre dH jour esl wloptc.

Colnntnnication frQm the President 3. Communication cln PreBident eoncer·
nRut le rapport ell date du 15 fevl'ier
regarding report dated 15 February
194,9, adresse an Secretaire general
1949 from the United NaLiolHI
l)ar la Commission des Nations Unie&
Commission for Indone8ia to the
pour l'Indonesie eoncernant la resoSeeretary.Genernl concerning the
lution dn 28 janvier 1949.
resolution of 23 January 19~9

The PRES1DENT; I wish to call the attention at
the members of the Security Council to document 5/1258, which is bEfore us. It contains a

Le PREsIDENT (traduit drJ l'anglais): J'attire
l'<:ttention des membres du Conseil de secudre
St;l" le dO~l11)Je-n: 5/12.18 que no-us avons sous les

2
report from the United Nations Commission for
Indonesia to the Secretary-General concerning
the resolution [S/1234j of 28 Janllary 1949. The
text is as follows:
"The resolution of the Security Council of
28 January requires that the United Nations Commission for Indonesia report to the Security
Council and make recommendations for a SOhltion of the difficulties if the parties have not
reached an agreement on an interim federal
government by 15 February.
"In light of recent developments at The Hague
the Commission recommends that the reporting
date be postponed to 1 March."
The recommendation of the Commission seems
to be so simple and so reasonable that -I suggest
that we accept the recommendation and that I,
ag President of the Security Council, be authorized to reply that the recommendation is accepted.
Unless I hear objection, I shall do so.
Mr. MAUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from, R1Issmn): This question
has been brought up before the Security Council
somewhat unexpectedly today, without prior
notification to members. Should the Council, in
de::.lling with this question, 3[.lproach it from a
purely technical point of view, considering the
Commission's request for postponement in Sllb"
mitting its recommendations? Can it grant that
request?
It is the USSR delegation's opmlOn that this
question is much more' far-reaching. We are
concerned with a flagrant violation by the Netherlands Government of the Security Council's resolution of 28 January [5/1234]; the fact is that
the Netherlallds Government, after committing
an act of aggression against the Indonesian Republic and its people, has disregarded a decision
of the Security Council, in other words, a decision
of the United Nations, on this question.
all remember that the fundamental proVlSlon of that Security Council decision was the
immediate and unconditional release of the members of the Government of the Indonesian Republic, and particularly, the President and Vice"
President. The Netherlands Government, as a
~ember of the United Nations, is obliged to
Implement the Security Council's decision without delay, by re1easinRr the members of the Government of the Indonesian Republic. This, however, has not yet been done.

yeux. 11 contient un rapport adresse au Secretaire
general par la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'Indonesie 111.1 sujet de la resolution en
date du 28 janvier 1949 [S/1234]. Ce raf'port sc
lit comme suit:
"La resolution adoptee le 28 janvier par le
Conseil de sccnritc prevoit que la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Indonesie adressera an
Conseil de securite un rapport et des recommandations en vue de rcsoudre les difficultes s-l les
parties n'o11t pas realise au 15 fevrier un <lcco!'d
sur Ja. constitution d'un gouvernemeat fe.oel'<ll
provlSOlre.
"Vu la recente evolution de la situation survenue it La I-Iayc, la Commission recommande
de reporter au 1er mars la date de remise cia
rapport."
La j'ecommandation de la CommiSSion semble
si simple et si raisonnable gue je propose que nOllS
l'acceptions et fJue le Conseil m'autorise, en mt\.
qualite de President, a l"cpondre CJue noos ncceptons cette recommandation.
•
S'i! Il'y a pas d'objection, je pracedefai ainsi_
M. MAUK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du Tlt.S£e): Cette question a.
ete pos~e aujourd'hui au Conseil de secufite d'une
fa«on assez inattendue. Les membres dn COl1scil
n'en ont pas e.te avises a l'avance. En examinant
cette question le Consd! de securite doh-it se
placer strictement au point de vue de la procedure, en conside.rant que la Commission a demanc1e
d'ajourner la presentation de ses recommanc1ations? Doit-il hire droit a cette demande?

Selon la delegation de l'URSS, it s'agit d'unc
question bien pins vaste. En effet, le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a commis une violation flagrante de la resolution du Conseil de securite <tu
28 janvier [S/1234], apres s'etre rendu coupable
d'agression contre la Republique et le peup1e d'Indonesie, le Gouvernement neerlandais n'a .tenu
aucun compte de la decision que le Co~sel1 de
securite et l'Organisation des Nations Umes tout
entiere ont prise a ce sujet.
Tous 1es membres se souvicnllcnt certainement
que le point essentie1 de la resolution etait ~e faire
remettrc immediatement et sans condittOn en
libei·te les membres du Gouvemement, et notatn~
ment le Vice-President et le President de la Republique d'Indonesie. Le Gouvernement des PaysBas, en tant que Membre de I'Org<tnisation des
Nations Unies, est tenu d'executer immediatemc1"1 t
cette decision du Conseil de securite, c'est-a.-dire
de libher 1es membres du Gouvernement de la
Republique d'lndonesie. Or, il ne l'a pas encore
fait.
Dans sa lettre du 9 fevrier 1949 [S/1250], le
In his letter of 9 February 1949 [S/1250j, the
bead of the Indonesian delegation officially noti- chef de la deIegation de la Republique d'lndo_
fied the Security Council of the following facts: nesie a communique officiellement au Conseil de
12 days after the adoption of the latest Security securite les faits sttivants: 12 jours apres que le
COl1ncil resolution Ori the Indonesian question Conseil ellt adopte sa derniere resolution relativ€
[Sj1C34), the Netherlands Government had not ala question indonesienne [5/1234], le Gouveryet released the President of tbe Republic and nement des Pays-Bas n'avait pas encore remis en
liberte le President et1es autres dirigeants de l~
the other Republican leaders.
Republique.
En outre, la meme resolution du Consell de se-c:uFurthermore, the resolution called for "the
immediate discontinuance of all military opera- rite enjoignait de "cesser immediatement tOltte~
tions". But what bas happened in that regard? opera'tions militaires". Or, que s'est-il produit aCe
The Netherlands Government has ignored this 'egard? Le Gotlvernement des Pays-Bas n'a teu"\;
demand. According to the official communication aucun compte de cette demande. Dans cette lettrl

.?le

3
of 9 February [5/1250J iron: the (lea~ of the
Indwt'siall delegation, on 1 February-m other
wo.:-Cs, three or four clays after the Security
CounCil had ?clo)..lted t~lC reso:ution on the immediate cessation o£ military operations~Nether­
lands aircraft clropped nine "bumbs on the town
of L1.1busi:(aping r)O the isla:1d of Sumatra. and
machine-g'unned the town for 20 mi:mtes. The
same don:mellt offc:ally st,.te~ that on 2 Febrn<lrv at 11.30 [l.r:·L, the N etherlallcs COJl1n:::llld
landed t~GOpS in Sungai-Nipa1 on tl:e ishnn of
St;.matr<1, a f!e~ wbicl: they oCC'.1pied Pninan, all
the sar.le island.

offi~iel1e rln 9 fevrier [S112501, le chef de la dele~
gallon dc l~ Republique d'lnconesie declare q:le,
le ler fcvncr, c'est-a-dire troi~ 0"..1 (uatre jams
apn~s l'adoption de la resoiutiJll du' Cor.seil de
securite prescrivaLL la ee5sa:ion immediate di'S
operations militaires, des avbns neerlancais ont
laisse tomber neuf Lombes sur la \'ill~ de Lubtlsikaping clans file de Stnt:atra et ont mitr'li1le :a
viae dmant 20 minutes.
lu~rne document
couliellL le retJs~ignement officie! suivant: le 2 fe~
vricl",
11 h, 30, le haUl COUnlalldenent :1eerlaudais a debarqUl~ des troupes it. Sttngai-Nipah
it Stllllatra, et a ensnite oCC".lpe fa vil:e de Painan,
dans la meme He.

Thm, the Security Cot'.l1dJ l:as d i:s IHsposal
official data ;;howing t11<:t the st\;olLd point of its
dec:~io[l on the i1\1:nediate cessation of military
operations ha~ a!so beer. violated ana ignored by
t~e 2'Jetber!auds GOyer:llllent. Tt is dear, both
frOin the letter of the head of the Indonesian
delegation and from the Coml1li:ls icn'g reQort",.
that the Netherlands GO'ler:lnlent has not yet
decided to comply with :he Senlrity CDl!l1eil's
resolution of 28 January. This is tlte actual
sitttat:on today.

Le Conscil de secur:t~ dispose c!O:1C de renseigllements offitit:ls r.rom'unt que le Gocnrernement
necrl!:mdais a debherernent viole ega1cll~elll la
dCllxicllle clause de la reso:ution Ul1 Conseil de
secllrile relative
1<2 cessation innedi£te deg
11OStilit6s. Ll lettre dll chef de Ta deleg-.at:on de la
Republique d'Inclonesie et b "ap[JDtt~ de la Commission montrel,t que le GUllVe;]le:l1cnt des Paysn~s n'a pris .IUSqU'E preSeJlt a:1Cl1ne ce::::ision
concern'mt 12. mis~ execlltiOn de :a r~soltJtioIl du
Conseil (le secw·ire du 2R janvier, ~el1e est done
it l'hetlre actllcl1c I" situation ~eellc.

ee

a

a

a

In the ligl1t Df tlH'se facts, one Cal~ well ask

Tenant compte de ces faits, il est -pcrmis de se
demander si le Consei~ de securite peet canslCerCr
to consider :he situatiDll wllicr. has arisen as a que la situatior qui s'est cn~ee est d'ardre pure'pl1rely technical [lnd procedural one, tln1S allow- ment formel et relhe strictement de la procecurc;
ing the C0t:1mis3b:1 to postpone, by "" further· convient~il qu';1 permette
:a C:l1nffilssion Le
fcr:llight, ~mtil 1 Ma~ch, the s'.1bl".1ission of its retarder it nmlVCittl d'UIlC quhu.aine de jours,
recomnlendation to the COlweil? It is clear, it-. c'est-:\.-dire jnSCju'J.tl l~I mars, la :"emise des rcthe light of tllcse bets '1nl) nf the rerods <It the comnmnclations qu'e11e doit Sot:metlre au Con:;eil (
Security COllncil's disposill, tln:t the N ctherlnnJs Le:; faits que j'ai cites et les rer.sej~l1eL11en:s don:
troops would use such n ~oslpCnC1l1el1t (nr C011- dispose le Conseil de seeurite l.ai~ser.t prevoir
tinnio;:!' :t:rther m:lit.::.ry operations against the CJue les :on:·es arnl6cs n6crlnI~dai~cs 11l-oliteraiel1t
Indonesian Repuulic am:] it3 people <ll1d for de- clf'. ee dHai pour pOIJfsuivre :es operations mili~
laying sfll £Udl€r the release of tbe Ministers of tains contre la Rcpl:blique et ;;ontrc le peuplc
indoneaicu et pnur continueI' a bire trainer e:l
~ile Government '::lE the Indcnesiar. 1{epclblic.
longuCllr la l'e11lise ell liberte des min:s:rb du
GOltverllClllcllt illdonesien.
.
IVhetlter it wot:1d he right :or the Secllrity Council

a

The USSR delegation considers blat by adQp:ing sllch a C;Ollf5C the COlll1ci' would
faithfully
pursui:lg t~1e roiicy of encouraging :hose who,
were gnilty of unprovoked flgg-rc:<lsion against
':he Indonesian Republic_ Tbe USSR delegation
,Hnks that the attittlde of the Netherlands Government is tlot cOnlpiying Wit!1 the reSO:l1tiO;1S of
the Security COl;ncil calls fer altogether different
measures.

La delCgatior: de ·'U].SS estime '11l'ell agissant
de la SOl't(?, le COllseil de secnrite ~estc:1lit 5.<':t:1t
la POlitiqllc qui eonsis:e;\ I"Ontinuer d'cncOtrag~T
cettx qui se sont rCll<Lts cwp<l.bles d'unc ag:'essioll
non provoqucc CO:ltre la R5pub!iqlle d'!ndoncs:e.
lille c:rlusidere que l'a:tit'ldc OH Gouvemcment des
Pays-Bas glll n'ap}lique pas b resolutions d,j
COllsdl de securit~, appcile ie;; mesures d"l:1
tont autre ordre.

Mahm::ltlL FAwzr Hey (Egy:-tt): I <2sswne that
the n:embcrs o£ th~ Seclrity Council, mere!}' as
a matter of procedllrc, ate disCllssillg the question
brought to on ;l.ttcntiOIl :n doccment 5;1258,

M"hmOl1CI FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (tra-iwi! de
I'rmgJais): J'ai l'illlpl-esshn, et je sO:lleve id
1.lne simple qu::stion de procedure, que le Conseil
\:st en tr~in d'examiner la question pnr7.ee
SOil
:tttel1!ioll clans le docl1n:cnt 5/1258, bien que cette
CLllcstiDll ne .soil pa> A l'orclre d~l jOllT.

ne

although it does not ap[lenr on the agend;l.

As to the (Jllest:OIl itse:f, I should like to say,
among other things, flat Lhc so-culLecl reccnt
rJcvelopmruts <It Tl:e Hal{ue ~la"'e not been duly.
'J r Ol1ght to our nofce t'uough ,my official docnmenb. Tne me[l~bers of ~'he Security CO:111cil do
not know in de:<til what tl~ese "recent developments·' <ere. W~ hal'e not received information
from the Secretaria:, fro-.n neutral sources, or'
fr0111 tl1e CommiSSion as to what l1:esc dcvelopments arf'. t.Iost of our illformation comes from.
the newspapers. I do not tHnk that is the proper,
l[leans thtOllgh wHeh we sholl1d receive 0:1r info,mation or ·upon w~lich we shot11d base our
action in the Security' CU\lndl.

a

a

Qumtl ;i la l..juestion ellc-merne, je '{oudrais

hire remarqller, entre a'Jtres :::1lOses, que nons
ll'avnns pas ete avises pr la. voic officieUe de

cettc pl'(~tendl1(' "'recent( evoh.:l'iofl de la sitootio!,
snrvcnllC
La Haye". Le5 lllCll:Dl'(';S tlu Cmsetl
de sceuriLf [lC stl.'{Cllt pilS en quoi consiste exacte1l1er,t !a.dite "evolution", car ni It .secre:ar;at,
n1 la C01~11llissi(.lll, ni (ll~C,me Slnllrce ne1.'.trc
ne 110tlS en OJt il:fonnc~. Ce oue nettS savoos,
nOllS l'avo~ls i£1pp·ris smtoul p~r Its jClrr,:\ux.
J'cstiine que, norll1alement, nos rellseigncmcnts
ne dcvraient pas pro\·enir
celte sot:rcc, et que
ce n'est pas "ur des nOllvclles de pr-esse Que le
Canseil ee sec\lrite dcV"rait fondel" scs <Iedsiol1i;l.

a

ce

4
While I concede that the Security Council,
under the circumstances, and considering -especially that today is already 16 February-one day
later than the deadline given to the Commission
to present its first report-may have no choice
but to accede to the request of the Commission,
I must, however, express my disappointment,
without disparaging the efforts which I am sure
the Commission is trying to make, at the fact
that the Commission did not go the trouble of
informing the Security Council, for example, as
to what happened to the political prisoners, what
approaches and efforts the Commission has made
so far, and how the whole military situation
shapes up at the present time, as well as since
the time when the Security Council passed its
previous resolution [S/1150]. I therefore sub~
scribe to much of what the representative of the
USSR has said in this regard. I subscribe entirely
to what he said in expressing disappointment in
this connexion.

Etant donne les circonstances presentes, etallt
donne surtout que nOllS sommes deja le 16 fevrier et que le delai fixe a la Commission pour
la remise de son premier rapport a expire hier,
le Conseil de securite, j'en cenviens, ne pourr.:!
sans doute qu'acceder a la demande de la Commission. Mais, sans VOll10ir jeter le discnMit sur les
efforts que la Commission deploie, a n'en pas
douter, je tiens eependant a. dire combien jc
regrette qu'elle n'ait pas eru devoir informcr le
Conseil de securite dn sort des prisonniers politiques, par exemple, ainsi que des demarches ct
des efforts qU'elle a accomplis jusqu'a present,
de l'aspect acwel de I'ensemble de la situation
mi1itaire, et de son evolution depuis que le Conseil
a adopte sa derniere resolution [S/1150]. Dans
ces conditions, je sotlscris a la plupart des observations que le representant de I'URSS a formulees a cet egard, et je partage entierement la
deception qll'il a manifestee.

Bombs are still being thrown upon the defenceless people of Indonesia. Some military moves
are still being taken by the Netherlands. The
least the Security Council was entitled to expect
from the Commission was that it should be in~
formed as to the developments there, and not
to receive a mere reference to a supposedly dilatory matter which is referred to here as "recent
developments at The Hague".

On continue a lancer des bomhes sur la population sans defense de l'Indonesie. Les Neerlandais effectuent encore certaines operations militaires. Le COllseil de sectlrite etait en droit
d'escompter, pour le moins, que la Commission
le tiendrait au eourant de l'evolution de la situation en Indonesie au lieu de se borner a faire
allusion a une "recente evolution de la situation
survenue a La Haye", formule dont 011 peut
supposer qtt'elle est dilatoire.

, Therefc:re, w?i1e e~pressing- my disappointment
m connexlOn wIth thIS matter, I must say that if
I agree to the postponement, I am doing it most
relllctantly.

C'est pourguoi, en meme temps que j'exprime
mOl deception a ce sujet, je tiens a dire que je
ne me reSiglle gu'a regret a. accepter l'ajour~
nement.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom).
As the representative of the USSR said, I think
we ~ave all been taken by surprise, and I am
cert~tnly not prepared at this moment for a disc~lsslOn of t~e substance of the Indonesian questIOn. W?at .IS before the Security Council is this
CO;11l;ltInlCatlOn from the United Nations Com1l11SS1?n fo; Indonesia, dated, 15 Febrl1ary 1949.
contalllcd 111 document S/12S8.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Reyaume-Uni) (tr-aduit de l'G1!glais): Comme le representant de
l'URSS, je pense que neus aVails tous ete pris
au depourvu et, pour mOl part, je ne suis certainement pas en mestlre d'examiner en ce moment
le fond de la question indonesienne. Le Conseil de
securite n'a sous les yellx que la communication
de la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inrlonesie en date du 15 fevrier 1949 [S/1258].

I. should li1le to make one point in that connexlon:, and th?t is that under the Secl1rity
COl1nClI s resolut~on 0.£ 28,Tm:uary 1949 [S/1234 1
there are certam tlme.hn:,ls imposed on the
Netherlands Government, III particular in sttb<-hI'IS hment
paragraph
"· 3(a)
. ' which say's'. "The es...
o f tIle l11tenm federal government. , . shall be
the result of the ahove negotiations and shall
trtke place not jrtter than 15 March '949" F
'I
'b
1
.
ur,le; ~n,.1n S1l -paragraph 3(c), there is a time-llllllt mdlcat('d,.where it states: "Provided that if
no ag-reement IS reachen by one month nor
.
to
the respective dates"-that is to say ;n thP.
,.
,Isease
I •SMarc h- "th e CommlSSlon
h
11
'
"
.. , s a Immedl~
t I
a e y report to the Security Council, .."

Je voudrais presenter Hne observation n ce
propos: la resolution que le Conseil de securite
a adoptee le 28 jnnvier dernier [S/1234J impose
cermines conditions an Gouvernement des PaysBas; notamment l'aJinea 3 a) de cette resolution prevoit que "la conclusion des negociations
susmentionnees devra aboutir a la constitution c1u
GOlwernement federal provisoire , . . et celn.
le 15 mars 1949 <:IU plus tard". Plus loin, a
l'alinea 3 c), il est fait mention d'ulle date limitc:
"si.aucun accord n'intervient entre les parties UIl
mOls au moins avant les dates mentionnees .. ,"
- c'est-a.-dire un mois Rvant le 15 mars - "la
Commission . . . adressera immediatement all
Conseil de securite tin rapport".

That time-limit, which would ha
. d
yesterday, IS February, is a time-1in~~ ~f~;~~
Hot on. t~le ~ether1ands Government b~t on th~
Commlsslnn Itself. Therefore 'f
.
communication from the Corn' .1 • we recelv~ a
that it sho~ld defer making i~lsrs~~~r:tli~esftlng
recommending- that it should def
k' a~t,
report-:--I should have thought tha~rt~aslng .ltS
Councl~ would be wise to comply with t~ t ecunty
mctldatron.
a recom~

Ce delai, qui a expire hier, 15 fevrier, ne lie

p~s l.e Gouyernement des Pays~Bas mais la COlll-

mISSIOn. SI celle-ci nous suggere, nous reCOI1l;nande meme, de differer la remise de son rapport,
J1 me semble que le Conseil- serait bien avise
d'acceder a cette demande.

5
I am not quit", .<mre whether the representative
of the USSR made any defiilite proposal at the
cnd of the remarks whicll we listened to this
afternoon, bltt I would suggest that, in the light
of tlJi:. communication which the Council has received from its own Commission, the Council
should be disposed to accept the rewmmendation
made by the members of the Commission,
It is true that the members of the Commissioll
do n&t explain in any detail ::he reasons which
have led them to make that recommendation, but
prC3umnbly they havl" good onts. They say: "In
the light of recent developments at The Hague
tht: C(on~n1ission recommen(l.<; that the reporting
date be postponed to 1 March." Therefore, I
ShOllld be in favour of granting thf'.ir request.

Je ne suis pas tout it fait certain que le re[.H'esentant de l'URSS ait ftiit une propn~itinn preLise if. la fin de 50:1 intel'Vl:'ntion de eet apn~s-midi,
mais, pour ma part, je serais ~nc1in
propmer
que le Conseil accepte la recomtnandation qui
lui a ete adressee par sa proprc Commission.

a

It e,;;t vrai que les membres de. la Commission
ne Jonnent al.lCl.l11 detail sur les raisons qui les

ant {l1Ilt:nes Et prescnter cette recommandation:
mais il faut eroire qu'ils avaient de bonnes raisons. "Vu la rcccntc evolution de la situation
survenue La Haye", nous disent-ils, "la CDm~
mission recommallde dc reporter au leT marS"
la date de remise cll1 rapport". Dans ccs conditions, je trois que U(jUS devrions leur aco::order le
deJai qu'ils demandenl.

a

J should like once more to emphasize-because
the representative of the USSR took this ocea·
sion to m~ke a st:ong att,aek upon the Net::terlands
Goverlltl1ent in regard to the maliner in which it
has or r.as not complied with the Security Council
resolution-that the 15 February date is not a
date which is imposed upon the Netherlands Gov·
ernmen:. It is a date which was prescribed for
certain action to be taken in certain circumstances by the United Nations Commission, That
Commission now recommends that we should
grant it a further fortnight's delay. Therefore,
r should be in favour of complying with that
request.

Le representant de l'URSS a profite de ceUe
occasion pour se livrer a une vive attaque <:ontre
le Gouvemen~ent des Pays-Bas, I'aceusant de ne
s'etre pas ~ollforme a la resoJutioll dt1 Conseil
de· securite; ces critiques m'amenent i souligner
a nouveau gut: la date limite du 15 fevner ne
s'applique pas au Gouve:rnement des Pays-Bas.
C'est J<l. Commis~iou Ut::; Nations Dnies pour I'Tndonesie qui, clans certaines conditions, devait
s'ac:quitter d'une certo,Jne. tache avant cett~ date.
Or, voici que eette Commission nous cemande un
deJai tie quinze jO\IT"Sj je pensc donc que nOllS
devrions lui donner satisfaction.

The PR,EStDENT: I recognize the representative
of the USSR un a point of order.

Le PRESIDENT (tradwil de l'clIglais) : Je donne
la parole au representant de I'URSS pour une
motion <i'ordre.

Mr. MAUIC (rnion of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated fl'om Russiatl) : As the impression is being ,created here, that the Security
Council has no official documents describing the
situation on the spot, I request that document
5/1250, the letter frOIn the representative of thl'
Indonesian Republic to the President of the Security Council, should be read out. This letter
descri'Jes the true . situation in rndonesia and
tells how the Security Council rtsoluticn b being
violated by tlle Netherlands Government; it will
undoEbtedly throw some light on tbe question.

M. MAUl(' (Union des R6pClbliques socia1istes
sovietiqt1es) (trdduit df~ rttsse): PuisCJ.u'il Se cree
id l'impression que le CUllseil cc slkurite ne
dispose d'aueun document ofticie1 rciatif 8. la.
situation stlr place, je uemande qll'il soit donne
lecture de la 1ettre que le President de la Rbpu·
blique d'Indonesie a adressee au Presidcnt du
ConseiI de securite [Sj1250]. Cette {ettre expose
la situation telle qu'elle se pn~$Enlt: vraimcnt en
Tnllonesie et mantre de queUe faSOl1 le Gouvernernent des Pays·Bas viole la resolution du Con·
seil de s&t':urite. La lecture de Cl". tex.te apportera
;>.ans allcuo doute des precisions sur cette question.

The PRESIDENT: I should like to say that the
suggestion of the representative of the USSR has
in fact been carried OUt. The letter from the
repre~entative of the RepUblic of Illdunesia ha:;
been circulated as an official document of the
Security Council, and it has reacht:d all the
members of the Council.

Le PRESIDENT (tradl,it de l'culglais): Ce que
delnllnde le representant de I'URSS a deja ete
talt, me se:nble-t-il: k kttrc du repre.senlant de
la Reptlhliquc (I'Indonesie a
distribuee en taut
que document offic:iel du CcnseiJ de securite cl
tous les nH'mbres du Conseil ant pu en prendr~
collna.issance.

Before I recognize the representative 0 f
Can<lda, I <ihould like to say that there ~ef'.ms to
be some misunderstanding in regard to my suggestion. I am pedeclly aware of the fad that
the situation in Indonesia requires the consideration of the member!; of the, CounciL I suggested
that we accept the recommendation of the Com~
m:ssion without prejudice to any of the qlJcstions
involved, and, for the moment, without prejudicing the right of any member of the Council to
request a special discussion on the issues involved.
I still urge members of the Council to acccpt
my suggestion, with that distinct understanding
in mind.

Avant de danner la parole au represent:w.t du
Canada, je tiens 8. dire que ma suggestion semble
avoir c:lonne lieu
t1t1 rna!t;:ntemlu. Je sais fori
bien que la situation en Indonesie reclame une
etude approfondie de la part Ju Conscil. J'ai pro"
pose que nous acceptions l.a recommacdation de
l<l Commission, SelDS pl'ejuger aUCJJ11C deo: questions qui se posent et sans prejuger pour ['instant
le droit de tout membre du Comeil de demander
Cjue ces questions fassent l'objet d'Wle discussion
particuliere. Je maintiens donc ma !>l.lggestiOll et
je rlemal1de all Conseil de bien vouloir l'accepter
en tenant compte des precisions que je 'liens cl'y
apporler.

ete

a

6
General ~.fcN AUGHTON (Canada): May I say
Le general McNAUGRTON (Canada) (traduit
lbat I fully agree with the action which the de l'al1glctks): J'approllve sanS reserve la marcht
Presidellt has just now suggested to tlS, which a suivre que le President vient de nous proposer.
rcpresents, in my opinion, the only practical C'est a mon avis la settle attitude que le COl1seil
course which the Security Council can usefully de seCLIl"ite puisse adopter avec quelgue <LVantage
take ill this matter ut this time. Our representa- a I'heure actuelle. La Commission des Nations
tive on the spot, the United Nations Commission Unies pour l'Indonesie represente sur place le
fol' Indonesia, which is comprised of the only Conseil de sccllrite et ses membres sont les seules
people in a position to judge all the attendant personnes qui soient meme de porter un jugecircumstances, has found that it requires some mellt d'enscmble sur la situation. Or, cette Commore time in order to formulate the reports which mission eSlime Cju'eHe a besoin d'ttn delai suppleit is required to make to the Security Council mentairc pOllr elaborer les rappol"ts qu'elle est
under our resolution of 28 January 1949 tenue de soul11ettre an Conseil de secudte, en
[S/1234]. I think that the position under that vertu de la resolution du 28 janvier 1949
resolution has been very ftllly and adeCJ.uatcly [S/1234]. A mon avis, le representant dll
described to us by the representative of the United Royaume-Uni nous a -donne de cette .n~soll1tiol1
Kingdom, and I fully share llis view that this une interpretation tres complete et satisfaisante.
date, 15 February, is only a date which has been . COl1ll11e lui, j'estime que la date du 15 f6vrie:· est
given as a target for the Commission. It has , une date limite assignee a la settle Commission,
nothing to do with any action by any o( the in- et qu'elle n'a rien a voir avec les meSHres qui
tel'ested parties in Indonesia, and since it is only doiventetre prises par l'lIne 011 l'autre des parties
a target date for the Commission, I thin1< that interessees en Indonesie. Pllisqne cdte date ne
the Commission should have the power of arbitra- conccme que la Commission, je pense que celle~ci
ment to chnnge it in accordance with the practi- devrait avoir le droit de: la changer, si elle juge
calities of the situation. Therefore, I think that : que la situation l'exige. Il me semble done (jllC
the proper action is as the President has Sl1g- _nous devrions adopter b marche a suivre qu'a
gested, nf\mely, that we should accept this pro- : suggeree le President, et accepter, confonnement
posal from the Commission and say that we shall a la proposition de la Commission, qu'eIle nous
be very glad to have this report by 1 March 1949 SOUl11ctte son rapport le ler mars 1949 au lieu
du 15 f6vriet' 1949.
in plilee of is February 1949.

a

Accordingly, I would propose that the President
write to the Commission in that sense.

Je propose done que le President avise la
Commission que 1l011~ accedons sa dcmande.

The PRESlDENT: Unless I hear further objection, I shall communicate to the Commission that
its recommendation to postpone the date to
1 March is accepted by us.

Le PRESIDENT (tradu.it de l'anglais): Si per~
sonne' ne s'y oppose, je ferai savoir a la Co,mmission 411e le COllseil accepte sa recommendatlon
tendant 8. ajourner au ler mars la remise de SOl1
rapport.

a

M. MAUl( (Union des Republiques socialistes
Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trallslated from Russia.l~): Some of the sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Celiains dcs
speakers who have preceded me have tried to orateurs qui m'ont precede ont tentc de ramenc:r
reduce the whole matter to the question of tIle , toute la question a cellc dll l'apport de la Comla creation d'ul1 Gouvernement
Commission's report on the establishment of a mission re1atif
temporary government in Indonesia; this how- provisoire en Indonesie, alors qtte ce n'en est la.
ever, is only one aspect of the matter. The 'second qu'un settl aspect de" la situation. Le deuxieme
fundamental and decisive aspect of the question aspect de la question, qui est essenticl et d~eisif,
la cessation immediate des operais the. immediate di.sconti~uance of all military se- l'apporte
la liberation immediate et
operatIOns and the immediate and unconditional tions ini1itaires et
release of all the political leaders of lhe Indo- : inconditionnelle des dirigcants politif],ues de la
nesian Republic, as provided for in p<tragraphs Republique d'Indonesie, C01l11l1e le prevoient les
1 and 2 of the Security Council's resolution of deux premiers paragraphes du dispositif de la
resolution dl1 Conseil de secmite en date du
28 January [5/1234].
28 janvier [5/1234J.
.

a

a

a

Paragraph 1 "<;alls \lpOn the Government of
Le pal'agl'<lphe premier "invite le Gouverncment
the Netherlands to insure tile immediate discon- des Pays-Bas a faire cesser immediatement toutcs
tinuance of all military operations".
. operations militait·cs".
Paragraph 2 "calls upon the Government of
Le paragraphe 2 "invite le GO[fVCrnement des
the Netherlands to release immediately and un- PayscBas a remettrc immediatement et sans condiconditionally all political prisoners arrested by tion en Jiberte tous les prisonniers politiques
them since J7 December 1948 .. ,"
arretes par 1nl ... depuis le 17 dec:embrc 1948".
Sir Alexander Cadoga.l1 disregards these points;
Sir Alexander Cac!og,m neglige c.es raragrapltes
they are of no interest to him and he is not pre- qui ne l'intcressent pas: il n'est pas dispose a.
pared to consider these matters, or to discuss the etudier ces questions, .it e.xaininer la violation flatbgrant viol:tllon of these provisions of the Se- grante que le GOllvernement des Pays-Bas a
curity Council resolutiOn committed by the Neth- cOI11\11ise a l'egard de Lt resolution du Conseil
erlands Government. He said that he was not de securite. Sir Alex:mder Cadogan declare qu'il
ex;"nniner Cl'S questions; par
prepared to discuss such questions; he is, how~ n'esl pas disrlOse
ever, always, at every moment, prepared to speak C:Ol1tre, il est toujours et a tout moment pret a
ill defence of the Netherlands Government, which prendre la defcnse du Gouverne11lcnt des Paysis guilty of' an act of ag-gression against the Indo- Bas qui s'est rendu coupable d'agression contre
nesian Republic. This, of course, is entirely his la IHpubliqlle d'Indonesie. C'est la, bien entendu,
J

a

7
own cor.cern. It is, howe\'er, the concern of the
Security COUllCil to see that its own resolutions
are carried out.

t:lle C[tteotion ql1i concerne Sir Alexartder Cadogan; ro:lis I,,: COI1~eil de securite se doit ce \'ei 11er
ce que ses resoIu:ions soient executees,

a

Althongh :lltlch time has Vasst:d-more than
two weeks-the Sec:trity Council resolution on
the immediate discontinuance of aU military
operations ar.d the imrneciafe and unconditional
release of political pri]oners !tas not yet bef'.n
implemented j if the Council has any respect for
its own decisions and if it really w;,~hes to protect the legitimate interests of the victims of
aggres(;ion, it should find· out why its resolution
has 1Jot been implemented and who is to blame,
ra:her th;<.n r.onfining itself to a mere technical
dedsior. on the postponement of the date for tile
suhrni".\ion of the Commission's repor:. It is to
this aspect of tlle question that the USSR deLegation wishes to draw the Council's at~ention.

Un dclai assez long -- plus de del1X: semainefl
--:--,s'est dej~ ecoule de;l1Iis que le CC'llsdl de sC!:!lnte a adopte sa l-esolution prevoyant la cessation
immediate des operatiDl1s militaires et la I:beration
immediate et salJs condition d~s priSD:1niers politigues; or, Hn'y a toujours -pas
suite,
Si le COllseil de securite a le respect de ses propres
decisions, ~'il entend vraiment detencre les interet.s h~gitimes de la victillle de l'agression, il se
dOlt de rechercher Les raisom pour I~sque]es sa
resolution ;1'a p;;,s
appliquee et de determine:'
a qui en incombe It hute. I1 re sattrait se contcnter de prendre Ulle decision d'ordr~ purement
formcl tendant R ajo\lrllel' k date a laquelle la
Commission cloit lui cotlUimniquer son rapport.
C'est predscmcllt .'iU;· eet aspect de la ql:eslion
que la delegation de I'URSS tient it attirer l'attentian dn Conseil de securite.

4. Continuation of the discussion on

4,.

tbe application of the Democratic
People'.!! Repuhlic of Korea for
admil:Hiioll to membership in t.he
United Nations

ete conoe

ere

Suite de la discu8sion sur la deulallde
d'admission 8: rOrganisation des
Natiolls Unies presentee par la Republique populaire democratique de
Coree

TIle PRESIDENT: The Security CO'.1ncil will now
revert to its agenda, beginning with the French
translation of the speech made by he representative of tr.e USSR at the last f409th 1 meeting,

Le Pn:fi:sfDBNT (tradltit de l'anglllis): L:.
COllseil de seeurite va :nailltell<.nt reve1ir son
ordl'e dll jour, en eommen~nt pClr L'il1terpI'Ctatir);)
en fnan~ais de l'inte~vention du representant de
I'URSS la demiCie seance [4D9bMOJ.

AIr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (tmnslated
froil' Punch): In order to facili:ate and expedite

M. DE LA TmIRN"RLLE (France): Pour ana
part, et pour faciliter et hiter les tnv;mx du
Com"il, je r,e soliciterai pas la tradl1c:ion f1"(1.n<;aise qui n'avait pas e:e faite hier soir,

the Council's work, as far as I am concerned, I
shaJ not ask for the French translation which
was not given l<:st llight.

a

a

Mr. lvL'\LIR (Unior o~ Soviet Socialist Republies) (trmlSll1Jed fro",_ Ru,ssian); 1 nave already
poi~ted out rmc~ that ] shall not press for an
interpretation if there i~ a ntle in the Security
CO".1ntil that the French interpretati::m is to be
given only' for the bCl:etlt of the French represenlaLve, I have dways believed that French was
one of the official and working langl1age.<; dml lhat
all speeches had to be interpreted into the two
working lang'Jages, If :his is not so, ] shall not
insist on an int!'rpre:ation being given,

M, MALIIC (Union des Ri:pt:bliques socialistes
sovieriques) (traduit dtl nine): ]'ai d~ja d&la~e
al1paravant que s'il etait de regie, au .Conseil de
securite, de ne donner l'interpretat:orl des diSCOltrS
ell fraJ1~ai-s qu'a l'intention dll re!wesentant de la
France, je n'insisterais pas pm: q~l'i~ soit ::>roce:1e
a ceUe interpretation. JU5CJ.l1'a present, ie pens3.is
que le fran.;ais etait tine Ja:tgue officielle et tme
langlle de travail et que tous les discours devaient
etl'e t:adltit~ clans les deux lan~ues de travail.
Toutefois, s'il nJen est pas ainsl, je II'insi~terai
f\<'l~ pour qu'il soit prace-de l'interpretation,

Mr. DE LA TOUIHIE'LT.'R (France) (translated
from Fr-e1Ich) : I am well aware of the fact that
French i.", a wr:rking language alld I thank the
representative ef the USSR for the concern he
has shown on that point. I intervened solely for

111. DE LA TOURl'ELLE (France): Je sais fDrt
bien que le fran~ais est ~llle langue de travail et
je remercie le j"'epresentant de ['URSS (Iu sOltci
dont il fait prellve it c.et cgarcl. Je n'ftais interventl que pow' faciliter et hater les travaux du
Con~~i1 de sccurite, Je sais qUI", ~lOT ce po:nt, le
l'epn~sentar.t de l'Jnion wvietique n'a pas le
mCl1lc sonci q:.te moi.

th(! purpose of facilitating ar.d expediting the
Secu:-it'l Council's work. I know that in that
matter -the representative of the USSR does !lot
share my ~ollcern.

a

I tOok care to add that, "as far as I ...m C011r.erned" I was not asking for the trallslation,
that is, I forn::ally reserved the rights of other
representatives who might war:t it.

J'avais eu soin J'ajolltel' que jc 11e demafldai~
pas h1 tra<1'Jdioll "pour ma part", e'est-a-dire que
je r~servajs formdlcmcnt les drcits dfS autres
rcpreaentants qai pOl1vaient la desirer.

Mr. M_.. . LIK ::Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tra'lslclt"d ;rom Rf1ssifl-n): III tht r::l~e, ill
order to facili:ate the Security Council's work,
we might decide to have. interpretations only into
English.

M. MAUl( (Union des Republiques soclalistes
sovietiQues) (lra&li[ dll r.ls.rc): Dafls cc- ens, ij
faudrait petit-etre, ann de facJiter les travaux
du Consetl de secutite, decider de n'avdr que
des interp:-eJations en ang:ais.

8
Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (t"anslated
from French): On variotls occasions we have
resorted to simultaneous interpretation into one
of the two working langtlages in order to facili~
tate the Council's work. Thus, for example, last
year before the General Assembly, we had
simultaneous interpretation in French 1:ere, fo1lowd by the English interpretafon, in order to
shorten our discussion, At certain meetings of
the General Assem')ly in Paris, we did the opposite, Otlr mles of procedure <ire t1m5 subject to
very wide interpn:lation and ,the President has
complete authority in that field,

M. DE LA TOURNKLLE (France): A plusieurs
reprises et aun de faciliter les travaux du Couseil,
I'interpr~tation Sitnlllnous avons eu recours
tall(~e dans une des det1x langues de travail. C'est
aksi, par exemp1e, qe'ici, t'an deruier, avant
I'Assemblee generale, ilOUS avions, pour ecourter
nos discussions, ),interprctation sirnnHanee en
fmnt;ais et ensuit~ I'interpretation ell anglais,
Naus avens fait le contrairc lors de certaines
seances t'Assemblee generale de Par:s. Par consequent, nos reglcs de procedure sont susceptib:es d'une tres In.l'ge interpretation et le Presi·
dent a t01lS pouvoirs en ce domaine.

T~e PRESIDENT: The Sewrity Council will now
turn to the item on the agenda, and 1 understand that the representative of the USSR has
a point of order to raise,

Le PRfrsIDEN7 (traduit de Z'a,ngloS:s): Le
Conseil de secnrite va maintenant examiner le
point qui est a l'ordre du jour; je trois que le
representant de l'URSS desire presenter une
motion d'ordre.

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Repu1.Jlics) (translated from RU.Jsian) : I should like to
,submit the following draft resolution on the
ques:iotl under discussion:

M. 1\IAL1K (Union des Republiqlte5 socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit dlt ru.~,'e): Je voudrais
soumettre au Consei1 le projet de resolution sui~
vact a propos de la question qui fait l'objet de
notre examen:

"The Security Council,

a

a

"Le Conseil de seeurite,

"HaDing considered the application or the Govetnrl1el11 of the Democlatic PeoIJ1e's Republic of
Korro for membership in the Uni~ed Nations,

"Ayatlt examine la demande d'admission comme
Mc:nbre de l'Org<lu,satiorl des Nations Uuies pre~
sentee par le GOllvcrncmellt ~e la Republique
democratiquc pop'.llaire de COl'l'~e,

"Resolves to refer this application to the Committee for the Admis&ion of New Menbet's."

"Decide de transmett:'c cette demnnde
son
Coroite charge de I'admissiolt de nouveaux
Membres."

Mr. TARASENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Repl:blic) (tnmslated fran!. RUS.tWfl) : The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR cor.sioers that the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea is the only legitimate ano competent
Government of Korea. The participation of over
77 per cent of the e1ecton:te of South Korea in
the elections to the Korean Supreme People's
Assembly proves that the Democratic People's
Repcblic of Korea :s indeed a Sta~e which represents the whole of Korea, the entire Korean
people. Even thongh this state o~ affairs is not
to the liking of the United States Govern:nent or
the United States delegat:on, that cloes not in
the least alter the situation; 1:0 marc, than
the ,;ituatioij is cI-.ang~d by the fact that the
United States of America, relying on a docile
maj?rity in the General Assembly of the United
NatlO11s, which fo:Iows its policy, ha;; carried
through a resolution [195(W)] which, as is well
known, ,approves the establishment, by the United
Stays, III .Sot,th Korea, of a puppet Gov~:·nment,
whlch enJoys no support whatever among the
popu:ation of South Korea,

M. TARASSENKa (Republique soci.a~iste sovietique d'Uhaine) (tt'aduit d·u yusse): La delegation de la Repub1ique socialiste sovh~tique
d'Ukraine estime que le ~eul GOllverncment legal
et legitime de la Coree est cehti de la RepubliqtlC
derr.ocratique pop'J1aire de Cot'l~e. En effet, plus
de 77 pour 100 de tous les electeurs de la Con~e
dn Sml om pris part aux elections a l'Assemblee
nationale supreme de la COf(~e j cela. prouve q.ue
la Republique dernocratique populalre est ,blen
un 3:tat qui represente l'ensemb1e de la Coree et
le pet\ple CJreCn tout entier. Cet etat de chos~s.a
beae depla:re at' GouvernelTl~nt des. Etats-~ms
et sa delegation, cela ne morhfie en flen la .sltua.
tion. pas plus, d'aillcurs,que ne la t:lOd~fie ~a
resolution [195 (If!)] que les Etats-Unls? Amerique appuyes p<lr la majorite ql1~ suit docllement
leur 'politiCjue, ont reussi 'a fair.e adopter .par
J'Assemultt:gtIlerale de l'OrgalUsatiOl1 des NatiOlls
Unies; on sait que cette resolutiotl donne son
approbation au Gouvernement fantoche que les
Etats~Unis ont etabli en Coree <In Sud, bien qu'iJ
ne beneficie l1ullement de I'appui de la population.

TllUs, the popular will of the Korean people is
expressed in the Government of the Democratic
Peop:e's Republic of Korea, which Ims the support and confidence of the population mt only
of North but also of South Korea. This is
the most fundamental and decisive factor which
must be taken into account by the Security
Council when dealing with the application of the
D~mccratic People's Republic of Korea :01' admission to membership in the United Nations.

Ainsi dOllC, c'est le GO(1vcl'uement de la. Republique democratique populaire de Curee qui est
l'cxpressioll de la volonte populaire clans ce pays
et qui jouit de la confiance et de l'appui de la
popdatiol1, dans le nord aussi bien ql~e da?s le
sud de la Corec. C'est la le fadeur e%entlel et
decisif que le Consei1 de securite doit prendre
en consideration lors de l'examen de la demande
l'Organisation des Nations Unies
d'admission
presentee par la Republique Jemocratique populaire de Coree,
Selon la delegation de la RSS d'Uhaine. les
arguments que M. Austin, representant des EtatsUnis d'Amel'ique, a. inv0<lues contre l'admission

The Ukrainian delegation cons:ders that the
argun:ents put forward by the United States
representative, Mr. Anitin, It the Secmity Conn-

a

a

a

9
cils last [409th) meethlg against the admission
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to membership in the United Nations, are not
convincing. It was not ay accident that Mr.
Austin devoted most of his speech to procedural
and leg,al considerations, completely evading any
discussion of political factors, These procedural
and legal considerations were filled only with administrative formality and banal chicanery. 'rhf'
argument of the United States representative was
that the Government of the Democratic People's
R~p~blic had had recourse to the telegraph, that
a teleg-rarn cou:t1 not be regarded as an appllcation, and that, in addition, one could not be sure
whe~her the telegram had been signed by a Minister or wbether it had, indeed, l.:eelJ signed at all,

de la Republique democratique populaire de Coree,
au cours de la demir~ reunion clu Comen, ne sont
pas convaincants. Ce n'est pas un hasard que.
M. Austin 'lit. fait 7aloil' dans son. intervention
[4D9~me seance] de:; c~ni:iideraliOl:s relevant
surtout du droit et de la procedure, tont en
es<]uivant completement ]'examen des facteurs
politiques, D'ailleurs, ces conside,ations juridiques
rt clf'_ procedure ne relevaient que de l'tsprit administratif de fOTmalisme et de chicane le plus
banal. Le representmt des Etats-Unis a notamment signale que le Gou,·el1lement ue la Repubtique dtlnocratiquc popub.irc de Conie a pT\~sen­
Le :sa c1ell1andc d'admission par teJegramme, qll'un
tlHegmmme ne constituait pas une demande d'admission et qu'on ne savait d'ailleurs pas si ce
te.legran:ll1e avait ete signe on non par le Ministre
de3 Aff.nires etrangeres de la Repub:ique.

Rule 58 of the provisional rules of procedure
of :he Security Council lays down that "Anv
State which desires to become a Member of tl1~
United Nations sh"ll submit ~ll application to
the Secretary-General." This rule, however, doe.~
not oblige the State submitting the application
to use the postal services only, any more than
it forbids the use of the telegra?h. The very fact
that the United States representative resorts to
SllC;l argLlmems shows the extent to which his
thesis is neither serious nor convincing.

Or, aux termes de l'article 58 du re;glement
interieur provisoire rIu Conseil de securite, " Tout
Etat qui desire deve1.ir ivlcmbrede l'Organisation
[dcs N~tiol1s Unies] pre.<;ente une demande an
Secretaire general". Cet article n'ex:ge pas que
la dem<l:J<:le (j'admission soit adressee ?lr la poste,
pas plus qu'il n'interclit de le'faire par :eJegramme,
Le fait meme que le representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique ail reours i des arguments de ce
genre mOntre a que! point sa these manque de
serieux et est pell convainrant.

11 is infleed remarbblf' to sep. the extent to whic:l
the United States re-:Jreser;tative fears a discussion
of the politica: fact~rs which constitute the very
fotmdation of this question, Why does he fe:lr
it? Because he realizes full well that the Governme~t of the Democratic Peuple's Republic of
KOI"ea enjoys the support of any overWhelming
part of the pO::lUlation not only of North but also
of South Korea. He is perfectly well informed
on the feelings oi the whole Korean people
towards the pup?et Gover:lment in South
Korea, He knows perfectly well that if the
United States occupation troOp3 left South Korea
the puppet Government would not remain in
power more than 21, holt rs. The United States
rerresentative knO\VS, as does his Government
how -the Korean people feel about the fact that
an occupation regime is maintained in South
Korea, while USSR occupatiO:l troops have long
since left North Korea, formerly a part uf the
USSR zone of occupatio:"!.

I1 est frappant de voir.a que1 point le representant des Etats-Dnis d'Amerique redonte l'cxamen des facteurs politic.ues qui constituent le
fond ffihlle de ce probteme, PO'Jrquoi le rcdontet-il? Parce qu'il St rend parfaitement compte
que le Gouvernemellt de la Republique democratique populai~e de Coree benefLcic de l'appui de
la grande majorite de la populat:on. non seu:emen1
dans le nord mais anssi dans le sud de la Coree
11 connalt fort bien quels sont les sentiments de
people cor~cn tont cnticr a l'eg:wrl dn GOl1vernCJ1lent fantoche de la Con~e du Sud. n sai~
tres bien que si les forces d'occupation des EtatsCnis se retiraient de la Con~e du Sud, ce Gouvernement ne se maintiendrtit pa~ plus de 24 heure~
a:'l pouvoir. Le rcrresentant ues Etats-Unis sait,
tout aussi bien que son Gotlvernell1ent, queUe
est l'attitude du peuple coreen a l'egard du regime <!'occupation qu'on maintio::nt en CGree d'l
Suo, alors que les forces de I'tTRS5 ont evacue
depuis longtemps deja la COf(~e dtl Nord q'Ji avait
fait partie de leUl· zone d'OCCltpation.

Tt i-" becau~e he knows all this that the United
States representative fears to tcmh on the politic.al
substance of this question. I can see, however,
no need for the other members of the Security
Council to share his fears. The Security Council
has nu right to neglect these decisive facts Jy
imoking far-fetcht:d and casuistical arguments.

C'est parce qtt'i: connalt tous ccs faits que :e
l·epresentattt des Etats-UlIis d'Ameriquc u peer
GC toucher aux facteurs politiqucs qui constituent
le fond meme de h question, Mais ;e ne yois pas
pOllrqwj les autre.; menbres du Conseil de securite devraient par:ageres craintes du representant des Etats-Uds. Le COll3eil de securite n'a
pas le droit de negliger ces fa:ts decisifs en invo(juant des consideration" fallacieuses qui reievent
de la casuistique.

In view oi what I bve said, the Ukrainian
SSR delegat.:on must insist that the application
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
for ."dll1ission to memoership in the United
Nations shoL:1d be expedited, that is to say that,
as it now stands, it should be referred to the
Security Cotncil's Committee on the Admission
of New Members.

Pour ces raiso:1s, la delegation de la Repu~
blique socialiste sovietique d'Ukr-aille demande
insltu'tmen! qu'il .soit donn~ suite a la candidature
de la Republlqtle democratique popuJaire de Conie,
c'est-a-dire que cette question, teHe qu'dle se
presente acluellemel1t, soit soumise au Comite
d'adm:ssion des nouveaux Membres,

10
The PRESIDENT: I wish now to make a brief
statement in my capacity as the representative of
CHINA in the Security Council.

Le PRD:SIDENT (traduit de l' anglCtits) : Je tiens
U. ~aire main,tenant une breve clec1ar::ltion en qun.~
hte cle representant de la CHINE: au Conseil de
securite.

Yesurdayafternoon [409th ml:fJ!i;,g] the representative of the United States analysed the broad
issues involved in our discussion. His speech,
although short, was very much to the point.. I
wish only to call the attention of the Security
Council to the possible political effects of anT
action today. Unfortunately, Kor~a is in ~a~t
divided. In the north we have a regime the ongm
and nature of which are unknown to ns. Th::lt
regime has persistently defied the United Nations.
In the south, where two-thirds of the Korean
people live, we have a Government which is certified by our own Commission as being based on
the valid, popular will of the people, and which
was acknowledged as such by the General Assem~
bly in its resolution of 12 December 1948
[195(III)].

Hier apres-midi, [40geme seana] le represen~
tant ?es Etats-Unis a fait l'analyse des grandes
questions que petlt soulever notre discussion. Son
intervention, bien que breve, Cl ete tres pertinente.
Ie vottdrais settlement ;atti,-er l't1ttention du
Conseil de securite sur les comequences politiques
possibles des decisions que nous prendrons au jour~
d'hui_ Malheureusement, c'est tln fait que la
Con~e est dlvisee. Dans le nord e:st en vigueur un
regime dont nous ignorons I'origine et la. nature
et qui n'~ cesse de braver l'Organisation des
Nntions Unies. Dans le sud, ou sont concentres
les deux-tiers de la population coreenne, exi'ste lln
Gouverlll::ment dont notre pl"Opre Commission
atteste qu'i1 est fonde sui- la volonte valablement
exprimee du peuple et qui a ete reconnu comme
tel par la resoltttion [195 (II!)] de l'Assel11blee
generale en date du 12 decembre 1948.
Cela pose, le Conseil de securite cloit~il prendre
en consideration la demande de la Coree septentrionale, de la meme ff\<;on qu'il a decide de
prendre en consideration celle de la Republique
de Con~e? En ne faisant pas de distinction enil'e
le nord et le sud, nous commettrions une erreur
politique. D'une part, je crains que le prestige du
Conseil de Seellrite ne se trollve alors diminue
::lUX yeux: des peuples du monde; cl'autre part,
on pOllrrait nous reprocher d'avoir inlelltiollnel~
lemenl refuse de tenir compte de la resolution
de I'Assem1J.lee generale. De plus, nons rendricJIls
contradi.ctoire.s les decisions de l'Orgal1isation des
Nations Unies.
Ma Jtl6.gation est d'a~is que, la demandc presentee par la Coree septentrionale [5/1247] ne
merite pas de retenir plus longtemps l'attention
du Conseil de secudte ou celle de son Comite.
C'est pourqtloi notlS voterons contre la resolution
que vient oe proposer le representant de I'URSS
[S/1259].

In view of these facts, should the Security
COl\llcil give to the 'application of North Korea
the same consideration as it has decided to give
to the application of the Republic of Korea? If
we showed no appreciation of the differences
between Ille north and the south, our action wonld
be politicany mischievous. On the one hand. I
am afraid that the prestige of the Security COllllCil
would be lowered in the eyes of the people of
the world; on the other, we should throw ourselves open to the objection that we had purposely
ignored the resolution of the General Assembly.
Further, we should render the action of the
United Nations inconsistent.
In the opinion of my deleg,ation, the application of North Korea [5/1247] does not deserve
any further consideration by this Council or its
Committee. For this reason we shall vote against
the resolution which has just been introduced by
the representative of the USSR [5/1259].
Mr. MOE (Norway): I wish to make a few
brief remarks, as my delegation sees some difficulties in the procedure proposed here. As to
the stlhstance of the question of whether or not
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea should
be admitted to membership in the United Nations,
the posilion of my delegation is clear. In our
_opinion the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has shown that it is not willing and able
to carry out the obligations in the Charter. We
are, therefore, forced to vote against the reference
of this application 10 the Committee on the Admission of New Members. We shall do this
though we do not like to make a decision of substance in the form of a decision on procedure.

M_ MOli: (Norvege) (traduit de l'anglais):
I'aimerais formuler quelques breves observations,
car, de I'avis de ma delegatiw, la procedure que
1'on nous propose presente quelql1es- difficultes.
Sur le fond de la question de savoir s'il y a lieu,
ou non, d'a'dmettre la Republique popu1aire d6mcicratique de Coree au sein de l'Organisation des
Nations Unie.s, la position de m:l deh~gation est
mtte, A noire sens, la Republique populaire democratiqne de Coree a prouve qu'elle n'etait ni
capable de rempler les obligations de la Cl,arte,
ni disposee a le faire. ,Nous nous trouvol1S, en
consequence, dans I'obligation de voter conh'e le
renvoi de cette demande atl Comite d'admission
des nouveaux Membres, bien que nous n'aimions
guere trancher une question de fond en prenant
nne decision de procedure.

There is another difficult question. Is this
document [S/1247] that has been circulated by
the Secretary-General an application, or is it
not? I f it is considered an application, my delegation wOllld be in favour of referring it to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members.
We would be in favour of that procedure partly
because we feel that the Security Council should
not decicle on an application before it has been to
the Committee on the Admission of New Members, and also because we Ihink that the Cammit-

I1 y a enCore une autre difficulte. Le document [5/1247] qui 1101'.S a ete distribue par le
Secretaire general constitue-t-H, ou non, llne
demande d'admission"i' Si on le considere comme
tel,ma delegation serait d'rwis de le renvoyer au
Comite d'admission des nOl1veaux membres. Si
nous preconisons cette maniere de proceder, c'est
en partie parce que nous estimons que le Consei!
<le securite ne devrait pas statuer sur une demande
,want qu'elle ne soit passee devant le Comite
c1'admissiOll des nouveaux Membres, et c'est aussi

11
parce que le, Comite est a notre avis lJ1ieuK. plnc'::
que le <;onse11 pour acco1"der a cette demam1e touk
I attentIOn vou1ue,
is
this
I raise the questio n of wheth er or not
Je po~e.la question de savoir s'it y a liell DU ncn
to be c~msiclere.d an applica tion becaus e the point d; c01!-sl?erer ce document comme une demande
wa~ ralsed yesterd ay by t~e represe ntative of the
d a~mlss10n, pa;ce que le representant des Etat~­
UnIted States. rvIy P0111t lS that if it is not an L!,ms a, sO.111eve ~ette question hier. Selon moi,
applica tion, the ql1e~tioll of wheth er to send it to s I1 ne s aglt pas dune demancle d'admission il est
the Commi ttee on the Admis sion of New Mem- absolLlm.ent ,.;l1pel'f~u de, disc1!~r de la qt;estion
Lers cannot even be discllssed. Therefo re this de. S;;tVOlr s 1, y a lieu den SalSlr le Comite d'adsee{l1s to me to be a very import ant point. I'must 1l11SS1011 des ,noll:'e~l1X Membres, Aussi te point
repre- ~le, s.el~lble-t-l1 tres 11l1PO~ta~t. le dais avoller.que
&1.y that I was a little astonis hed when the
the J al ete queltjne :pen stupefalt lorsque le represento
agreed
States
United
the
sentati ve of
Presid ent's constru ction of his -intervention, In tant des Etats-Un:is a approtlVe la maniere dont
Au
his interve ntion, the represe ntative of the United le President interpretait SOI1 intervention.
tant
represen
le
tion,
tion
interven
applica
the
meme
la
that
de
point
cow's
the
raised
also
Slates
C01.11d not be conside red by the Security Council des ~lat~-Ynis a egal~ment affinne que le Conseile
de-mand
becaus e it was contrar y to the resolution of the de secnnte Ile pOl1Valt pas prendre la
en consideration, parce tjll'tlle ctait contraire :i
Genera l Assembly 011 the KOI-ean question.
la resolution de l'Asscmblee gener:r.le relative a
la question de Cork
conC'est Ja, sans auClUl OOllte, un argu\l1ent d'tll1
This is certainly a consid eration that has
enl
Counci
ty
considerable. Le Conseil de securite est-il
Securi
poids
the
siderab le weight. Is
sa part _
titled to act contrar y to, or would it be wise for en droit - et ce1a serait-i\ .age de
andati(lll
I'CCOlllm
1me
avec
iction
recomcontrad
a
en
to,
ry
d'agir
the Secl1rity Counci l to act contra
cc a
approuv
cte
a
qui
e,
genera1
blee
was
l'Assem
that
de
bly
Assem
l
Genera
lhe
111cndatio,1 of
orite?
maj
forte
tres
une
accepte d by a very large ll1ajor ity?
It se pose id une autre question. Le Conscil
This raises anothe r questio n. Is the Security
conration
conside
securite a-t-i1 le droit de faire intencp ir d'aude
into
take
to
C0l111c11 entitld
4
tres considerations que les conditions prevl1cs i
ditions other t!l;lll those mentio ned in Article
be
ShOllld
l'Artic1e 4 de la Chttrte, a savoir qll'nll Etat tloit
State
a
of the Charte r, which are that
les obligations de la
peace-IoviJlg, that it should accept the obligations etre pacinql1e, accepter
rempJir et dispose :i
les
de
capable
etre
be
Chartc,
should
it
contain ed in the Charte r, and- that
, c'est que la
question
cette
sotlleve
jo.:
Si
bire?
le
ions?
obligat
tllose
out
carry
to
able and willing
;\ la majoemis
a
Justice
de
iona!e
jnternat
Cour
I raisc this qucstio n because there is a majorit y
les conditions
lequel
selon
tif
consulta
avis
lln
rite
Justice
of
Court
decisio n by the Interna tional
4 de la Charte sont les seules
which states that the conditi ons mentioned in prevl1es a l'Article en consideration.
prendre
£ail1e
qU'il
be
to
Al'ticle 4 of the Chalte r are the only ones
taken into cOl1sideratiOll,
La question dont le Conseit est saisi est tn':s
The questio n before us is a very complicated
wie, et j e n'ai ~ l'intention de provocotnpliq
on
deLate
any
raise
one, and I do not wish to
SUI' ces dlffe.l'~lit$' point~., M,a dc1,ethese points, My delegat ion will Yote against the ql1er un debat
le renvoI all COITIlte cl acltnl~­
contre
votel'a
gatlon
ratic
referen ce of the applica tion of the Democ
s de la dcmande -preMemhrc
ux
nouvea
People 's Republic of Korea to the Committee of sion des
e dcn;?cr~tiqu,e
ropll1~ir
q~e
Repu~li
la
par
sentee
Adlllissiun of New Membe rs. However, I do
Je tlens a ce ql111 n Y nit
ls,
TOl1tetO
Coree,
de
I
ami
,
erstood
not want this vote to be misund
aucun malentendu au ~ujet de ce vote 'et, si
have Inade this statem ent in order that it might
j'ai fait cettc dec1arati?~, c:est POll; qu'il soit
attiits
s
be qllite clcar that my delega tion reserve
bien entendu que ma delegation ne ~eng~e p.a~
tUlle on all of these questions and that, when the pour l'avenir et que, lorsque le Cansell ,de 5~Cll,l'lte
Sccllrit y Council conside rs furthe r applications examinera de nouvelles del11andes d admiSSion,
for membe rship, this vote by the Norweg ian dele- on n'invoquem pas ce yote. commc ,u~ precedent
gation cannol he taken as a precede nt.
ele nature a lier la delegation norvcglennc.

tee coll1d give the applica tion mUch more serious
conside rntion than it can be givel"l in the COl1ncil.

Mr. Al.\'AREZ (Cuba) (transl ated from Spanish): On my Govern ment's instruc tions I wish to
state its stand on the Yote all the application being
discuss ed by the Conneil. I shall refer simply and
solely to a criterio n which seems to us strictly
procec!t1ra1, witbou t procec (ling to consider other
qllestions which would pro!on g the argument,
An application for the admiss ion of a new
Membe r to the United Nation s is being pre~
sented before the Securit y Counc il and it is n,ot,
therefo re, possibl e to avoid t}le proced:lr~ wh}ch
the application to the Secl1n ty ConnCl,l ImpiJes,
In that connex ion rule 58 of the Secllrtty COl11~­
cil's rtlle~ of proced ure may be relevant. ~hl$
rde clearly says that"A ny State which de:>lres
to become a Membe r of the United Nations shall

M. ALVAREZ (Cuba) (tradl:it ~e J,'espagno[):
Man Gcuvernement m'a ch<trged tndlquer ~ll?lIe
est sa position au sujet de la deman~e d admiSSIOn
dont discllte actuel\ement le COllsell. Sans aborder l'exa1l1en (\'autL'es q~stio?5 et afill de 1!-e, pas
prolonger mOll interventIOn, ~e !nc borner~1 a ne
parler que d'un argument, gl11, a notre aVIS, COllcerne tlOiquemellt la procedure,
C'est au Conseil de 5ccu~ite, gu'a ~te ~oumisc
tme dem'ande d'admission a 1Organl~tlon des
Nations Unies, It n'est donc pas poss1ble de ne
pas suivre 1.."1 plLlcedurc pre~l\e en, cc ,o;s. Le
reglement interieur du [onsell d~ .securtt~ COI~­
tiel1t un article _ I'article 58 - qUI l;eut s ~pph­
uer en l'occl1rcncc. En effet, cet, o.~tl~le declal.'e
{art c1airement que "Tou.t Etat gut de,slre deveOlr
1Icmbre de l'Organisatlon dOlt presentcr llne

12
s~bmit 311 application to the Secretar)'.Gene~al. demande au Secretairc general. Cette demande
This application shall contain a declaration made doit contenir une declara.tion, faite clans un instruin a formal instrument ..."
ment forme[ , .."

This requirement of a Itdedaration made in a
formal instrumetlt" has not been fulfilled in the
pr(,3ent instance and we therefore consider it

necessary, without going into other consid.erations,
to vote against admission of the applicant S,ate
by voting against the doCUmC[lt c\.Hltall1ing the
application.

Dans le cas present, ['inrlkatio:J. "declaration
fai!e clans un instrclment fonnel" n'a pas re(fu
satt~fact:on. Nous estimons qu'il y a la un facteur
Sllffisant pour que, sans entrer dans d'alltn:~
considerations, nous \'ations cantre l'admission
de l'Etat qui a pose sa ca~didatl1rr! all rr.oyen
clll docwnent qui nous est soumis.

YIahmoucl FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I scbrnit that
the Security C0undl should be particularly grate~
ful to our colleEgue from Norway for the very
lucid statement he has just made to us on the
natule of the qt.:<:stion now before us, a qttestion
which I might call the matter of the "receivahility" of the application for members11ip in the
U:lited Nations which has bee~ presented by the
so~cal1ed Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
I must confess that I came hen with some
dOllCts, which I still entertain, as to certain technical a~d other phases of this question, doubts
similar to those entertained and expressed by on
colleague from Norway, and regarding which I
reserve the futtte attitude of the Egyptian delegation in a manner similar to that of our colleague
from Norway.

Mahmoud FAWZl Bey (Egypte) (t1'adllit dr:
l'anglais) : Je tiens it dire que le Consei! de secudte dcvrait etrc purticuliercment r'l'(';(lnnaissant
a notre col1egue de Korvege de s'etre prononce
avec tant de clarte sur la. r.ature de la question
dont nous sommes saisis, question que vous me
permettrez d'appe1er celle de la "rccevabilite" de
la candidature de la pretend~le Republique popll_
Wre de..'!locratique de Coree. Je dais avouer que,
l"tI arrivant ici, j'o.v<lis, et j'ai toujours d'ai~leurs,
des dOlltes sur certains aspects techniques et
autres de la question, doutes analogues a ccux
qu'a mallifestes tlotre co'li:fuc d<: Norvege et en
raison desque1s ·je reserve pour l'avenir l'attitude
de la delegation egyptienne, comme J'a fait, pOllr
sa delegation, notle co11egtle de Norvege.

This is a very delicate and comp1ica~ed matter,

C'est une question tre5- <1eticate et compliquee,
bien Qc'elle ne le paraisse pas au premier abord.
Ainsi il faut determiner si ceUe demande d'admi::;sion, comrne d'a.illeurs tot1:e demande presentee
pa.l un Gouvcrncrncnt, par un Etat otl par uoe
eutite politique, est de celles que p:evoit l'Article 4
ele la Cha:te. 11 faut egalement se demnnder si le
COllseil de securite doit rejeter immediatemcIlt
une dCr.1ande sans l'avoir etudiee de ntaniere approfondie, soit par l'inturr.6d:a.ire clu Comiit d'aomission des nouvel1.UX Membres, soit en se constlttlant en quelqne sorte lui-meme en Comite et en
procedant a un examen ;ninut:eu:c de la question,
pour determiner s'il s'agit d'un Gouvernement
legitime et si ce Got1verncmcnt est autorise a
presenter une teUe demandc. Cc sont la des questions tp~hnlques que, en rfalite, nous aurions dtl
examiner si nous avior.s voltlu etre absolument
stirs d'ayoir tenu compte de taus ll':s details.
Cependant, je ne )?eux ignorer les consideranou8
dominantes et primordiales qui m'ohligent d'autl'e
part 3 m'oppo;:f'r ;\ ce que nous donnions tlne
suite queIconque a ceUe dernande, que ce soit par
une decision de procedure ou par toute autre
decision.

.althongll it might n6t seem so at the outset. F{)r
ex.ample, is this application, or any similar ;;pplil':Rtion for membership presented by a GO'{ern-

me:r.t, hy a State or by an entity s.imilar to the
cne envisaged in Article 4 of the Charter? And
shOl1ld the Security COllllcil, in one minute disw
card an application without thoroughly g.oing into
ft, either through the Committee on the Admission
of New Members or, somehow, by constituting
:tsel f into a committee and invest:ga:ing the:
ma:ter thomughly to see whether this is a lawf',l
Government and whether it is entitied to present
such un application? All these are te6nical
matters which, strictly speak:ng, we should have
~one into if we wunded to be one hundred per
cent careful about details. However, I cannot
fail to T,otke that we have, 011 the other hand,
0vel'weighing "nd ov~r-riclillgcan.qitlemtiom which
compel me to be against our taking any positive
ac~ion, whether procedural or otherwise, in connexion with this application.

I do not tblk that thc Security Council 5honld
refer the mat~er to the Committee on the Admission of New Members, although it might be
proper for the Council to form its opinion or ask
for the opinion of the Com:nittee of Experts as
to the point rai::;ed by the r<.:prcsentativc o~ Norway, whic:1. 1 call the "receivabiIity" of tl1e applic~tion. Belt this particular application which is
now before the Security Council goes counter to
too many things which overweigp. and over-ride
the other pro.:edural ur ;;imilar considcrntions. To
begin with, it goes against the resoll1tions of the
General Assembly, the latest of w:tkh r195(JIIJl
was adopted only two monthE ago. 'Then there
are some other considerations which are particularly important, at least as far as the Egyptian
Delegation is concerned.

J~ ne r.rois pas qu~ le ConseiI de securite doive
rcnvover ceHe questioll au Co:nite d'a6nission
des nouveattx Membres, et pourtant, le Conscil
aumit peut-etre avan~ag~ i se faire une opinion,
ou a demander l'avis du Comite, sur la question
soulevee par le rr.prescntant de la Norvege, (lui
a demande en SoIDme si certe demandc etait bien
recevable. Mais la demande dont le Conseil est
actuellement saisi est incompatible "vec un trap
grand nombre de considerations primordiales, qui
l'emportent sur touteR les autres considerations
de procedure ou autres. En premier lieu, elle est
incompatible avec les resolutions de l'Assembtee
generale dont la derRiere 1195 (Ill)] a ete
adoptee it y a deux :11o:s seulement. 11 ya encore
d'autres consideration,,, particulierement importantes, pour la deUigatio:l de l'Egypte tout al1
moins.

13

If we admit that such an application should
be given consideration eqllal to that given to the
other application presented by the Government
of South Korea [S/1238], this would be a step
along a very slippery road, the road toward
crystallizing a state of things against which the
United Nations and all freedom-loving peoples
should stand steadfastly. That state of things is
encroachment and partition. For SOLneone to
come to a country and partition it because some(me, somewhere, wants to have influence in part
of it and is preparing to use it as a brideghead
in order to have influence over all of it, is a state
of things which is one of the introductions to
war, to strife, and which means the stifling of
freedom.
I am not speaking of partition merely because
I hate the ward. I do not want to go into another
question, because I, as an Arab, might be a bit
-or very-allergic to the word "partition", but
that is not the point I am making om'"'. I am
speaking of that state of things which, unfortunately, is now prevalent not only in Korea but in
many other parts of the world and which state,
most unfortunately, is likely to continue for some
time. I am speaking of encroachment by the large
on the small; I am speaking of spheres of influence, of extending a large nation's arm over a
small nation's territory. I think that not only as
an Egyptian, and not only as a spokesman for
Egypt here, but as a free man of the world,
worrying about freedom, I should pronounce my·
self against anything that would crystallize encroachments on freedom.
Before closing, I wish to say a word or two
in connexion with pat'agraph 3 of the General
Assembly's resolution of last year which spoke
of the withdrawal by both sides [195( fU)]. Does
anyone of us doubt that if such withdrawal is
accomplished, and accomplished soon, it will be
the best constmctive step toward the unification
of Korea and the restorl'ltion of freedom for all
its people? This is another part of the General
Assembly's resolution ag:l.inst which the application' of the so-called Democratic People's Republic of Korea goes. I therefore will vote against
the Security Council referring this application
for consideration and examination by the Committee on the Admission of New Members.
Mr. MALIl\" (Union of Soviet Socialist Reptlblies) (translatea from Russian): I shall be brief.
r only wish to point out to the Security Council,
as I have already done yesterday, that the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is a Government legally elected by the
whole Korean people, tIle will and interests of
which it represents. This Government is pursuing
a policy of peace and friendly relations with
all countries and peoples wishing to establish
normal reTations with the Repubiic. The Demo~
cratic People's Republic of Korea is a free and
independent sovereign State not subordinate to
a foreign occupation regime, sLnce there are no
foreign troops in North Korea.

I fUlly agree with the Egyptian representative
that occtlpation troops must be withdrawn from
Korea forthwith, and that the presence of occupation troops on any territory~be it South Korea
.or elsewhere-precludes the establisllment or

Si nous admettions que cette demande d'admission doive etre examinee sur un pied d'egalite
avec la demande presentee par le Gouvernement
de la Coree ou Sud [5/12381, nous nOlls engage~
rions dans llnc voie extremement dangereuse,
nous tendrions ;). cristalli:>er un etat de choses
contre lequel les Nations Unies et tous les peupies pacifiques doivent s'elever e.nergiquement;
je venx parler du partage d'un pays et d'une
atteinte i sa souverainete. Lorsqu'un Etat vient
a etre partage, pafce qu'un autre cherche a exercer son influence dans une partie de f.e pays et
a utili..,er cette region comme tete de pont pour
etendre son influence sur le pays tout entier,
voila un etat de chose de nattU'e a. provoquer le
conflit et la guerre et a juguler la Hberte.
Je ne parte pas de partage tmiquement paree
que je hais le mat. En tant qu'Arabe, j'ai nature]·
lement une certaine aversion - une reelle aversion - pour le mot "partage", mais la n'est pas
la question. Je parle d'evenements qui, malheureusement, se produisent a l'heure actuelle, non
sculement en Corte, mais dans un grand nombre
d'autres pays, et qui, helas, ne cesseront probablement pas de si tot. Je parle de I'inghence des
grands dans les affaires des petits, je parte des
spheres d'influence et de la mainmise des grandes
Puissances sur Ics petlts pays. J'c§time que, non
seulement en tant qu'Egyptien, et en tant que
porte-pal'01e de l'Egypte, rnais en tant que libre
eitoycn du monde, qui a le soud constant de la
liberte, je dois m'opposcr :l. taute mesurc qui
consacl'erait des atteintes a la Iiberte.
Avant de terminer, }e voudrais dire quelques
mots au sujet du paragraphe 3 de la resolution
adoptee I'annee derniere [195 (IIln, qui prevoit
le retrait des deux parties en cause. Nul ne doute
id que cc rctrait, s'1I etait effectue, et sans dHai,
constituerait le meilleur moyen d'assurer I'unification de la Coree et de rend re la lioerte a tout
le peuple coreen. Voila. donc tme autre partie de
la resolution de l'Assemblee generale avec laqueUe
la demande cl'admission de la pretendue Republique populaire democratique de Coree est incompatible. C'est pourquoi je voterai contre le renvoi
de cette demande au Comlt~ d'admission dell
nouveaux Membres.
M. MALIK (Union des Republiques sodalistes
sovietiques) (traduit du r1tssc) ~ Je semi brei. Je
voudrais simplement rappeler au COflseil de s~cu­
rite les consideratiolls que j'ai deja exposees hter:
le Gouvernement de la Repubtique dcmocratique
populaire de Coree a 6te 1c~gitimemet1t elu par
I'ensemble du peupIe coreen dont 11 rnanifeste la
volonte et dont il repn~sente les interets. Ce GOttvernement poursuit une politique de paix et
entend entretenir des reb.tlOllS amicales avec taus
les pays et taus les peuples desireux d'etablir des
rapports normaux ayec la Republique. La Republique Mmocratique populaire de Coree est un
Etat souverain, libre et independant, qui n'est
soumis a aucun regime d'occupation Hranger,
etant donne qu'iI n'y e. pas de troupes etrangeres
sur le territoire tie la Coree du Nord.
Je sUtS entierement d'ac«:ord avec le repre~
sentant de l'Egypte, qui demande le rdrait immediat des tro~pes d'occupation du territoire de la
Coree; en effet, la presence de troupes d'occupation, que ce soit sur le territoire de la Coree

14
existence of a free and independent government
and a free sovereig)l State. History shows that
this is impossible. The sovereign, democratic and
peace-loving State created by the will of the
. people-the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea~fully conforms to the provisions of
Article 4 of the Charter and can consequently be
admitted to membership in the United Nations.
Its application is ill order; its desire to join the
United Nations is legitimate and is not in any
way incompatible with the rules of procedure;
nor is it in any way contrary to the principles of
the Charter, the objective of which is to defend
the interests, liberty and independence of the
peoples of the world and to maintain international
peace and security. Furthermore, this application
conforms fully with logic nnd common sense.

du Sl.ld 011 sur tout autre territoire, est incompatible avec la creation ou le maintiel1 c1'Lln Gouvernement libre et inde.pendant, d'ltn Etat libre et
sotlverain. L'histoire nOllS en fomnit la preuve.
La Republique democratique popnluire de Corec
qui est 11n Etat (Iemocratique SOl1verain et pacifique, iss11 de la volonte pO[1ulaire, satisfait entierement aux dispositions de l'Artic1e 4 de la Chal'tc
des Nations Unies et peut par consequent etre
aumis cornme Membre de l'Organioo.tion. Sa
demande d'admission est legitime; son des;. de
faire partie de l'OrgaIlisation des Nations Unies
I'est tout autant et n'enh"eint en rien les dispositionsdu reglemcnt int6rieur; il n'est pas non
plus -eontraire aux principes de la Cl12rte qui a
pour bl1t de dCfendre les inten~ts des peuples,
lenr liberte et leur independance et de maintenir
la paix et la securite internationales. D'antre
part, cette candidature est tout a fait conforme
a la logiq ue et au brm sens.

This applicatioll, which bespeaks the desire of
the people of free Korea, is incompatible only
with the coloflial interests of the United States
of America. The application of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and those interests
are imleed incompatible; that is the only possible
reason for the hesitation and doubts of some of
the members of the Secmity Council. They are
caught between Scylla am'l Charybdis, namely
between, on the one hand, the lawful and legitimate desire of a free and independent State, of
its Government and of its people to enter the
family of the United Nations, and, on the other,
the colonial interests of the United States of
America, No wonder some representatives find
it difficult to choose between the two. But truth
and justice are on the side of the people of free
Korea; the vote of the Anglo-American bloc in
the Security Counci] cannot change that.

La candicl.ature en guestion qni repond <lUX
desirs du peuple de la Caree libre n'est contraire
qtt'atlX interets colonial1x des Etats-Unis d'Ame~
riqne. 11 est exact, en effet, que la candidature
de la Republique democratique popn1aire de
Con~e est incompatible ,avec ces interets; cela seul
explique les dOlltes et les hesitations de certains
membres ciu Conseil de securite. lIs se trouvent
places entre Charybde et Scylla: d'lln cote, iI y
a le elesir l~.gitime et jnstifie d'un Etat Iibre·et
independant, de son GO'clvernement et de son
peuple, gl1i demandent
entrer dans la' famillc
des Nations, ,Dnies; de 1,'aotre, il y a. les interets
coloniaux des Etats~Unis d'Amerique. Pour certains representants, le choix est difficilc, et cela
se comprend. Mais le peuple libre (le la Coree a la
verite et la justice pour ltti; le vote du bloc angloamerieair, au Conscil de securite, quel qu'il soit,
ne &aurait rien y changer.

General McNAumrToN (Canada): I only wish
to make a very brief statement on the draft resolution which has been placed before tbis Council
hy the representative of the USSR as contained
in document S/1259. To my mind, the terms of
the resolu.tion which was adopted by the General
Assembly on .12 December 1948 [195(llI)l
shOUld, ~e slne:l!,. regarded .by .this Security
CounCil 111 determltlmg our aetlon 111 this matter.
This resohttion establishes that the Government
which came into existence under the auspices of
the Uniled Nations Temporary Commission on
Korea is the only law£1ll Government in that
country,. and, .as a c?nseqttence, the Security
COllOC!lIS not, 111 my View, properly in a position
to, entertai~ an application from any other grollp
at persons tu that country, even if they may make
claim to exercise <It'.thority as a government.

Le gene'ral McNAUGHTON (Canada) (trad1tit
de l'anglais): Je ne voudrais dire que guelqlles
mots au sujet du projet de resobtion de l'URSS
qtli figure au document 5'/1259. A mon avis, le
Conseil de securite devrait s'en ten:Lr strictement
aux termes de la resolution 195 (Ill) adopte~
par I'A~sembtee generale le 12 decembre 1948
poltr determiner queUe mestlrc iI doit prendre
cet egard. Anx termes de ceUe resolution, le
GOl1vernement qlli a etccrce sous les auspices de
le. Commission temporaire des Nations Unies en
Coree est le selll gotlvemement legitime de cc
pays; par consequcnt, le COl1seil de sccurite ne
peut, mon avis, fain~ droit une demande d'admission presentee par un autre grOllpe de person11es de Cl'. meme pays, mellle si elles peuvcnt
pretendre y avoir constitue '-In gouverne1l1eltt qui
exerce l'autorite.

For this reason, I believe that the resolution
which is sllhmitted to us by the represent:1tive of
the USSR shotild not be accepted by this Security
Council, ami I would say on behalf of the Cana(\ian dele~ilti01: Lhat if it is put to the vote, I shall
v?te agalllst It for the reason which I have
gl\'en.

C'est pOlll"quoi j'estime que le projet de n~so­
111tioll propose par le representant de l'URSS
ne c1evrait pas etre accepte par le Conseil de
secul'ite et je declare au nom de la delegation
du Canada que si ectte resolution est mise aux
voix, je voterai contre, pour les raisons que jc
viens d'indiquer.

a

a

a

a

The PREStoENT: As there is no other speaker,
Le PRESTOENT (tradltit de I'onglais): Auctlll
I shall Imt the draft resolution of the USSR' autre rnembre ne desirant prendre la parole, je
[S/1259J to the vote.
mets <lUX: voix le projet de resolution presente par
I'Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiqt1cs
[S/12591
.

A vote _was takell by_show of hands, as follows:

Il est proccde au vote Lt ·m.ain levee.

I
I

~-

.,.-.

15
In favo1tr. Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Repl1blics.
Against: Canada, China, Cuba, Egypt, France,
Norw<l.)', United Kingdom, United States c·f
America.

Fotrmt pour: Republique socialiste sovietiql1e
c'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovie(ques,
Vo.lent contre: Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
Norvege, Rayaullle-Uni, Etats-Unis
c:.'Ameriqne.

Jfranc~,

Abstaining .. Argentina,

S' abstiant: Argentine.

The draft N!UIlution was rejiJcted by 8 vote..
to 2, with one abstentl:on,

Par 8 voi..: contre 2, avec une,lbste'ittion, le projet de resolution c.!t rejcte.

Mr. MALTK (Union of Soviet Socialist Repnblies) (translrtted from Rus.-ian): J wish to m.ake
a brief statement all behalf of the USSR delegation, By rejeding the USSR delegation's
the
resolt1tion, the Anglo-Americ:.n bloc
Security Council has committed a new act of
injustice against one of the oldest peoples of
Asia, which hds recently freed itself horn 40
ye;Jrs of colonial slavery and which has every
legitimate reason and right to be a:~cepted into
the family of the United Nations.

M. MALll( (Union des Republiques socialistesSQvietiql1es) (tmdltit dli nlssc;: Je de:;ire faire
une courtc dechration all nom de la delegation
de l'URS." Rrj r/'"jetant :1" proiet de resolution
presente [Jar :na uelegation. le bloc anglol3.l11ericain du Conseil de securite s'eEt rendu coul'egard de 1"Jn
pable d'ulle notlvel1e injustice
des peuples les plus anciens de l'Asie, qui s'est
libere recefilment <1'tue servitude coloniale vieille
de 40 ans cl qui a tOU3 le::; druit,::; d'etre admis daus
la £:twille des Nations Unies,

This people has created its own free and independent Democratic People's Repuhlic of Korea
al'ld its own national Government. It has applied
for admission to membership in the United Nations, Follcwing the lend of the Unit~(l Stales
delegation, 11Owever, the Anglo-American bloc in
tl~e Security Ccnncil has l'ejected the tpplieation of the legitimate Korean Government for the
<.tdmissioll of the Democratic People's Reptlblic
of Korea to membership in the United Nations.
At th!"; same time, this bloc hilS resorted to illega!
manoeuvres in an effort to drag into the United
Nations the puppet Government set up against
the will of ~he people lly the United States occupation authorities in Sout!,: Korea, That Was the
second act of injustice.

Ce peuple a cree :a Republiqt1e c1emoctatiqt1e
;:lOplIlaire de CDn~e libre et il1depencl.ante, et a
etabli un Gouvernement natio~laL Il a adresse
sa dem,uuJe d'adlllission it l'Otganisntion des Na:ions Unies. Ccpendant. le bloc: anglo-ameriO<lin
du COl1seil de secl\rite, suivant la delegation des
Etats-Uois d'Amerique, a repousse la dcmande
!Jresentee par le Gouvcrnement legitime de COl'ee
en vt:e de l'admissior. de la Republique democratique populairc de Coree dans l'Organisation des
NaticflS Uoies. En meme temps, ce bloc s'est li"fe
des manceuvres illegales pour tenter d'introdu:re
dans t'Organisation des Kations Unies le regime
fantQche que les forces d'occt:pation des EtatsUni::; d'AJllerique ant et:thli en Con~e dtl Slid,
contrairerrent it la volonte du peuple careen. C'est
la le cleuxicme acte d'injustice commis cantre la
Coree.

The first nct of injustice towards the Korean
people and its Democratic People';; Republic wu:;
committed under pressure from the Anglo-American bloc at the General Assembly in Paris, wlen
the representatives of this Rel~l1blic were den:cd
admission to the Assembly and were dep;ived of
the opportunity to st~te thl"ir opinioll, express
their point of view, and give a true pictnre of the
situation in Korea.

La preniel'e injustice a :'egard dlt ?euple coreen
et de la Republiql1c dcmocratiqLle populaire <le.
cc pays a ete commise a Pans, lors(]ue l'Asscmblee
gene;alc, ~ous la pression au blDc anglo-americ;.in,
a refuse £lUX representants de la Rept1blique
d'€tre adrnis l'Assemblee, de se £:lire entendrc,
d'e.xposer leurs VllC5 et de presenter un tableau
veridique de la situation qui existe en Coree,

The aim of the United Stales it: estanlishlng
illegal regime in South Korea is to obstruct
the unification of tlle K()f('an ~eople, to prolong
the partition of Kore[\. into a r:orthern and
southern zone, 'and thus to create suitable conditions for the contimlec OCCllpiltirm of South
Korea by the United States authorities and for
l{eeping its inhabit<:.nts in a state of colonial
serfdom.

En cl'eant en Caree dL: Sud un regim~ illegal,
les TItats-Unis d'Amedque visent it empecher le
pellplc coreen de renliser 50n \:nite et r:erpetuer
la division de :a Coree e~l deux parties, l'une au
nord et l'autre all sud du pays; ils cherchent ainsi
creel' des conditions qui permettraient nux
autorites americaines de con:inller l'occupation
de la Cor~e du Sud et de maintcnir la. population
de cc territoire sous 1111 re!:"ime d'esclava~e colonial.

:n

Ull

Then: iE 110 doubt that the peoples of Korea,
:lIld, indeed, the peoples cf Asia, who seek free-

dom and independer.ce despite alt ahsta.. . !es and
opposition, wil1 condemn this colonial policy,

Mr. AI.YAREZ (ellba) (translated front Span.
t~h): I have heard the USSR representative re-

peatedly i,;se tne expression "Anglo-American
h.lock", As news of the Seeuri:y COLlncil's activitIes app~ars 111 the Press of the whole world, aml
as the inhabitants of my country might be sur-

a

a

a

a

a

Le pet~ple de- la Coree qui, l11algre tOllS les
obstacles et to;Jtes les enlnlVes, aspire avec tous
les llulres peuples de l'Asie la. liberte et l'indepcncancej satlfa :::ans aucun doutc <::ondamner cette
politique coloniale.

a

a

M, ALvAREz (Cuba) (traduit de l'eJpagltl]l):
J'ai entendll le representant de I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques rncnticnner maintcs
reprises l'expression "bIDC anglo-a:nericain"; or,
la press<: du llloncle entier puhie n!',~ informations
sur res debats duo ConsdI de secudte, C'est pour-

a

16
prised by the term, I should like him to make it
clear to which bloc he is referring.

We have clearly explained the reasons for our
vote and we further state we do not belong to a
bloc of any kind. We do not know whether the
USSR representative will feel that he has special
reaso:Js for ref'eating the expression, but, in any
case, we should be grateful if he would clarify it.

quoi, afin d'eviter que les habitants de man pays
ne soient surprispar ceUe expression, j'aimerais
que le representant de l'URSS indiquat a qnel
bloc il fait allusion.
Nous avans .::.laire01ent explique les raisons qui
ant motive notre vote et nOllS declarons en ontre
n'appartenir a aucun bloc. No'J.s ne savons pas si
le representant de l'URSS estime avoir des
raisons particulieres de se servir de cete expres~
sion, mais, en tout cas, nous lui serions recon·
naissants de les indiquer.

The PRl.:SlDl':NT: In view of the lateness of the
hour, I imagine that the members of the Security
Council would prefer to defer c<lnsideration of
item 3 of OUT agenda until onr next meeting,
whicll is to be held tomorrow at 3 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angltri;s); Comme
il se fait tard, je suppose que les membres du
Conseil de securite prefereront reporter I'examen
du point 3 de l'ordre du jour a la prochaine seance
qui doit avair lieu demain, a 15 heures,

The meeting rose at 5,40 p,",.

La seance est levee a 17 h. 40.
