UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/893
14 November 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 13 NOVEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
12 November 1997, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I would appreciate your bringing it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

97-31929 (E)

141197

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/893
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 12 November 1997 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
tenth monthly report on Stabilization Force operations. I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/893
English
Page 3

Appendix
Tenth monthly report to the United Nations Security Council
on SFOR operations

SFOR operations
1.
Approximately 35,000 troops are currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all the NATO nations and from
20 non-NATO countries. Over the reporting period (21 September-20 October), the
number of troops in theatre decreased owing to the return of the reinforcements
previously deployed in support of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) during the conduct of the municipal elections which took place
on 13 and 14 September.
2.
Over the reporting period, SFOR continued to conduct surveillance and
reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols. A total of 2,550 sorties
were flown by combat aircraft, with the SFOR helicopter fleet flying 99 hours.
3.
Support continues to be provided to the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES), with
SFOR maintaining its regular, coordinated training missions over Eastern
Slavonia in order to exercise plans to conduct close air support if necessary.
4.
Political unrest continues in the Republika Srpska, and, over the reporting
period, tensions have risen with respect to the media there. On 1 October, at
the request of the High Representative, and as a result of persistent biased and
distorted broadcasting by Pale Serb Radio Television (SRT), in particular the
distortion of the press conference with Judge Louise Arbour, SFOR secured the
SRT transmitters at Udrigovo and Duga Nijva in Multi-National Division North and
at Mount Trebevic and Leotar in Multi-National Division South-East, with the aim
of preventing Pale SRT from broadcasting in contravention of the Peace
Agreement, and the Sintra Declaration. SFOR's securing of the towers was
accomplished without incident. In cooperation with the Banja Luka-based SRT
authorities, SRT transmissions were re-established from the Banja Luka SRT
studios.
5.
On 18 October, in response to unauthorized pro-Pale SRT television
transmissions, first monitored late on 16 October, SFOR troops in Multi-National
Division North mounted operations to inspect the SRT Veliki Zep tower to
determine if it had been the source of the unauthorized transmissions. During
the course of the inspection, it was discovered that transmitting and receiving
equipment had recently been removed from the tower, rendering it
non-operational, and also disabling the south-eastern section of the SRT
broadcasting network, including transmissions from Trebevic and Leotar towers.
A platoon from Multi-National Division North secured Veliki Zep tower. In
conjunction with the Office of the High Representative, work is in hand to
restore the south-eastern section of the SRT broadcasting network to normal
operation. SFOR forces continue to secure the television towers at Udrigovo,
Duga Njiva, Mount Trebevic, Leotar and Veliki Zep.

/...

S/1997/893
English
Page 4

6.
Throughout the Federation, the political and security climate continued to
improve. Nevertheless, there were several serious incidents over the reporting
period, including a car bomb explosion in Mostar and an explosion which
destroyed a mosque in Tomislavgrad. In early October, inflammatory reports were
broadcast by Mostar radio, accusing SFOR and the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) of mistreating a local Bosnian Croat official and engaging in behaviour
likely to result in further violence. OSCE called for a retraction of the
broadcasts.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
7.
The parties remain generally compliant with most military aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace across the whole area of operations, and
were highly cooperative during the recent election period.
8.
With respect to the police restructuring process, the Federation is fully
engaged with the programme initiated by IPTF, and its police forces are now
conforming to internationally recognized standards. The target size for the
Federation police force is 11,500 - to date, 6,711 policemen have been fully
certified and 2,985 temporarily. Five of the 10 Federation cantons have
completed the IPTF certification process.
9.
Although local police restructuring is progressing more slowly in the
Republika Srpska, an agreement was reached between the Republika Srpska
authorities and IPTF on 26 September to begin the restructuring process there
immediately and setting the size of the Republika Srpska police at 8,500
officers. On 13 October, Ambassador Farrand, the Brcko Supervisor, issued a
supervisory order requiring the establishment of a multi-ethnic police force in
Brcko by 31 December 1997.
10. While the Republika Srpska local police certification and training
programme is encouraging, the Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade, under the command
of General Saric, is still not in full compliance with annex IA of the Peace
Agreement and with the supplementary instructions to the parties issued by the
SFOR Commander on 15 August. This Brigade comprises five units, and currently
numbers 954 men in total. The units are located in Pale, Sekovici, Bijelijna,
Doboj and Tjentiste, with Brigade headquarters and two weapons-storage sites
located in Janja. In addition, there are two training centres at Bratunac and
Janja. There are two outstanding issues of non-compliance: first, an overall
general failure on the part of each Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade unit to
provide monthly duty rosters, and the non-submission of a personnel list by a
unit at Bratunac. A further issue which remains unresolved is President
Krajisnik's failure to reply personally to the SFOR Commander's letter of
24 September requiring an explanation of the role of the Specialist Police in
the Banja Luka events of 8 and 9 September (see S/1997/794, annex, appendix,
para. 7). In the light of this non-compliance, the Police Anti-Terrorist
Brigade as a whole remains subject to a training and movement ban and continues
to be closely monitored by SFOR. SFOR will continue to require all units to
comply fully with the relevant instructions before permitting any modification
of these present restrictions. In an effort to ensure such compliance, SFOR has
established links with each unit and has addressed a letter to the Republika
Srpska Minister of the Interior outlining the remaining non-compliance issues.
/...

S/1997/893
English
Page 5

11. During the reporting period, SFOR inspected 373 military weapons storage
sites: 119 Bosniac; 127 Bosnian Croat; and 127 Bosnian Serb. A number of minor
discrepancies were discovered, and the following weapons confiscated: from the
Bosniacs, 5 rocket-propelled grenades, 1 rifle grenade, 24 hand grenades and
2 x 60 mm mortar rounds; from the Bosnian Croats, 6 long-barrelled weapons,
4 AK 47 rifles, 27 rifle grenades, 100 PMR1 mines, and 83 x 7.62 rounds of
ammunition; and from the Bosnian Serbs, 2 lorry-loads of old rifles, pistols and
ammunition.
12. SFOR continues to support the IPTF inspections of civilian police stations.
Over the reporting period, a total of 236 civil police stations were inspected,
71 of which (36 Federation and 35 Republika Srpska) revealed discrepancies, and
the following weapons confiscated: from the Federation, 611 grenades,
3 anti-personnel mines, 1 anti-tank mine, 1,974 long-barrelled weapons and
68 rifles; and from the Republika Srpska, 48 grenades, 8 anti-personnel mines,
1 anti-tank mine, 51 long-barrelled weapons, 16 rifles and 5 pistols. In
addition, SFOR confiscated 25 mortar rounds and 271,405 small-arm rounds. In
accordance with SFOR policy, after a period of time to allow for appeals, all
these confiscated weapons will be destroyed.
13. Over the reporting period, no illegal checkpoints were dismantled. The
SFOR/IPTF checkpoint policy has improved freedom of movement over the entire
area of operations, and the number of requests for authorization to set up
checkpoints has steadily decreased, dropping from 1,049 a week at the beginning
of July to 96 requests a week by the end of September.
14. Movements of displaced persons and refugees were affected by the
announcement of the municipal election results, with refugees drawn to
communities which they view as more hospitable, based on the election results
and the degree to which their implementation is proceeding. Much of this
movement has taken place across the Inter-Entity Boundary Line, and SFOR is
continuing closely to monitor the most affected areas. SFOR is also continuing
to work with the Entities on cross-Inter-Entity Boundary Line transportation
and, in conjunction with the United States Agency for International Development,
has repaired the Tuzla-Brcko railway line in order to enhance freedom of
movement.
15. Over the reporting period, SFOR monitored a total of 438 training and
movement activities: 119 by the Bosniacs; 46 by the Bosnian Croats; and 273 by
the Bosnian Serbs. There are currently two training and movement bans in
effect, both in the Multi-National Division South-East - one on the 7th Bosnian
Serb Army Corps, and the second on the 820th Bosniac Army Brigade.
16. During the reporting period, Entity personnel, under SFOR supervision,
removed 1,818 explosive devices from a total of 325 mined areas: 229 anti-tank
mines; 1,539 anti-personnel mines, and 50 items of unexploded ordnance. A ban
was placed on the movement and training of the 3rd VRS corps by Multi-National
Division North from 22 September to 21 October, with the only exceptions being
activities to execute the counter-mine campaign, OSCE arms reductions, and site
reductions. A complete training ban which had originally been placed on the 5th
VRS corps from 22 September to 21 October was lifted on 10 October because of
the corps' full cooperation with SFOR in its demining programme.
/...

S/1997/893
English
Page 6

17. The agreement reached by the parties at the 19 August Inter-Entity Boundary
Line subcommission meeting and reflected in last month's report (S/1997/794,
annex, appendix, para. 17) was not ratified, with the result that the exchange
of the Republika Srpska village of Dobocani for the Federation village of
Koprivna did not take place. Separate meetings with the Federation and
Republika Srpska officials have taken place in an attempt to move this issue
forward.
Cooperation with international organizations
18. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre and support the work of IPTF, as noted
above, the Office of the High Representative, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and OSCE.
19. Since the beginning of the political struggle within the Republika Srpska
in early July, SFOR has supported the development of an Office of the High
Representative and OSCE media initiative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. This has
involved direct support for the completion of the successful Free Elections
Radio Network (FERN) and the development of the Open Broadcast Network (OBN),
with SFOR providing engineering, communications and logistics support. In close
liaison with the Office of the High Representative, a policy of opening up the
media within Bosnia and Herzegovina has been pursued. This has included SFOR
working within the various media advisory working groups such as the Media
Experts Commission and the newly created Media Standards Advisory Group. SFOR
has also helped staff the Office of the High Representative Media Restructuring
Plan and encouraged the technical and financial support that will be required to
fund this project.
20. SFOR also continues to work with the Office of the High Representative on
the issue of opening up regional airports, notably by ensuring that there are no
technical grounds to preclude the opening of the Tuzla, Mostar and Banja Luka
airports to civilian traffic.
21. SFOR is fully participating in the OSCE Election Results Implementation
Committees, at national and regional levels. These Committees will monitor the
installation of elected candidates and will coordinate responses to installation
problems. SFOR is also developing a public information campaign in consultation
with OSCE, to assist in the election implementation process.
22. With the announcement of Republika Srpska Assembly elections on
23 November, SFOR has begun initial planning for providing logistics and areasecurity support to OSCE. SFOR also continues to provide personnel to the Joint
SFOR/OSCE Elections Operations Centre in preparation for these elections.
23. With respect to arms control, all those parties with weapons still to be
reduced reported that they expected to meet the 31 October deadline.
Cooperation in the period leading to the end of phase II has been excellent,
except for the boycott by the Republika Srpska of the Subregional Consultative
Commission meeting in early September. Overall, arms control is progressing in
a highly satisfactory manner.

/...

S/1997/893
English
Page 7

Outlook
24. SFOR has now begun initial planning, in close coordination with OSCE, for
the Republika Srpska Assembly elections, scheduled for 23 November. SFOR
support will be similar to that provided for the municipal elections, although
on a smaller scale, owing to the smaller number of polling stations.

-----
