United Nations

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5776th meeting
Tuesday, 6 November 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wirajuda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cartuyvels
Mr. Li Junhua
Mr. Maboundou
Mr. Renié
Mr. Christian
Mr. Azzarello
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. Al-Henzab
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kačo
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Saltonstall
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Letter dated 29 October 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Indonesia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2007/640)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-58467 (E)

*0758467*

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Benin and Thailand, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zinsou
(Benin) and Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated this morning, to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now call on the representative of Angola.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
congratulate the Indonesian presidency for convening
this important meeting and welcome with appreciation
the insightful concept paper (S/2007/640, annex)
circulated prior to this meeting. Thank you,
Mr. Minister, for coming all the way from Jakarta to
chair this important meeting today. Your presence
honours us and enhances the value of the deliberations
of the Council on the role of regional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
As rightly mentioned in the concept paper, “Over
the years, there has been a plethora of efforts in
promotion of such an objective, including through the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1631 (2005)”
(ibid., para. 2). We fully share this vision of the
situation, which now calls for concrete action in order
to match the consensual recognition of the central role
of regional and subregional organizations as
instrumental mechanisms in the collective security
system.

2

Regarding the African continent, the Security
Council has held special meetings and has adopted
several presidential statements and resolutions,
including recently holding a summit meeting dedicated
to the African continent. The problems and possible
solutions are therefore fully identified.
Both the Security Council and the African Union
recognize the importance of having an effective system
of coordination between the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of West African States,
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Southern
African
Development
Community,
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community,
the East African Community, the Arab Maghreb Union
and others.
We therefore welcome the steps taken towards the
implementation of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
decision on the 10-year process of sustained capacitybuilding support within the African Union strategic
framework, as well as the reflection underway in the
Department of Political Affairs on how to better liaise
with the different regions, including by enhancing the
presence of the United Nations on the ground through
regional offices. Cooperation with local bodies,
particularly in the field of police training for
peacekeeping operations, should be stressed. In this
connection, we reiterate our call to the donor
community to assist the efforts under way on the
continent. The initiative recently launched by
Cameroon, the Ecole internationale des forces de
sécurité to train police from African countries, is a
good example.
Africa has been the ground for useful experiences
in peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding,
including the deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping
operations,
the
deployment
of
multinational forces and the bluehelmeting of African
regional and subregional forces such as in Burundi and
Côte d’Ivoire. All those experiences have had an
impact on the action of the United Nations, the reform
of its bodies such as the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), and the philosophy of the
Organization in shaping a new vision of global
security.

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

The concept paper you have distributed,
Mr. President, calls our attention to the important
question of the innovative initiative consisting of a
hybrid model being tested in Africa. While addressing
the Fourth Committee, Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guéhenno of the DPKO recalled the
work being developed by his Department in
establishing the initial operating capabilities of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. In this connection, the multidimensional
presence in Chad and the Central African Republic —
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad — to be deployed by end of this
year in close concert with the European Union would
constitute a welcome development.
It is our hope that those experiences will serve as
catalysts for strategic partnerships with regional
organizations in order to maximize their impact and
increase the likelihood of successful peace and security
outcomes. Important lessons should also be drawn with
regard to the need for reducing the time between
decision and implementation. Those two experiences
will be decisive concerning the use of the model in
future circumstances.
Peacebuilding is also a question of great
importance for the African continent, in view of the
increasing number of countries in post-conflict
situations. The experiences under way in Burundi and
Sierra Leone point to the direction and to the need for
strengthening the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. One of the lessons drawn from the
peacebuilding work in these countries and the presence
of peacekeeping operations is the need to improve the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The United
Nations peacebuilding architecture should also take
into account the efforts of the African Union in the
establishment of a peacebuilding regional mechanism.
By creating the Organization of the African
Unity — which later became the African Union — and
by establishing subregional bodies, the African
continent recognized very early the importance of
those institutions and has spared no effort to preserve
them. Those bodies are therefore pivotal partners for
the United Nations. This partnership requires, inter
alia, adequate structures in the United Nations
Secretariat, a fluid communication channel and the
enhancement of the role of the mechanisms established
by the Security Council, including the Security

07-58467

Council’s Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
Before I conclude, let me reiterate the view that
clearly there is added value in strengthened and
coordinated action between the Security Council and
the regional and subregional organizations. The
maintenance of peace and security is clearly better
served if this coordination becomes more real and
action-oriented. This debate today represents an
important contribution towards reaching this urgent
goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for organizing and presiding over this
open debate on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Kazakhstan fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Kyrgyz Republic
on behalf of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.
Kazakhstan considers this important issue to be
one of the main priorities of the Organization and the
Security Council. In particular, the Security Council
should encourage cooperation between the United
Nations and regional arrangements to promote
international peace and security, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Resolution 1631 (2005) underlines the Security
Council’s commitment to taking appropriate steps to
the further development of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and recognizes the growing contribution
by regional arrangements to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We note with satisfaction that over the years,
many efforts have been made to promote such
objectives. There have been debates in the Security
Council on conflict management and post-conflict
stabilization processes and the role of regional
organizations in peace and security. In previous
presidential statements, closer cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations on peace and
security issues was supported, including the brokering
of peace agreements in conflict situations.

3

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

We welcome the growing role of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security and an enhanced international cooperation,
while supporting the principle of multilateralism in
addressing burning international issues.
It is now obvious that in recent years, the
international community has seen a rapid surge in
peacekeeping missions, and this trend is likely to
continue. The United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations currently directs 18 such
operations across the world, comprising more than
130,000 troops, police and civilian personnel.
We believe that peacekeeping operations under
the aegis of the United Nations remain the most
effective tool for preventing and settling various crises
and for ensuring global and regional stability. In light
of this, our country firmly supports United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and the continued strengthening
of its capacity in this area.
In a situation of escalating humanitarian crises
and armed conflicts, as clearly demonstrated by the
developments in Darfur, the United Nations and the
Security Council should pay special attention to the
possibility of broader participation by authoritative
regional and subregional organizations in peacekeeping
operations. That would allow a response to emerging
threats in a more effective and timely manner.
We believe it to be of great importance to
establish closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations possessing real
capacity to prevent conflicts and maintain peace. From
this point of view, we encourage the Security Council
to formulate coherent, common operational strategies
and early, integrated mission planning in close
cooperation with regional partners of the Organization.
Regional and subregional entities are in a
position to better understand local and regional
conditions and have influence on the prevention or
resolution of conflicts, and they contribute to the
maintenance of peace and stability in various parts of
the world. In this context we are pleased that the
United
Nations
engagement
with
regional
organizations is growing. In particular, a number of
regional organizations have already received observer
status at the General Assembly, including the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. On behalf of 18 Member States,
Kazakhstan has requested the General Assembly to

4

grant observer status to the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building in Asia (CICA). We hope that
the Assembly will support this proposal.
I would like to note that CICA is an
intergovernmental forum for dialogue, consultations,
consensus-based decision-making and implementation
involving issues of security in Asia. On the Asian
continent, CICA is seen as a unique structure uniting
the countries of the region in the task of strengthening
mutual cooperation in order to stabilize and safeguard
the region.
At present, 18 countries of Asia and Europe
participate in CICA as member States, with the United
Nations as an observer organization. We strongly
believe that the CICA platform for dialogue will
continue to play an effective role as a collective
mechanism for regional stability and security in Asia.
My delegation considers it very useful to carry on
our work to further enhance the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security within the United
Nations Security Council and General Assembly. We
hope that the broad views expressed by Member States
today will serve to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional arrangements.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank your delegation for convening
this open debate.
Due to the shared responsibilities and interrelated
interests of their members, international organizations
are in a privileged position to respond to regional
challenges to international peace and security in an
expeditious manner and with better knowledge of the
local causes of conflicts. Those efforts must
complement those of the United Nations, especially in
areas where the given regional organization has
comparative advantage, and the mission should be
implemented with a high measure of cooperation with
the United Nations.
In our judgement, there are four situations where
the United Nations and regional organizations may
complement each other in conflict resolution: first, in
the deployment of joint missions; secondly, when the
United Nations can take responsibility for continuing a
peacekeeping operation initiated by a regional

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

organization; thirdly, when a regional organization can
take the responsibility of continuing a peacekeeping
operation initiated by the United Nations; and finally,
when the United Nations can delegate the deployment
of a peacekeeping operation to a regional organization
when it considers this more efficient.
In any event, as stipulated by the United Nations
Charter, in all the above cases the maintenance of
international peace and security is always the primary
responsibility of the Security Council, as Chapter VIII
of the Charter ensures that the Security Council has the
ability to authorize regional organizations to
implement coercive actions. At the same time, in all
these cases, complementing funds and corresponding
financing will always be required.
In its presidential statement of 28 March, 2007
(S/PRST/2007/7) on the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
recalled that cooperation between the United Nations
and the regional arrangements in matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security were
an integral part of collective security as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations and welcomed the
Declaration on enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union.
In this context, we are pleased with the initiative
to give assistance to the African Union to increase its
peacekeeping capacity with the objective of
establishing a permanent African reserve force by
2010, as well as the initiatives of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States or the Southern
African Development Community to create reserve
brigades for peacekeeping in their respective
subregions.
In the American region, the case of Haiti deserves
mention as a model for cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of American States
(OAS). We can say that the OAS has established a
strategic association with the United Nations,
facilitating the fulfilment of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti through the
leadership and accumulated experience of the
organization.
The OAS has contributed its specific technical
knowledge and has actively collaborated in the

07-58467

political dimension and, specifically, in the continuity
of the electoral process. That has been fundamental for
the organization of free and clean elections, from
which the current democratic Haitian Government has
sprung.
Cooperation under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations provides enormous possibilities to
optimize resources and stimulate the political will of
the international community to achieve peace and
security through an effective operational association
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. It is therefore desirable to
promote formal and informal consultation mechanisms
that will allow the United Nations and regional
organizations to mutually enrich that interaction. We
believe that when the universal Organization studies a
specific conflict, prior to taking action on the ground, it
should ideally have available to it the opinion and
advice of the relevant regional organization and give
that organization’s point of view adequate
consideration.
In conclusion, we believe that greater
decentralization in, and delegation of, peacekeeping
operations to regional organizations, along with greater
cooperation
and
coordination
among
those
organizations and the Security Council, will not only
alleviate the actual burden on United Nations
peacekeeping, whose resources are at their limit, but,
in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, it
could also enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions authorized by the Security Council. We
therefore think it is important for there to be a balanced
distribution of capacity and resources for all regions of
the world, in order that the knowledge of regional
organizations with regard to conflict situations may
also be utilized.
Systematic cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations that includes a clear
distribution of functions and adequate capacities will
increase the effectiveness of the international
community to prevent conflicts. It would make
possible a speedier response when a conflict arises and
provide solutions for building lasting peace. Given the
existing link between security, peace and development,
we believe that the specialized knowledge of regional
organizations, whose original mandates were to foment
economic and commercial integration, may also be of
value in ensuring the success of strategies aimed at
economic growth and long-term stability.

5

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.

the function of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your
country, Indonesia, on your presidency of the Security
Council. I would especially like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, for your presence in New York to preside
over this meeting.

In the debate that took place in March, we
focused our comments on the possibility that regional
organizations could assume greater responsibility in
the area of military operations. We also expressed our
doubts about the desirability of moving towards the
regionalization of peacekeeping operations and the
need to fully respect certain traditional principles of
peacekeeping
operations, especially
those of
impartiality and the need for the composition of a force
to reflect the widest possible geographical
representation.

Before I turn to the topic that has brought us
together today, I would like to make a few brief
comments on the open debates of the Security Council.
I assume that the purpose of open debates is to
allow the members of the Security Council to hear the
views and opinions of the other delegations to the
United Nations that are not members of this body. I am
concerned because this is not the first time that I have
come to make a statement in the Security Council that I
have observed a phenomenon repeating itself time and
again. A sort of migration from the Council usually
occurs 90 minutes after a meeting begins, with the
principal members of the Secretariat and Permanent
Representatives gradually leaving the Chamber.
Moreover, at this very moment I notice that only the
President and another head of Mission are the only
Permanent Representatives seated at the table.
Apparently, there are other more important things
attracting the attention of our colleagues. It is a shame
that this meeting has been scheduled at the same time
as those other activities. I therefore hope that this is not
considered as a second-class exercise or a meeting just
for show. As far as the working methods of the
Security Council are concerned — a phrase that is
referred to continuously in this House — this is one
that should be reformed thoroughly.
With regard to the issue before the Council, my
delegation would like to offer the following comments.
We are going to approach this matter from a different
point of view than in the past, when doctrinaire debates
were held during the cold war with regard to the
application of coercive measures and corresponding
interpretations of the application of Articles 41, 42, 51,
52 and 53 of the Charter.
In current international practice, the participation
of regional organizations is part of the Organization’s
overall framework, bringing to it the best capabilities
of the various regions in rebuilding and strengthening
States affected by conflict. It is therefore appropriate
that we continue a debate in the Security Council as to

6

On this occasion, I should like to take up the
issue of the role of regional organizations once they are
already involved in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks. It is in that area that we can appreciate the great
potential regional organizations hold for cooperation
with United Nation-led processes. We believe that
there is clearly value to arguments calling for greater
participation for regional organizations in the areas of
peace and security and, more specifically, in postconflict reconstruction and development. It is at the
regional level that the consequences of a conflict are
most immediately felt. States in the region of a conflict
are in the best position to understand the situation in its
cultural context. It is also the States of the region that
have the most information.
With regard to the States of Latin America and
the Caribbean, we have the contemporary example of
countries of the region and the Organization of
American States (OAS) joining in the peacemaking
efforts of the United Nations in Haiti. Those countries
provided military contingents. Above all, however,
working through the OAS — they brought to bear their
experiences in post-conflict reconstruction in various
areas, including in the areas of humanitarian
assistance, the strengthening of democratic State
institutions, medical and economic assistance and
development aid.
I do not want to exhaustively enumerate the
activities of the OAS in the field, but its support is
essential and invaluable for States participating in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
However, I should mention its electoral support aimed
at Haiti’s establishment of a permanent electoral
commission; its support in strengthening institutions;
the process to update Haiti’s civil registry; its support

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

in strengthening Haiti’s judicial system, in particular
through the Justice Studies Center of the Americas and
the Inter-American Juridical Committee; its promotion
of tourism and trade; its support for activities to
generate employment and improve the economy; its
assistance in the area of management training and
coordination of foreign aid; its support for the
Government of Haiti in formulating development
policies in coordination with the United Nations, the
Caribbean Community and other institutions; and the
implementation of OAS resolutions aimed at increasing
cooperation with Haiti with a view to operationalize
the National Drug Observatory through technical and
scientific capacity-building.
I should also underscore the steps being taken by
the OAS with international financial institutions, and in
particular the role of the Inter-American Development
Bank. Those institutions closely support the
development priorities of the Government of Haiti by
providing financial assistance for programmes intended
to create jobs, promote education and rehabilitate the
environment. They also support health policy in
various areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): Allow me, first, to join other
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to convene this meeting with representatives
from many regional and subregional organizations.
Through the strengthening of the capacities of regional
and subregional organizations and the experience
accumulated between the United Nations and those
organizations beginning in the late 1990s, the United
Nations relationship with regional and subregional
organizations has produced significant developments
on the ground. It is my hope that the discussion today
will build on past open debates in the Security Council
and lead to concrete steps towards the further
enhancement of such cooperation.
I would like to begin with the issue of conflict
prevention. Conflict prevention requires continuous
efforts, and thus it is often difficult to discern clear
signs of success. In such circumstances, the role of
regional and subregional organizations is crucial in
complementing the work of the Council and supporting
the good offices of the Secretary-General. Those
organizations closely monitor a situation on an ongoing
basis and practice active preventive diplomacy based

07-58467

on a strong interest in and deep knowledge of the
particular region. A well-known example of such
cooperation is the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) field missions and
groups such as the OSCE Minsk Group. Japan is
counting on regional organizations and initiatives to
increase their role in mediation and preventive
diplomacy in Asia, the Middle East and Africa. It is
essential in that field to institutionalize the cooperation
between regional organizations and the Secretariat
through
frequent
communications,
information
sharing — including in those areas where there is no
United Nations presence — and the establishment of a
closer working relationship among the field offices. In
that context, we welcome the fact that some
organizations recently have developed memorandums
of understanding and declarations with the United
Nations, and hope that such arrangements will also
help to eliminate administrative obstacles to further
cooperation.
The contribution of regional organizations such
as the African Union, the European Union and NATO
in the field of peacekeeping has been outstanding.
There can be no doubt about the importance of the role
of regional organizations in that area. Once a threat to
the peace and security of a region has emerged, the
ability of regional organizations to deploy capable
troops swiftly and at the right time, at the request of
the Security Council and through consultation with the
United Nations, is a great asset for the Council, as well
as for the international community at large, in
responding effectively to a crisis. We welcome the
variety brought to the modality of engagement by
regional organizations, such as the deployment of
police forces and military or police advisors to support
security sector reform.
I would like to mention one related issue. With
regard to the currently pressing issue of the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the Japanese delegation
strongly hopes for the acceleration of the preparations
and believes that further cooperation among the
various actors, including the Government of the Sudan,
is important to that end.
The United Nations and the international
community must make active use of those efforts by
regional and subregional organizations and support
them to the maximum extent. The true exercise of
ownership consists in regional organizations’ having

7

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

the ability to sustain their own activities. The
international community must render assistance by
promoting the decision-making and operational
capacity-building of those organizations. In that
context, the African Union secretariat’s efforts to
enhance its capacity, with the support of the United
Nations Secretariat, are welcomed.
Japan believes that the sharing of knowledge and
experiences among organizations is useful and should
therefore be promoted among regional organizations.
We encourage, in that regard, advancing the
institutionalization of cooperation not only with the
United Nations, but also among regional and
subregional organizations themselves.
As regards support for the peacekeeping
operations conducted by regional organizations, in
principle every organization should be responsible for
its own costs. When the United Nations examines the
possibility of offering financial support, the Council
should consider the advisability and modality of
support on a case-by-case basis, taking into account
whether such support would be consistent with the
principles that govern United Nations peacekeeping
operations, while making an effort to obtain the views
of major States that are not members of the Council —
in particular, major financial contributors — so as to
ensure transparency. In addition, once a peacekeeping
operation has been deployed, the same rules and
standards for its management as those in place at the
United Nations should be strictly applied.
Peacebuilding is another area in which Japan
believes regional and subregional organizations can
make a contribution. Peacebuilding requires a holistic
and integrated approach and the participation of all the
stakeholders in the process. The Peacebuilding
Commission was established precisely to ensure such
an approach. It should be noted that the Commission is
a unique and open organization, insofar as it includes
regional and subregional organizations as members in
its country-specific meetings, as well as member States
selected from among various groups. As the Chair for
the second year of the Commission’s work, Japan
encourages regional organizations to contribute to a
more effective response on the part of the international
community by providing their knowledge and
assessment to the Commission, where appropriate. In
that context, I am pleased by the decision of the
Commission to invite the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region to the country-specific meeting

8

on Burundi, and welcome its active participation in the
work of the Commission. We also welcome the
language related to the Peacebuilding Commission that
is incorporated in today’s presidential statement.
Allow me also to touch briefly on the issue of
counter-terrorism. That is an area in which regional
and subregional organizations can also play an
important role by implementing the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. In Asia, the
framework of regional cooperation, with the
Association of South-East Asian Nations at its centre,
is enhancing its efforts in that field, and Japan has been
actively supporting those efforts.
The Government of Japan has always paid close
attention to the root causes of conflicts and taken an
approach that respects regional ownership, as well as
making financial contributions through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, the United
Nations Democracy Fund and the Peacebuilding Fund.
We have been promoting peace consolidation in Africa
through the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process, which included the
TICAD Conference on Consolidation of Peace at Addis
Ababa in February 2006. We will hold the Fourth
Tokyo
International
Conference
on
African
Development in May next year, followed by the G8
Hokkaido Toyako summit in July. Japan intends to
continuously present the challenges in Africa as a
priority area and to further enhance its cooperation
with Africa.
In addition to those initiatives, we intend to
continue to extend bilateral and multilateral assistance
in such areas as the collection of small arms;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and the
response to landmines, as well as to provide support to
the African Union and subregional organizations in
Africa for capacity-building. We will also continue our
consideration of the possibility of offering further
assistance to strengthen the peacekeeping capacity of
Africa. Through those endeavours, Japan will remain
actively engaged in the issue of conflict prevention and
resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guinea.
Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
work of the Security Council this month. I also
congratulate you on having organized this important

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

public debate on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Guinea welcomes this wholesome
initiative, which attests to the renewed and growing
interest in strengthening the ways and means for such
organizations fully to honour their commitment, which
has become crucial, to promoting the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and the maintenance and
building of peace around the world.
While endorsing the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Angola on behalf of the
African Union, I shall focus in my own on the critical
challenges to and opportunities for the international
community in promoting peace, security, stability and
development in the subregion of the Mano River basin.
The situation in that highly sensitive region, which is
considered to be the source of instability in West
Africa, has undoubtedly witnessed important progress,
reflected in particular in the building of peace and
democratization in Liberia and Sierra Leone, the
relaunching of the peace and reconciliation process in
Côte d’Ivoire, and the strengthening of national
dialogue and the restoration of conditions of good
governance and economic growth in Guinea. While
welcoming that progress, which augurs well for the
future of the subregion, we should not let our guard
down. Further progress is still necessary to eradicate
forever the fundamental factors behind instability, to
prevent a recurrence of conflict and crisis, to ensure
the viability of States and to build a lasting peace.
Indeed, after 15 years of armed violence, the
States and peoples of the Mano River region are today
at a turning point in their history. They need to
individually and collectively meet the immense
challenges of political, economic and social
reconstruction, the establishment of a lawful State that
respects human rights and the settlement of
transboundary issues, including human and drug
trafficking, terrorism and the traffic in firearms.
In that context, we must welcome the recent
encouraging prospects for reactivating the Mano River
Union and for resuming an ongoing dialogue at all
levels among its member States. The Mano River
Union, which on 3 October 2007 commemorated 34
years of existence, is working to be at the very heart of
the subregion’s transformation. The member States are
committed, in that respect, to reactivating the
secretariat of the Union and revitalizing its operational
mechanisms, particularly the 15th Protocol to the Mano

07-58467

River Union Declaration, which addresses community
issues of defence, security, justice, territorial
administration and foreign affairs.
The countries of the Mano River basin are also
seeking to strengthen their transboundary cooperation
in order to better address the interlinked issues of
peace, security and integrated economic development
in the subregion. Therefore, on the initiative of Guinea,
a draft pact on good-neighbourly relations, stability
and solidarity was submitted in November 2006 to the
member countries of the Mano River Union, to which
it had been proposed to add Côte d’Ivoire. The draft
pact is an important confidence-building measure,
which should become effective and operational as soon
as it is adopted.
We must encourage and support the initiatives of
the Mano River Union aimed at carrying out
institutional reforms promoting closer subregional
integration among its countries and ensuring greater
effectiveness in the settlement of transboundary
problems.
Building the capacity of civil society groups that
are working to promote, beyond their borders, a culture
of non-violence and peace is a vital task. Volunteer
organizations such as the Mano River Women’s Peace
Network, the Mano River Union Youth Parliament and
the Action Group of Religious Faiths, which have
played a major role in the restoration of peace, need to
be involved in all phases of programmes of action.
The adoption of a truly regional viewpoint to
advance the peace agenda is necessary to prevent a
recurrence of conflict. Priorities that are clearly fixed
by member States need to be supported by United
Nations entities, donors and all relevant stakeholders.
Guinea
welcomes
the
success
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission in dealing with countries
emerging from conflict. We encourage the Commission
to continue to fulfil its mandate with the same rigour
and effectiveness, while expanding its action to include
all other involved countries. We also believe that it is
equally important for the international community to
provide the necessary support to neighbouring
countries weakened by the serious effects of conflict
on their borders. We should also further affirm the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission as the body for
coordination between the United Nations system and
regional and subregional organizations, as suggested

9

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

by the President of the Security Council in his
statement of 28 March 2007 (S/PRST/2007/7).
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my
delegation’s conviction that this meeting of the
Security Council will undoubtedly contribute to
identifying specific and promising paths for action,
enabling us to strengthen the role of regional and
subregional organizations in promoting peace, stability
and development in Africa and around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): I would like to
express my appreciation to the Indonesian presidency
of the Council for initiating this open debate and to
personally thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to share my views on this pivotal subject.
Shortly after the foundation of the United
Nations, international developments led to the creation
of various regional initiatives and organizations. It
became obvious that the international community
needed a number of organizations to address the
challenges of differing natures arising in different
regions and in a variety of spheres. Those
organizations have been instrumental in handling
regional problems and settling local disputes. In that
regard, I fully share the opinion expressed by the
representative of the European Union. Indeed, the
regional organizations are closer to the facts on the
ground and possess a storehouse of historical
experience and unique perceptions that sometimes
overshadow realities; they often have greater
motivation to tackle explosive problems quickly and
effectively.
I would like to speak about two regional
organizations in particular.
Established shortly after the United Nations, the
Council of Europe has made a tremendous contribution
to regional stability through the promotion of
democracy and the rule of law. Its activities have been
instrumental, especially for the new democracies that
emerged after the cold war. The focus of the Council of
Europe on remedying the socioeconomic and political
conditions that exacerbate conflicts is truly a valuable
long-term contribution.
In that same sense, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) also plays a central
role in creating conditions that will provide security in

10

our region, by requiring commitments from
participating States and utilizing mechanisms for
conflict prevention and resolution. The Treaty on
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe is among the
OSCE tools providing for an effective and unique set
of arms control mechanisms. The complete observance
of the agreed arrangements by the countries of the
South Caucasus is a sine qua non for the maintenance
of stability and peace in our region, where, regrettably,
the resumption of hostilities is indeed still possible. We
believe that the organization should pay special
attention to — and watchfully consider — all
violations of the ceilings established for conventional
weapons in the South Caucasus.
However, it is the fundamental OSCE principle of
consensus that distinguishes it from other international
forums. The comparative advantage of the OSCE over
other international bodies lies in its consensus-based
decision-making mechanism. We strongly believe that
only consensus among the concerned parties leads to
genuine, willing compromise and guarantees lasting
solutions to seemingly intractable disputes.
Past experience clearly illustrates that imposed
settlements are not only ineffective but also fragile and
unable to withstand the test of time. The very existence
of various international organizations dealing with
conflict resolution proves that uniform approaches and
one-size-fits-all solutions to address different disputes
are hardly realistic. Therefore, we believe that since
every conflict has its prehistory and its peculiarities, it
is important that regional organizations — or those
with appropriate mandates, with acquired institutional
memory and with an understanding of the specifics of
the history and evolution of a conflict — be allowed to
tackle comprehensive solutions that will last, instead of
offering philosophical, well-meaning remedies, which
at best result in a loss of time, and at worst, in a loss of
life and hope.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. de Palacio España (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would sincerely like to thank the
presidency of Indonesia for this new opportunity given
to my country to address the United Nations Security
Council. Spain is the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2007. I would also like to associate myself
with the statement made this morning by the

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

representative of Portugal on behalf of the presidency
of the European Union.
As Council members may recall, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain,
Mr. Moratinos Cuyaubé, had the opportunity of
speaking before the Security Council in his capacity as
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE on 28 September
2007, to inform the Council about the activities of the
Organization during 2007.
The OSCE, recognized as a regional organization
under Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, is
the most inclusive security organization in Europe and
the largest regional security organization anywhere in
the world. It plays a significant role in support of the
Security Council, which retains the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The OSCE is well suited to play
this role.
Based on its ample membership, its concept of
multidimensional and cooperative security, its well
developed toolbox and its comprehensive body of
norms and commitments, the OSCE is an indispensable
forum for political and security dialogue. On a weekly
basis, through meetings in Vienna of the Permanent
Council and the Forum for Security Cooperation, 56
participating States from North America, Europe and
Eurasia come together to discuss issues of mutual
interest in the politico-military, economic and human
dimensions of security.
Thanks to its network of 19 missions in the field
in 17 countries and the professional work of its
secretariat and institutions, the OSCE provides
assistance to its participating States on a broad range of
issues, such as border management and security,
policing, combating terrorism, fighting trafficking in
human beings, protecting national minorities,
advancing democratization and human rights, elections
monitoring, ensuring media freedom, and promoting
economic development and environmental protection.
Over the years, the OSCE has contributed greatly
to the efforts of the United Nations in conflict
prevention and resolution, and peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations, as well as the settlement of
unresolved conflicts within its geographical area of
responsibility. In Georgia, the OSCE mission works to
defuse tension, promote negotiations, build confidence
and sustain reconstruction efforts in the zone of the
Georgia-Ossetia conflict. The mission also works to

07-58467

support the United Nations-led peace process in the
Georgia-Abkhaz conflict, striving to foster a climate of
understanding and promote dialogue when incidents do
occur, as in the case of the missile incident of
6 August, and to find ways of avoiding future crises.
The Personal Representative of the OSCE
Chairman-in-Office and the Co-Chairs of the OSCE
Minsk Group remain committed to a peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, although
their efforts have not yet resulted in the desired
breakthrough. The OSCE mission to Moldova
continues to facilitate consultations aimed at a
sustainable political settlement of the Transdnistrian
conflict. In parallel, it works to support the
advancement of human rights and democratic
institutions. A recent visit to Moldova by Foreign
Minister Moratinos in his capacity as OSCE Chairmanin-Office has triggered positive developments on both
sides of the Dniestr River. During follow-up
consultations to be held in Madrid on 13 November,
Mr. Moratinos will seek to build upon this progress.
In Kosovo, the OSCE mission works as an
integral part of the United Nations mission in the
framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
taking the lead in the areas of human rights and of
capacity- and institution-building. While we support
the efforts of the Security Council and the European
Union-United States-Russia troika to help facilitate a
just and lasting solution that advances the stability of
the region, our own mission is neutral, aimed at
improving the implementation of standards without
regard to the eventual shape of a political settlement.
This work remains vital to all of Kosovo’s citizens and
will, we hope, not be lost in the current politically
charged climate. Furthermore, the OSCE actively
supports the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, in particular in the areas of combating
terrorism and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Our organization also facilitates the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.
The OSCE remains strongly committed to
continue providing assistance to the activities of the
Security Council and to strengthening cooperation with
the United Nations. In March 2006, OSCE member
States reiterated this readiness by adopting a
Declaration on Cooperation with the United Nations,

11

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

responding to the call by the United Nations for
strengthened cooperation with regional organizations,
as expressed in Security Council resolution 1631
(2005).
In this spirit, the OSCE acknowledges the great
value of the annual thematic debates between the
Security Council and regional organizations. These
debates offer a unique venue for the exchange of
views, information and experience-sharing, as well as
for exploring possibilities for enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
In the same vein, the OSCE very much welcomes
regular high-level meetings between the United
Nations Secretary-General and regional organizations.
We particularly appreciate the good practice of
inviting the OSCE Chairman-in-Office to deliver an
annual address to the Security Council. We hope this
will become a well established tradition to help the
Security Council to familiarize itself with the priorities
and activities of the OSCE. Annual United NationsOSCE staff-level meetings, as well as regular
participation of the United Nations representatives at
the OSCE regional heads of mission meetings, are also
very useful additional tools for turning political
commitment into practical cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations, in seeking to reach our
common goal of strengthened international peace and
security.
Each regional organization possesses its own
unique expertise, based on the mandates and tools at its
disposal. As such, each regional organization acts as an
invaluable partner to the United Nations and this
Security Council. Taking advantage of this opportunity,
with several other regional organizations gathered
around this table, I would also like to reaffirm the
OSCE’s commitment to continue enhancing dialogue
with our 11 Mediterranean and Asian Partners for
Cooperation. In addition, acknowledging the potential
spill-over of security threats between adjacent regions,
our organization stands ready further to exchange
experiences and expertise with other regional
organizations, such as the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
Indeed, by strengthening dialogue and seeking
greater synergy, the United Nations and regional
organizations can widen the range of instruments to be

12

utilized in the common effort of strengthening
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the delegation of Viet Nam, I would like to congratulate
you and your country, Indonesia, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
warmly welcome your initiative to hold a debate on
this important topic and highly appreciate your
substantive concept paper on the topic. I am confident
that, under your skilful leadership, this meeting will
arrive at a very successful conclusion.
At a time when the contemporary world faces a
wide array of interconnected, transnational and
transregional threats, the international community has
increasingly recognized the pivotal role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
My delegation wishes to recall that Chapter VIII
of the Charter, while reaffirming the principles of
subsidiarity and complementarity in the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
underlines the importance of pacific settlement of local
disputes through regional arrangements. As also noted
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1), the multidimensional
nature of the challenges facing the Organization calls
for a multidisciplinary approach involving multiple
actors at both the diagnostic and the treatment phases
of crises and thus opens up new venues for interaction
and for contributions by regional players to collective
security.
It should be underscored that by resolution 1631
(2005) the Council resolves to expand the involvement
of regional organizations in the work of the Council
and to encourage their proper contributions to conflict
prevention and peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations. At the same time, multifaceted cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and the means to develop such cooperation have been
substantially reflected in various resolutions and
reports adopted by the General Assembly.
On the implementation front, we are convinced
that geographic proximity and close historical and
cultural ties among their members give regional
organizations the advantage in better understanding the

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

root causes of regional conflicts and in finding
peaceful solutions to those problems. Recent
experiences in Asia, Africa, Latin America and the
Balkans underscore the growing importance of regional
organizations as partners of the United Nations in the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts as
well as in peacebuilding and stabilization processes.
Resources from regional players also strengthen global
action to counter the spread of weapons of mass
destruction and the illegal circulation of small arms
and light weapons, to combat the drug trade and
organized crime and to resolve other destabilizing
cross-border issues.
While it is true that not all regional organizations
work in the same manner and that regional perspectives
should be respected, Viet Nam recognizes certain areas
in which the contributions of regional organizations to
international peace and security can be further
elaborated and strengthened. Based upon their unique
experience within their own sphere of action and their
rich knowledge of local cultural conditions, regional
organizations should further concentrate on preventive
diplomacy, early warning mechanisms, institutionbuilding and the promotion of development and wellbeing. Regional organizations should be encouraged to
assume a key role in providing information from the
field and in helping to formulate the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies of the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other organs. In the
field, for example, the expertise and resources of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Organization of American States, the League of
Arab States, the European Union, the Commonwealth
of Independent States, the African Union and the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
among others, have made commendable contributions
to peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction activities of the United Nations.
Equally important, possible modalities of
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations must be further explored and expanded
on the basis of equality and mutual reinforcement,
taking into account the differing characteristics of
regional organizations in terms of membership,
resource availability and institutional capacity, as well
as the uniqueness of each conflict situation.
Regional organizations, particularly those in
Africa, should be able to count on political, financial

07-58467

and logistical support from the United Nations in
actions they initiate to resolve conflicts in their
regions. On the same note, regional organizations
should maintain closer contacts with the Security
Council in order to provide the Council with timely
and comprehensive updates on their undertakings. In
that connection, Viet Nam welcomes the important
contribution towards achieving these goals made
through the Secretary-General’s regular high-level
meetings with the leadership of regional organizations
and looks forward to his upcoming report offering
specific proposals on how the United Nations can
better support arrangements for further cooperation and
coordination with regional organizations under Chapter
VIII of the Charter.
Since its inception in 1967, ASEAN has
concluded many initiatives which significantly
contribute to peace, security and stability in the region.
Those include the declaration of a Zone of Peace,
Freedom and Neutrality in South-East Asia, the Treaty
of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, the
Declaration of ASEAN Concord, the Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone and the
Declaration of Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea, as well as regional actions undertaken in
cooperation with the United Nations with regard to
Timor-Leste and Myanmar.
The establishment of the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the ASEAN+3 process — ASEAN plus
China, Japan and the Republic of Korea — have helped
expand regional capacity in dealing with some
traditional and non-traditional security challenges,
including
counter-terrorism
and
combating
transnational crime. ASEAN has also attached great
importance to fostering consultations, exchanging
experiences and best practices with other regional and
subregional organizations in Asia, Europe and Latin
America and promoting multilateral endeavours for
peace, stability and development.
My country notes with satisfaction that ASEAN
has very recently been granted observer status in the
General Assembly and has signed an ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation agreement. We believe that there
is great potential for expanding cooperation between
the United Nations and ASEAN. It is also our sincere
hope that the multifaceted relationship between the two
organizations will continue to achieve steady progress
in all areas of common interest and concern.

13

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): First of all my
delegation would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Sir, and your delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to thank you for
convening an open debate on the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. This is consistent with
Chapter VIII of the Charter — as has been said by
previous speakers— and recognizes the role of regional
and subregional security arrangements in preserving
international peace. The changing international
climate, with shifts by the bigger Powers in the
international system, has had an impact upon and has
redefined all security mechanisms globally, at both the
regional and the international levels.
My delegation is pleased that the presidency has
taken the initiative in reaching out to the wider
membership to discuss this important issue. This
debate allows us not only to review but to appraise
how secure the world has become with the
contributions
from
regional
and
subregional
mechanisms. It further permits us to draw the Council’s
attention to some of the challenges confronting
subregional and regional mechanisms in preserving
international peace and security and to see how these
can best be addressed, given the role and purpose of
the Council. In saying that, my delegation recognizes
that different regions have their own particularities and
realities.
One of the glaring gaps my delegation has
identified on the issue is the lack of observance of
Article 54 of the Charter. The Article underlines the
requirement that the Council be kept fully informed on
all activities under regional and subregional
arrangements in the maintenance of international
peace. At the moment, some regions have received
more attention than others. This presents an
institutional gap that could be accommodated within
the working methods of the Council by having periodic
reports presented to the Council, by the Secretariat and
the States concerned, on all regional and subregional
security mechanisms. That could be done on a sixmonthly basis or quarterly.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) also supports that proposal
and calls for a formalized agreement between the

14

United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and involvement of such organizations in
the work of the Security Council. This is in addition to
strengthening United Nations and regional and
subregional cooperation in the economic, social and
cultural fields. In other words there needs to be some
movement beyond the holding of biannual
consultations between regional organizations and the
Secretary-General. On this note, if there is a draft
memorandum of understanding, Solomon Islands will
be happy to take this through its regional process in
trying to formalize relations with the United Nations.
Solomon Islands is a post-conflict country and
particularly welcomes this occasion as a recipient of an
ongoing subregional security arrangement. This
occasion presents an opportunity to put the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands on the
Council’s radar screen with its successes and
challenges.
The maintenance of international peace and
security at the regional level is a financially expensive
exercise and is, therefore, driven by those with
resources. The subregion my delegation hails from has,
within its membership, two industrialized members
among many small island developing States. This has
allowed for a active regional cooperation mechanism.
The issue with regional mechanisms is that, if they are
not properly managed or are unbalanced in their
approach, regional organizations could address
symptoms rather than the causes of conflicts.
Differences could occur between the recipient State
and the regional organization. It is important that the
regional organizations working to maintain regional
stability do so in strong partnership with the recipient
country while being flexible regarding the changing
security, economic and social climate. It must be a
partnership and must take a participatory form, so as to
ensure that the ownership and leadership of the peace
and nation-building processes are country-led and
country-driven. Decisions to use public, as well as
quiet diplomacy, are also important.
The absence of such a balance will expose the
receiving State to the dangers of slipping back into a
conflict situation. Security and development are two
sides of the same coin and can only instil real peace if
applied
simultaneously.
The
economic
and
development needs of the country tend to be
overlooked, with the issues of the rule of law,
democracy and governance receiving more emphasis in

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

the cooperative effort. Solomon Islands, a least
developed country, is off track in terms of meeting its
Millennium Development Goals and is in a vulnerable
position, as its development needs are not receiving the
necessary attention. In this regard, enhanced
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations is crucial in order to address the
concerns of all parties, ensuring that security and
development cooperation remains on track. This is
based on the understanding that, in many of today’s
conflicts, regional organizations have gone further into
countries than our multilateral institution would have
and have, therefore, accumulated acquired both
positive and negative experiences.
The Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon
Islands, led by Australia and strongly supported by
New Zealand and my fellow Pacific Islands small
island developing States, is in its fourth year in the
Solomon Islands. It comprises military, police and
civil-servant support, all rolled into one. It has been
successful in its mission; however, like anything new,
it has its strengths and weaknesses and faces certain
challenges. Regional mechanisms, being external
actors, do face challenges in aligning their efforts with
the national, political and economic realities they seek
to support and need to be refined and adapted to the
changing climates in which they operate.
It is in this spirit, this past month at the annual
Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting, it was noted that the
Solomon Islands had decided to review the 2003
Facilitation of International Assistance Act. The review
will seek to increase the partnership between the
receiving State, Solomon Islands and the Regional
Mission. Solomon Islands would like to see a
strengthened United Nations Security Council
mechanism, so as to ensure that no problem issues are
allowed to aggravate but will be confronted with
international attention, where necessary. After all, the
centrality of the Security Council must be preserved
and protected.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the
delegation of Indonesia for having organized this open
debate, which allows the countries that are not
members of the Council to express our points of view
on this very important topic. I would also like to thank

07-58467

that same delegation for the very clear reference
document that was distributed to all of the delegations.
It is also an honour and a privilege to see our friend,
Hassan Wirajuda, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
presiding over this meeting.
We are aware of the fact that the more complex
the challenges of our globalized world, the more
crucial it is to have the partnership and pooling of
efforts between our respective organizations in order to
achieve a security that is authentically collective,
effective and equitable for all. The maintenance of
international peace is the most powerful and practical
proof of our commitment to collective security. The
association in this area between the United Nations and
regional organizations has become crucial for the
success of our common efforts.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the regional organizations is today stronger than it was
during the early 1990s. Many of the very regional and
subregional organizations are much more robust, and,
therefore, interaction with them is more intensive,
substantial and significant. In recent years, political
and operational cooperation has included, to mention a
few examples: cooperation with the hybrid
peacekeeping operation with the African Union in
Darfur, with the European Union in support of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad, continued partnerships with
Economic Community of West African States, and
cooperation with NATO in Afghanistan and Kosovo
and with the Organization of American States in Haiti.
Those are a few examples of the range of policies
and operational activities that have been carried out in
recent years. Therefore, we think that the United
Nations today already has a better idea of the scope,
magnitude, advantages and disadvantages of this
cooperation. Thus, the knowledge of given situations is
improving, thanks to the political contributions of
regional actors. Their military and peacekeeping
capabilities have made it possible to respond more
rapidly, when a crisis breaks out, as well as during
decisive moments. Their resources are crucial for
peacebuilding in the post-conflict stage.
Nonetheless, despite these definitely positive
events, for this relationship to be more substantive and
effective, we still have to resolve many outstanding
problems. As we have said in previous debates,
although Chapter VIII of the Charter refers to regional

15

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

arrangements and bodies and establishes its functional
relationship with the Security Council, there is nothing
said about the constitutional relationship of such
arrangements with the Security Council. We think it
crucial that there be greater clarity on a series of
questions, which would facilitate the creation of a
global and regional mechanism for peace and security,
agreed to by the Security Council as well as by
regional organizations, as recommended by the former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his report of July
2006.
In the Western Hemisphere, an example of
successful cooperation has been the case of Haiti,
where the Organization of American States has
established a valuable strategic partnership with the
United Nations. This has facilitated the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose main military
and civilian component is Latin American, thanks to
the leadership and experience acquired in the
preparation of Haiti’s elections.
The heads of State and Government of the
member States of the Central American Integration
System (SICA) have pointed out the importance for the
whole region of the democratic process in Haiti. They
have since urged MINUSTAH, in its continuing
presence, to consolidate that process and offered their
assistance to it.
It is important for regional and subregional
authorities to develop their own mechanisms. In the
subregional sphere, the member countries of SICA and
Mexico are working on a Mexican and Central
American security strategy, which, from a
comprehensive perspective, seeks to guide the
coordinated security actions adopted by the countries
of the region into their respective legal frameworks.
The specific objectives of this strategy are:
harmonization of the different efforts in the region in
the area of security so as to achieve better results;
facilitating coordination, the exchange of information
and experience between the various operational
agencies and authorities in the region so as to more
effectively combat regional crime; and identifying and
managing the financial needs, in addition to the
resource and training needs, required by security
institutions. In short, combating organized crime and
drug trafficking, strengthening information exchange
mechanisms and combating the illegal arms trade and
terrorism are priority areas in the strategy.

16

With regard to the final point — relating to
peacekeeping — in paragraph 14 of the concept paper
for this debate (S/2007/640, annex), we believe, first of
all, that a single hybrid model cannot always be
applicable to all conflicts and regions. Past experience
has shown us that conflicts must be assessed and
managed on a case-by-case basis. Therefore, we
believe that this issue should also be discussed in depth
within the framework of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
Today, more than ever before, regional
organizations must play a crucial role not only in
conflict prevention and resolution, but also in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The geographic
proximity of their members and the close historical and
cultural ties among them give regional organizations
comparative advantages in better understanding the
root causes of regional conflicts, and thus in finding
peaceful solutions to those problems.
As for how we can encourage broader
participation by regional organizations in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, we propose that, when
they are on a special Security Council mission, Council
members try to meet with representatives of regional
organizations. Furthermore, provision should be made
for representatives of regional organizations to inform
the Security Council about their activities.
The Peacebuilding Commission now plays a key
role in the United Nations system in defining
peacebuilding strategies for countries emerging from
conflict and in improving coordination. Close
collaboration with regional organizations and the
participation of civil society in peacebuilding will be
important contributions to the Commission’s success.
In conclusion, I should like to express our full
support for all efforts to enhance the capacity of
regional and other organizations. If the United Nations
and its Member States really want to develop an
effective partnership, they should promote the
capacities of such organizations by providing them
with technical, financial and human assistance.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): Norway supports the
Security Council in its efforts to promote closer and
more comprehensive cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

of international peace and security. We are actively
engaged in such efforts through the United Nations, as
well as through many regional and subregional
organizations. Particular mention should be made of
the African Union (AU), which has taken on increasing
responsibility for peace and security on the African
continent.
To encourage more comprehensive engagement
on the part of regional organizations, we must replace
old habits and institutional protectionism with an open
and flexible approach adapted to the particular
situation at hand. Our experience with the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) in Darfur, where
the European Union (EU) and NATO provide crucial
support to the AU, shows just how important that is.
One lesson learned from AMIS is that
cooperation in the field paves the way for strengthened
mutual engagement. The EU is on its way to Chad and
the Central African Republic to provide military
support to the United Nations operation there. NATO
has signalled its willingness to provide strategic airlift
capabilities in support of the AU mission in Somalia.
NATO will also favourably consider a request to assist
the AU in building peacekeeping capacity. Such
cooperation builds confidence and makes more
comprehensive engagement possible.
Right now, the United Nations and the AU are
engaged in a joint endeavour to establish one of the
largest United Nations peace operations ever: the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The political process led to the
establishment of the Hybrid Operation, thus ensuring
its predominantly African character. The hybrid model
of UNAMID provides a new model for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Much is expected of the hybrid model. Its success will
be measured by its impact on the ground and by its
ability to make efficient cooperation possible between
the United Nations and the AU. While it is too early to
assess the hybrid model, our experiences with
UNAMID will enable us to develop and improve
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
UNAMID’s success will depend not only on the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
within the mission, but also on UNAMID’s relations
with the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and with

07-58467

the new mission that is to be established in Chad and
the Central African Republic.
UNAMID is more than just a joint peacekeeping
operation; it joins the efforts and experiences of two
organizations under Mr. Rodolphe Adada, Joint United
Nations-African Union Special Representative for
Darfur. For both organizations, that may prove to be a
strength as well as a challenge. The United Nations has
institutional experience with peacekeeping operations,
while the AU has regional anchoring and is still in the
process of establishing its peace-operation capacities.
I would like to commend the AU for its efforts to
develop peacekeeping capacity, while at the same time
taking on very demanding operational responsibilities
both in Darfur and in Somalia. Norway will continue to
assist the AU in developing the civilian dimension of
the African standby force through the Training for
Peace programme, which trains African police and
civilian experts for African peace-support missions.
If any operation is to succeed, there must be a
clear chain of command. The United Nations and the
AU must work together. The United Nations-African
Union joint coordination and support mechanism in
Addis Ababa will have a key function in that regard.
These organizational complexities are just part of the
setting. Ultimately, UNAMID’s success will hinge
upon the outcome of the peace talks between the
Government of the Sudan and the rebel groups. In that
regard, it is probably an advantage that those talks are
being led jointly by the United Nations and the AU.
Norway stands ready to support both the United
Nations and the AU in their important endeavour. We
are prepared to contribute both military and police
personnel to UNAMID. We are already contributing
financial and human resources to the Darfur peace
talks. UNAMID’s ability to fulfil its mandate — and to
provide security for civilians and to protect
humanitarian operations — will shape future
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Allow me, first of all, to
congratulate you, Mr. Minister, and Indonesia on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. We are pleased to
see you preside over this principal organ of the United

17

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

Nations, which has primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We also
wish to express our appreciation to you for convening
this open debate on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We believe that that is a most relevant
topic for discussion by the Council, in the light of the
many challenges confronting various regions and the
role that regional and subregional organizations could
play in maintaining peace and security in those regions.
Indeed, regional and subregional organizations
could contribute constructively to the work of the
Security Council in ensuring the prevalence of peace
and security in particular regions, particularly in light
of the ever-increasing demands placed upon the
resources of the United Nations and the complexities
of global politics. We share the view of former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, that
“regional action as a matter of decentralization,
delegation and cooperation with United Nations
efforts could not only lighten the burden on the
Council but also contribute to a deeper sense of
participation, consensus and democratization in
international affairs”. (S/24111, para. 64)
It is evident that the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security through the peaceful settlement of
disputes is recognized by the United Nations, pursuant
to Chapter VIII of its Charter. We are beginning to
witness an increased role played by regional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
countries facing conflict in their respective regions.
Without prejudice to the capability and effectiveness of
the United Nations, regional arrangements should be
seen as a complement to the Organization’s mediation
and conflict resolution approaches, as regional and
subregional organizations generally have a better
understanding of the interplay of local and regional
dynamics.
The countries of South-East Asia, including
Malaysia, are familiar with the effectiveness of
regional arrangements in the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security. Although founded
initially as a regional grouping focusing on economic,
social and cultural cooperation, ASEAN has
progressively evolved towards achieving regional

18

solidarity and that has contributed to peace and
stability in the region.
The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia, to which all ASEAN members adhere,
enshrines the principles of mutual respect for one
another’s sovereignty, non-interference in internal
affairs, the peaceful settlement of intraregional
disputes and effective cooperation among its
signatories. It states that ASEAN political and security
dialogue and cooperation should aim to promote
regional peace and stability by enhancing regional
resilience, and that this resilience shall be achieved
through cooperation in all fields among its member
States. Through political dialogue and confidencebuilding, ASEAN has well managed the occasional
bilateral tensions and conflicts among its members.
Malaysia maintains the importance of adhering to
the principle of non-interference in internal affairs,
particularly in the context of inter-State relations. The
so-called constructive intervention policy advocated by
some, involving loud criticism, adversarial posturing
and grandstanding, would only bring more harm than
good to the promotion of neighbourly relations. We are
in favour of engaging other countries in the region in a
dialogue on peace and security and in implementing
confidence-building measures. In this regard, the
ASEAN Regional Forum has served as a useful basis
for gathering all concerned parties in the region
through a process of dialogue on issues related to
regional peace and security. The objectives of the ARF
are to foster constructive dialogue and consultation on
political and security issues of common interest and
concern and to contribute to efforts towards confidence
building and preventive diplomacy.
Too often, the international community still takes
a reactionary and knee-jerk approach and is
preoccupied with the symptoms and consequences of
conflicts rather than addressing their root causes.
Learning from the lessons of other regional conflicts,
ASEAN has taken a more proactive and preventive
approach by investing seriously in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. As conflicts are more often than not
sparked by competition for limited economic
resources, ASEAN’s approach towards subregional
peace and security has been one of cooperation in the
economic, social and cultural fields for the mutual
benefit of all of its members. The peace, security and
stability that ASEAN has helped to maintain in SouthEast Asia have been conducive to development,

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

creating a political environment where rapid and
sustained economic growth has become possible.
Economic development in turn has brought about
social progress and human development in the region.
Malaysia believes that a strong and successful
ASEAN is not only an economic necessity but also a
strategic imperative. A prosperous, consolidated and
stable ASEAN, at peace with itself and with its
immediate neighbours, provides the best guarantee for
the security of the entire South-East and East Asian
regions. Malaysia will continue to push for the
strengthening of ASEAN as a regional grouping. We
believe that the existence of ASEAN has encouraged
patterns of behaviour that reduce risks to security by
enhancing bilateral relations and by fostering habits of
open dialogue on political and security matters.
In conclusion, Malaysia wishes to reaffirm our
belief that regional and subregional organizations have
an important role to play in the maintenance of peace
and security at the regional level, and that they
complement the work of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore, who will speak on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
Mr. Menon (Singapore): I am making this
statement of the 10 Members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Let me add that we
are extremely pleased to see a fellow ASEAN member
presiding over the Security Council.
The end of the cold war marked the end of an era
where global conflicts were seen through the prism of
only two lenses. Today, we live in a more complex and
interconnected world, where there are many new actors
on the international stage and more variables and
alignments to consider. While the threat of global war
has receded, smaller conflicts that are often
asymmetric,
low-intensity
and
diffuse
have
proliferated. It has become a messier world.
This situation presents new challenges to global
peace and security. Obviously, the United Nations and
the major Powers have a crucial role to play. But in a
globalized world, regional cooperation can also play a
key role. Indeed, even the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the role that regional arrangements
can play in helping the United Nations to achieve its
objectives.

07-58467

All over the world today, regional initiatives are
proliferating. Some are modest in their objectives,
providing forums to meet and consult. Others are more
ambitious. They discuss security or create free trade
areas. They foster joint efforts against problems like
drug trafficking and terrorism. Many of these regional
initiatives are open and inclusive and should be
encouraged to remain that way. Those which are
superfluous will gradually wither away. International
organizations like the United Nations, the World Trade
Organization, the World Health Organization, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United
Nations Environment Programme should work with
those that remain, strengthening their capabilities and
encouraging mutual learning. At their best, these
regional initiatives create a habit of cooperation and
reduce misunderstanding.
ASEAN has played this role. The year 2007 is
special because it marks 40 years of unity. ASEAN has
come a long way since it was established by the
Bangkok Declaration of 1967. Against the backdrop of
the cold war, and with regional disputes still fresh in
memory, ASEAN began with the modest aim of
keeping the peace in South-East Asia. It was a
mechanism for member countries to manage common
threats, while balancing internal sensitivities and
conflicts. In short, ASEAN was born out of the
strategic imperatives of its times. With the end of the
cold war, peace returned to Indochina and ASEAN
gradually expanded to include the newer member
States of Viet Nam, Laos, Myanmar and Cambodia, to
become a community of ten.
ASEAN has been working to establish a norm of
cooperation and dialogue among its members.
Economic cooperation was always a key point. In
1992, ASEAN decided to establish a free trade area in
stages. We have largely achieved that goal with respect
to trade in goods. For investments and services, we still
have some way to go. But there is the will to press on
and transform ASEAN into one economic space.
Four years ago, when the leaders of ASEAN met
in Indonesia, they took a major decision to establish an
ASEAN community by 2020 with three main areas as
its pillars — security, economic and socio-cultural.
Earlier this year, the leaders further agreed to
accelerate the establishment of the ASEAN community
by 2015. To create such a community, an ASEAN
charter will be signed later this month in Singapore to

19

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

provide a legal framework document for the further
strengthening of ASEAN. It will help remake ASEAN
into a more effective, cohesive and rules-based
organization, through, for instance, establishing
provisions for dispute settlement by independent
panels. Blueprints for each of the three pillars of the
ASEAN community will also map out concrete
initiatives, targets and timelines to achieve this goal.
The first such blueprint — for the economic pillar —
will be adopted later this month.
ASEAN has also been active in engaging the
external environment. For ASEAN to prosper, we have
always recognized the importance of maintaining good
relations with all the major Powers in the region.
ASEAN has dialogue partnerships with the United
States, the European Union, Russia, China, Japan,
Korea, India, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
ASEAN has been playing a bridging role of sorts. It is
the driving force behind the creation of such key
regional groupings as the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF), ASEAN+3 and the East Asia Summit. The ARF
is the main security forum in the Asia-Pacific region,
bringing together 27 participating countries and entities
including ASEAN, the United States, the European
Union, Russia, China and India.
Through its many confidence-building measures
and preventive diplomacy activities, the ARF has
contributed to the stability and security in the region.
Economically, ASEAN has negotiated, or is in the
process of negotiating, free trade agreements with
China, India, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Australia
and New Zealand and with the EU, and a closer
economic partnership with the Unites States. We have a
simple strategy, which is to give all of them a strong
stake in our regional stability, unity and development.
Strategically, some of the most important sea lanes
pass through ASEAN waters. About a third of global
trade, half of the global oil trade and 80 per cent of the
oil bound for China and Japan pass through the Straits
of Malacca and Singapore.
Through the ASEAN-plus groupings and the East
Asia Summit, which includes Australia, China, India,
Japan, the Republic of Korea and New Zealand, we are
creating a new architecture of peaceful cooperative
development in the larger East Asia. The East Asia
Summit process is maturing into an important regional
forum that is progressing beyond dialogue into
concrete cooperation. Let me stress that, while ASEAN
is not big enough to be a major global player, it plays a

20

significant role in holding Asia together and keeping it
open to the rest of the world. ASEAN is outwardlooking and inclusive, and through its various external
linkages seeks to engage all who have a stake in the
region’s future.
ASEAN is a work in process. Like other regions
in the world, we face many problems: economic
development, terrorism, drug trafficking, environmental
degradation, maritime security, ethnic and religious
divisions and avian flu, among others. However, what
each of us in ASEAN has come to appreciate is that,
without ASEAN, each of these problems would be
much harder to solve. And ASEAN alone cannot solve
any of them. We have to work with other countries and
with international organizations like the United
Nations. We are grateful for their assistance, their
partnership and their cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Honduras.
Mr. Romero-Martínez (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation, Sir, joins others in
congratulating your delegation on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and, today, on
having organized this important debate on the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The delegation of Honduras attaches great
importance to this topic, whose discussion will
strengthen the activities of the Organization. Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter establishes the
parameters for cooperation and recognizes the
existence of agreements with regional arrangements or
agencies for dealing with such matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action, provided that such
arrangements or agencies and their activities are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.
In its resolution 1631 (2005), the Security
Council clearly stated its determination to take
appropriate steps to further the development of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, consistent with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, it invited regional and subregional
organizations that have a capacity for conflict
prevention or peacekeeping to place such capacities in

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

the framework of the
Arrangements System.

United

Nations

Standby

And, in its presidential statement of 28 March
(S/PRST/2007/7), the Council wisely recognized that
regional organizations are well positioned to
understand the root causes of many conflicts closer to
home and to influence the prevention or resolution,
owing to their knowledge of the region.
My delegation acknowledges the progress that
has been made in this area and firmly believes that
strengthening these contacts, meetings and efforts will
benefit international peace and security.
In our region, this has yielded positive results,
demonstrating that interaction among all actors
promotes a climate of trust and cooperation, leading to
the possible resolution of conflicts.
We appreciate the role played by the European
Union in Europe and other regions, the African Union
in Africa, the League of Arab States in the Middle East,
the Organization of American States in the Americas
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Asia.
We can certainly add subregional actors as well, such
as the Central American Integration System, which
contribute to the creation of a climate of integration
and collective cooperation. My delegation believes that
appropriate breadth in our objectives and a more active
inclusion of non-governmental organizations and of
civil society are necessary.
We view type of debate as imperative. It allows
us to reassess the role of our Organization and, above
all, as the Charter tells us, to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We thank you
very much, Mr. President, for this initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Benin delegation, Mr. Minister, allow me
to offer you my heartfelt congratulations on
Indonesia’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to welcome your initiative to
convene this public debate. Your presence among us
and your personal contribution enhance the level of
this debate. I would also like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the delegation of Ghana, which held the
presidency of the Security Council in October.

07-58467

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Republic of Angola
on behalf of the African Group.
The theme of this public debate is extremely
relevant. Regional and subregional organizations have
a major role to play in the collective security system
established by the United Nations Charter. Here, the
provisions of Chapter VIII are explicit.
In that regard, remarkable progress has been
made in the process of restructuring mechanism for
conflict prevention and settlement in Africa. The
international community, which, through the Security
Council, has the core responsibility for world peace
and security, can rely upon a continent-wide machinery
that continues to be honed through the establishment
and articulation of mechanisms which are often
established spontaneously, but which have become
relevant within the integration process embodied by the
African Union and by its development programme, the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD).
This trend towards pooling energies and resources is
part of the Charter vision for a collective security
system that harmoniously encompasses the regional
and international levels.
We welcome the recognition of the importance of
the
capacities
of
regional
and
subregional
organizations, particularly with respect to the
establishment of mechanisms and rules of conduct that
make it possible to better manage critical situations
through more effective action on the ground based on a
rapid response to warning signs in order to contain the
tensions and the risks of rapid escalation, while
benefiting from complementarities.
This evolution calls for a review of the doctrine
of peacekeeping operations as it has been understood
until now. The international community has had to
make up for the absence or weakness of intervention
capacities at the regional level. Henceforth, the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for
international peace and security will need to be carried
out with the involvement of existing local capacities,
through standby force arrangements, and this was
clearly reaffirmed in Security Council resolution 1631
and was stipulated by the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union (AU).
In that connection, the establishment of hybrid
operations represents a transitional phase prior to

21

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

setting up fully operational regional capacities. In that
regard, the international community has a duty to
strengthen the process of setting up regional capacities
in order to fully delegate its operational responsibilities
to regions while maintaining the overall authority to
mandate operations, so as to avoid fragmentation of the
rules governing the exercise of that authority.
It is therefore important that the United Nations
follows the processes under way very closely to ensure
that they are carried out in strict compliance with the
Charter and that they can produce synergies to meet the
challenges confronting regions in the maintenance of
international peace and security, especially with regard
to the root causes of conflict, and to mobilize human
resources and the means necessary to ensure the
functioning of regional mechanisms as an integral part
of the collective system of security.
Having said that, development is another name
for peace — something that is especially true for the
African continent. From that point of view, support for
regional and subregional organizations should also be
aimed at promoting their mission of economic
integration. Thus they could increase their contribution
to sustainable development in countries where they are
active. That entails providing assistance in establishing
major agglomerations of States that are capable of
mobilizing efforts to ensure prosperity based on
economies of scale, as well as full inclusion of
individuals and State bodies set up to bring an end to
widespread poverty among entire groups of the
population who have been plunged into extreme
poverty by the distortions of the global economic
system.

capacities that regional organizations are able to
assume, on the other. The goal is to ensure greater
effectiveness by the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. That goal should be
pursued through a holistic approach that encompasses
all aspects with a specific impact on that area. The full
integration of regional mechanisms should include
better structuring of the global economy, in order to
provide all countries with an opportunity to achieve
peaceful development within an international system
that operates in the interests of humankind and for the
betterment of its capacities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr.
Pramudwinai
(Thailand):
Regional
cooperation has always been at the heart of Thailand’s
foreign policy. That is why we take pleasure today in
joining this open debate of the Security Council on the
role of regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We wish to congratulate Indonesia, a fellow
family member in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council and for initiating and organizing this
vital and timely debate.
We would also like to associate ourselves with
the statements made earlier by my other ASEAN
colleagues, including of course the representative of
Singapore, who spoke in that country’s capacity as
Chair of ASEAN.

In that connection, my delegation calls for better
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, so as to ensure greater
effectiveness in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts through existing mechanisms or those to be
established.

The founders of the United Nations foresaw the
indispensable role of regional and subregional
organizations in the pursuit of the purposes and
principles of multilateralism that are enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. That wisdom is clearly
reflected in Chapter VIII of the Charter. We hold that
wisdom to be more pertinent than ever in this
increasingly complex and interdependent world.

Regional and subregional organizations must
assume their full place in the system of collective
security established by the Charter, without
encroaching upon or diminishing the primary
responsibilities of the Security Council. We must
continually differentiate between the Council’s
decision-making power to define mandates and
exercise oversight over their implementation, on the
one hand, and the greatest possible operational

Thailand has consistently advocated for closer
regional integration in South-East Asia for decades,
starting with an arrangement such as the former
Association of South-East Asia, which later evolved
into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Since
its establishment, in 1967, with the adoption of the
Bangkok Declaration, ASEAN has been a cornerstone
of Thai foreign policy, and will continue to be so in the
future. It is on the basis of being a founding member of

22

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

ASEAN, and out of a sense of ownership in that
organization, that my delegation would like to share
with the Council its views in four areas, with ASEAN
as its focus.
First, regionalism can turn enmity into amity by
managing differences and emphasizing commonalities.
That is most evident in South Asia. Before the
establishment of ASEAN, in 1967, South Asia was a
zone of disputes and conflicts. Today, South Asia has
transformed itself into a zone of relative peace and
stability. With that peace and stability, South Asia has
emerged as one of the fastest growing regions in the
world. The peace, stability and prosperity that all of us
in the region cherish would not be possible without
ASEAN as an anchor and a common framework for
working together.
Thailand believes that ASEAN has a lot to offer
to the international community, not least its working
methods and its gradual institution-building processes.
For example, the ASEAN culture of sincere
consultation and consensus-making — the so-called
ASEAN way — has been instrumental in ensuring the
collective growth and cohesiveness of all its diverse
members.
ASEAN’s approach towards the subject of peace
and security is most notable. While the United Nations
prides itself of its 60 years without a great war,
ASEAN is also proud of its 40 years of the absence of
major conflicts among its members. As a
confidence-building process, ASEAN members have
been strong practitioners of a comprehensive security
that does not focus solely on the military aspect of
security but emphasizes common challenges in the area
of economic cooperation. Through closer economic
linkages comes the realization of a common stake in
joint prosperity, which ultimately underpins common
peace and security.
Secondly, for each regional organization to
flourish and be sustainable, it is vital that a sense of
community is cultivated and nurtured among its
members. It is in this spirit that Thailand has been a
strong advocate of the ASEAN community-building
process. We believe that it is important for ASEAN
members to spare no effort to develop a sense of
community and a “we” and “us” feeling in the region
— a mutual sentiment that will propel the region to
look to the future together as one community.

07-58467

In that conviction, we are pleased that the 10
members of the ASEAN family, including Thailand,
will celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the
organization by adopting the ASEAN Charter, which
will pave the way for a closer and stronger ASEAN
with a great advantage. By signing the Charter, every
ASEAN member will be committed to transforming the
organization into a rules-based organization based on
the three pillars of the ASEAN security community, the
ASEAN economic community and the ASEAN socioeconomic community, thus taking a vital step forward
in the regional integration process. Thailand strongly
believes that a stronger ASEAN will be an effective
partner of the international community in the pursuit of
international peace and security.
Thirdly, no region is an island onto itself in this
interconnected world. ASEAN therefore needs to
engage and work with other regional partners on the
basis of mutual benefits. It is upon that realization that
Thailand has consistently supported an outwardlooking ASEAN through such initiatives as ASEAN+3,
the ASEAN Regional Forum, the ASEAN postministerial conferences and the East Asia Summit.
Through that network of regional cooperative
arrangements, ASEAN has successfully played a
central role in managing regional differences in the
larger Asia-Pacific peace and stability architecture, and
has been instrumental in cultivating a culture of
dialogue and consensus among its diverse players.
But the horizon of ASEAN is not limited to Asia
and the Pacific. In this interconnected world, many
problems are transnational in nature and require
concerted efforts not only within each region, but also
between regions. As peace and security could well be
augmented
through
cross-regional
cooperation,
Thailand has been a staunch supporter of interregional
efforts. We have played a central role in establishing
the Asia-Europe Meeting and the Asia Cooperation
Dialogue, which to date is the only Asia-wide
cooperative framework. Thailand, along with our
fellow ASEAN members, has also been actively
participating in the Forum for East Asia-Latin America
Cooperation and has been promoting closer
cooperation between ASEAN and the African Union,
and between ASEAN and the Gulf Cooperation
Council, for example. All those cooperative
arrangements, when put together, constitute building
blocks for the stronger and more effective
multilateralism that the United Nations embodies.

23

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

Fourthly, greater capacity is needed to ensure that
each and every regional arrangement can bring out its
best potential. The United Nations has a vital role to
play in that regard. Thailand would also like to see the
United Nations placing greater emphasis on
encouraging and strengthening those burgeoning
subregional, regional and cross-regional building
blocks. There is much that each region can learn from
the others and there is much that, together, crossregional efforts could contribute to the enhancement of
peace and stability in respective regions. As an
observer to the United Nations, ASEAN has made clear
our intention to bring our cooperation with the United
Nations to a higher level.
As a founding member of the ASEAN family,
Thailand is cognizant of the collective responsibility of
the family and the common challenges it is facing in
the integration process in this interdependent world.
Like all other regional organizations, there is no other
way for ASEAN to head but up. A strong, healthy and
united ASEAN, with the firm determination to strive
forward and a reasonably profound optimism, is
essential to the maintenance of peace and security not
only in the region, but also in the world at large.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Azerbaijan, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mammadov
(Azerbaijan), took a seat at the Council table.
The President: I call on the representative of
Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mammadov (Azerbaijan): I would like to
express my delegation’s appreciation to the delegation
of Indonesia and Foreign Minister Wirayuda for
convening today’s open debate on the role of regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations has recently increased

24

significantly. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the European Union’s
contribution to the protection of civilians in Chad and
the Central African Republic, the activities of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations in Myanmar,
the role of the Economic Community of West African
States in elections in West Africa, NATO in
Afghanistan and Kosovo, the Organization of
American States’ support for the electoral process in
Haiti, and regular consultations with the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the League of Arab
States, as well as with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the European
Union, on European security are examples of such
broad and comprehensive cooperation.
The Secretary-General stated in today’s meeting
that the United Nations is committed to helping build
up the capacities of regional and subregional
organizations to undertake conflict prevention,
peacemaking and peacekeeping tasks in their
respective regions. That approach would reinforce and
mutually complement the activities of the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
OSCE, in maintaining international peace and security,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
With that in mind, and with the aim of giving new
impetus to the peace process and facilitate the final
settlement of certain conflicts on the OSCE agenda, the
United Nations may and should consider those
conflicts. That is not to say that we seek a substitute
for the peace process; rather, we seek to provide
encouragement and support for the ongoing mediation
efforts conducted by the OSCE. We believe that the
consideration of those conflicts by the United Nations
and its General Assembly will have a positive impact
on the existing negotiations and reveal the
determination of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, to continue to take
practical steps to settle those conflicts. Any settlement
will have to be based on the norms and principles of
international law.
Another OSCE dimension that needs to be
mentioned here is the Conventional Forces in Europe
(CFE) Treaty. As a result of occupation, some parts of
our State territory are beyond the Government’s
control, which has led to the establishment of so-called
black holes, where a significant amount of CFE Treatylimited conventional armaments has been deployed and
cannot be accounted for under the Treaty. That is in

07-58467

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

gross violation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe, to our great concern.
All of those problems reconfirm that there is still
room for an expansion and deepening of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
We are ready to contribute, within our capacities, to
that process.
The President: Following consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility
for
the
maintenance
of
international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council recognizes the
important role of regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations as well
as its relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005), and
previous relevant presidential statements on
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.
“The Security Council emphasizes that the
growing contribution made by regional and
subregional organizations in cooperation with the
United Nations can usefully support the work of
the Organization in maintaining international
peace and security, and stresses in this regard that
such contribution should be made in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
“The Security Council further recognizes
that regional and subregional organizations are
well positioned to understand the root causes of
many conflicts and other security challenges
close to home and to influence their prevention or
resolution, owing to their knowledge of the
region.
“The
Security
Council
recalls
its
determination to take appropriate steps to further
the development of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace

07-58467

and security. It welcomes recent developments
with regard to the cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union.
“The Security Council, while maintaining
the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, encourages
regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen and increase cooperation among them,
including to enhance their respective capacity, in
the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council underlines the
importance of the United Nations political
support and technical expertise in this regard.
“The Security Council encourages regional
cooperation, including through the involvement
of regional and subregional organizations in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and intends to
consult closely with them whenever appropriate
on their role in future peacekeeping operations as
well as political and integrated missions
authorized by the Security Council.
“The Security Council stresses the need to
develop effective partnership between the
Council
and
regional
and
subregional
organizations in order to enable early response to
disputes and emerging crises.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of exploring the potential and existing
capacities
of
regional
and
subregional
organizations in the field of peace and security,
covering, inter alia, the spectrum of conflict
prevention,
confidence-building,
conflict
resolution, peacemaking, peacekeeping, and postconflict peacebuilding, and welcomes regional
dialogue and the promotion of shared norms as
well as common regional approaches to the
settlement of disputes and other issues relating to
peace and security.
“The Security Council stresses the potential
role of regional and subregional organizations in
addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and the need to take into account in the
peacekeeping operations’ mandates, where
appropriate, the regional instruments enabling
States to identify and trace illegal small arms and
light weapons.

25

S/PV.5776 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by its subsidiary bodies with
responsibilities in counter-terrorism to foster
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, notes with appreciation the efforts
made by an increasing number of regional and
subregional organizations in countering terrorism
and urges all relevant regional and subregional
organizations to enhance the effectiveness of their
counter-terrorism efforts within their respective
mandates and in accordance with international
law, including with a view to develop their
capacity to help Member States in their efforts to
tackle the threats to international peace and
security posed by acts of terrorism.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of promoting the identification and
further development of modalities which enhance
the contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to the work of the Council in
maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. For that purpose, the Council
deems it useful to consider further strengthening
its interaction and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The
Council
recognizes
the
Peacebuilding Commission, in its area of
competence, as a forum for coordination in the

26

area of post-conflict between the United Nations
system
and
regional
and
subregional
organizations, in accordance with its resolution
1645 (2005) and General Assembly resolution
60/180.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to include in his report
pursuant to its presidential statement of 28 March
2007 (S/PRST/2007/7) a recommendation on
practical ways and means to increase and
strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations
and
regional
and
subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
“The Security Council invites all Member
States to contribute more actively to the
strengthening of the capacity of regional and
subregional organizations in all parts of the
world, in issues relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2007/42.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

07-58467
