IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

between International Organizations, as well as upon the
question of participation in the Conference,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General, 33
which contains comments and observations submitted by
States and principal international intergovernmental
organizations, in accordance with General Assembly reso­
lution 38/139,
Recognizing the importance of achieving a successful
conclusion of the work of the Conference through the pro­
motion of general agreement,
Bearing in mind the relationship between the law of
treaties between States and the subject-matter to be dealt
with by the Conference,
Noting with appreciation that an invitation has been
extended by the Government of Austria to hold the Con­
ference at Vienna,
l. Decides that the United Nations Conference on the
Law of Treaties between States and International Organi­
zations or between International Organizations shall be
held at Vienna from 18 February to 21 March I 986;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
(b) Namibia, represented by the United Nations Coun­
cil for Namibia, to participate in the Conference, in
accordance with paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolu­
tion 37/233 C of 20 December 1982;
(c) Representatives of organizations that have received
a standing invitation from the General Assembly to parti­
cipate in the sessions and the work of all international con­
ferences convened under its auspices in the capacity of
observers to participate in the Conference in that capacity,
in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 31/152 of 20 Decem­
ber 1976;
(d) Representatives of the national liberation move­
ments recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity to participate in the Conference as observ­
ers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(e) Representatives of international intergovernmental
organizations that have traditionally been invited to parti­
cipate as observers at legal codification conferences con­
vened under the auspices of the United Nations to partici­
pate in the Conference in a capacity to be considered
during the consultations referred to in paragraph 8 below
and to be decided upon by the General Assembly at its for­
tieth session;
3. Invites the participants referred to in paragraph 2
above to include as far as possible among their representa­
tives experts competent in the field to be considered;
4. Decides that the languages of the Conference shall be
the official and working languages of the General Assem­
bly, its committees and its sub-committees;
5. Refers to the Conference, as the basic proposal for
its consideration, the draft articles on the law of treaties
between States and international organizations or between
international organizations adopted by the International
Law Commission at its thirty-fourth session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Conference all relevant documentation and recommenda­
tions relating to the rules of procedure and methods of
work, taking into account the importance of promoting
general agreement on the final results of the work of the
33 A/39/491.
34 Official Records of the General A.uemhh'. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 26 (A/39/26 and Corr.!)

291

Conference, and to arrange for the necessary staff, facilities
and services which it will require, including the provision
of summary records;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the presence at the Conference, as an expert, of the Inter­
national Law Commission's Special Rapporteur on the
question of treaties concluded between States and interna­
tional organizations or between two or more international
organizations;
8. Appeals to participants in the Conference to organ­
ize consultations, primarily on the organization and
methods of work of the Conference, including rules of pro­
cedure, and on major issues of substance, including final
clauses and settlement of disputes, prior to the convening
of the Conference in order to facilitate a successful conclu­
sion of its work through the promotion of general
agreement;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session an item entitled "Preparation for the
United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties
between States and International Organizations or
between International Organizations.
99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984
39/87.

Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country

The General Assemhly.
Having considered the report of the Committee on Rela­
tions with the Host Country, 34
Recalling Article I 05 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations 35 and the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regard­
ing the Headquarters of the United Nations,36
Recalling further that the problems related to the privi­
leges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of those mis­
sions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in para­
graph 58 of its report; 34
2. Strongly condemns any terrorist and criminal acts
violating the security of missions accredited to the United
Nations and the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to continue to take all neces..
sary measures to ensure effectively the protection, security
and safety of the missions accredited to the United
Nations and their personnel, including practicable meas­
ures to prohibit illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage
in the perpetration of acts and activities against the secu­
rity and safety of surh missions and representatives;
JS Resolut1on 22 A (I)
16 Resolution 169 (II).

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

292

4. Reiterates that adherence of all Member States to
the Agreement between the United Nations and the
United States of America regarding the Headquarters of
the United Nations and to other relevant agreements is an
indispensable condition for the normal functioning of the
Organization and permanent missions in New York and
underlines the necessity for avoiding any action not con­
sistent with obligations in accordance with the Agreement
and international law;
5. Calls upon all countries, especially the host country,
to build up public awareness by explaining, through all
available means, the importance of the role played by the
United Nations and all missions accredited to it in the
strengthening of international peace and security;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively
engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United
Nations with the host country and to continue to stress the
importance of effective measures to avoid acts of terrorism
and violence against the missions and their personnel;
7. Requests the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country to continue its work, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Report of the Commit­
tee on Relations with the Host Country".

99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984
39/88.

Report of the Special Committee on the
Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organiza­
tion

A

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 686 (VII) of 5 December 1952,
992 (X) of 21 November 1955, 2285 (XXII) of 5 Decem­
ber 1967, 2552 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2697
(XXV) of 11 December 1970, 2968 (XXVII) of 14 Decem­
ber 1972 and 3349 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of 27
November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973
and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the strength­
ening of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, by which it established the Special Com­
mittee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and its reso­
lutions 31/28 of 29 November 1976, 32/45 of 8 December
1977, 33/94 of 16 December 1978, 34/147 of 17 Decem­
ber 1979, 35/164 of 15 December 1980, 36/122 of 11
December 1981, 37/114 of 16 December 1982 and 38/141
of 19 December 1983,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the work of the Organization submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh37 and thirty-ninth38 sessions
as well as of the views and comments expressed on them
by Member States,
37 Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session, Sup­
plement No. I (A/3711 ).
38 Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. I (A/39/1).
39 Ibid., Supplement No. 33 (A/39/33).

Having considered the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strength­
ening of the Role of the Organization on the work of the
session it held in I984, 39
Taking into account the elaboration by the Special Com­
mittee of the outline for a handbook on the peaceful settle­
ment of disputes between States and the conclusions
thereon,40
Noting the importance that pre-session consultations
among the members of the Special Committee and other
interested States may have in facilitating the fulfilment of
its task,
Conscious of the fact that the year 1985 marks the forti­
eth anniversary of the United Nations,
Considering that the Special Committee has not yet ful­
filled the mandate entrusted to it,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strength­
ening of the Role of the Organization;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall convene
its next session from 4 to 29 March 1985;
3. Requests the Special Committee at its session in
1985:
(a) To accord priority by devoting more time to the
question of the maintenance of international peace and
security in all its aspects in order to strengthen the role of
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, and
to enable it to discharge fully its responsibilities under the
Charter in this field; this necessitates the examination,
inter a/ia, of the prevention and removal of threats to the
peace and of situations which may lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute; the Special Committee
will work on all questions with the aim of submitting its
conclusions to the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraph 5 below, for the adoption of such recommenda­
tions as the Assembly deems appropriate; in doing so, the
Special Committee should continue its work on the work­
ing paper on the prevention and removal of threats to the
peace and of situations which may lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute41 or any revision thereof,
as well as other proposals which might be made;
(b) To continue its work on the question of the peace­
ful settlement of disputes between States and, in this
context:
(i) To continue consideration of the proposal con­
tained in the working papers on the establishment
of a commission on good offices, mediation and
conciliation; 42
(ii) To examine the report of the Secretary-General on
the progress of work on the draft handbook on the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States;
4. Requests the Special Committee to keep the ques­
tion of the rationalization of the procedures of the United
Nations under review and to revert to its work on this top­
ic when it deems appropriate;
5. Also requests the Special Committee to be mindful
of the importance of reaching general agreement whenever
that has significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Urges members of the Special Committee to partici­
pate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate entrust­
ed to it;
40 /hid., chap. Ill, sect. B.
41 /hid., Supplement No. 33 (A/39133). para. 20.
42 A/38/343, annex. -\;C6i39iL2.
