UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

“’

22 JUNE

1973

YORK

CONTENTS

,’
Page

Provkional

.., ...I............. .I... ..,.

..,..

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

.. . .

1

Ardmission of new Members:
Application ot the German Democratic Republic for admission to membership in
the United Nations:
L&ter dated 12 June 1973 from the Mitister for Foreign Affairs of the German
Democratic Republic to the Secretary-Genera1 (S/l 094%) ;
Applica,tion of the Federal Republic of Germany for admission to membership in
the United Nations:
Letter dated 13 June 1973 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Republic of Germany to the Secretary-Genera1 (S/ 10949 j;
Report of the Co,mmittee on the Admission of New Members concerning the application of the German Democratic Republic an’d the application of the FederaI
Republic of Germany for admission to membership
in the United Nations
(S/10957)
. , . . . . . . , , . . , . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . I,. . . . . I.. . * . * . . . . , , * . .

1

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l730)
of the agenda .

....,..

.

(a)

(b)

cc>

S/PV.1730

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol. S/ ‘. . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the 0;gicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively b resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.
.

I

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

‘lXIIRTIE?.‘H

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 22 June 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Y. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

(c) Report of the Committee on the Adlnission of
New Members concerning the application of
the German Democratic Republic
and the
application of the Federal Republic of Germany for admission to membership in the
United Nations (S/10957)

Present: The representatives ‘of the foillowing States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Bnitain
and Northern Ireland, United States Iof America and
Yugoslavia.

Provisional

1. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian) : In
accordance with the decision adopted at the 1729th
meeting of the Security Council, the Committee on the
Admission of New Members has held its meeting and
has submitted to the Council a report [S/10957]
together with the summary record of the meeting
[S/C.2/SR.42],
in which the views of till members of
the Committee are sst forth,

agenda (S/Agenda/I730)

1. Adoption of Ithe agenda.
2. Admission of new Menmers:
Application ,of the German Democratic Republic for admbion to, ,membership in ,the United
Nations :
Letter dated 12 June 1973 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic
Republic to the Semetaq-Genleral (S/10945) ;
Appli,cation of the Federal Republic uf Germany for admission to membership
in the
United Nations :
Letter dated 13 June 1973 .from ‘the Minister
for Foreign ARains of the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Secretary-General (S/10949);
Report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Memblers concerning the applicaltiom
of the German Democratic Republic a,nd the
applicatioa of the Federal Republic of Germany folr admission to membemhip
in the
United Natioos (S/10957).

2. I should like to congratulate the Com,mittee on
its decision to reco,mmend that the German Demoaatic
Repubhc and the Federal Republic of Germany be
a’dmitted to membership in the United Nations. In
a,ccoFdance with the agreement we reached and if there
are no objections by members d the Council, the
Security Council wi;ll first take a decision on the
substaace of these appli,ca,tions for admission to membership in the United Nations, and then members of
the Council will make their rstatements.

(b)

3. In this connexion I should like to remind the
Council that it was agreed after coasuiltations among
m’embers that the Council woulld take a decisiom on
this question by consensus, i.e., without voting.

cc>

Adoption

4. Sin,ce there are no objections,
agreed on this procedure.

I .take it we are

5. Now I want to draw ‘the attention of members of
the Security Council to paragraph 3 of the Teport of
the Commit.tee ,011 the Admission of New Members,
whi’ch contains a ,dsaft resolution whi,ch the Committee
‘recommends the Council to adopt. I shall read out
the text.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members :
Application
of the German Democratic Reptabhe for admission to membership in the
United Nations :
Letter dated 12 June I973 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic Repnblio to the §ecretaq&eneral
(WB0946) ;
Application of the Federal Republic of Germ
many for admission to membership in the
United Nations
:
Letter dated 13 June I973 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany to the Secretary-Genera1
(S/10949) ;

“The Security Council,
“Having considered sepmttely the app&zation of
the German Democratic Republic [S/10945]
and
ithe application of .the Federal Republi’c of Germany
[S/10949]
far admission to membership
in the
United Natioas,

“1. Recommends to the General Assembly that the
German Democratic Republic be admitted to membership in the United Nations;
“2. RecoInamends,t,o the General Assembly that
the Federal Republic of Germany be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.”

1

I

area as far as France is concerned. It is peopled by
men who for centuries have been aeighb,ours of the
French ‘and with whom we have had chcanging but
always dose relations. This people, whose merits we
have been able to appreciate even when we were compelled to combat #them, ha,s produced distinguished
7. Since there are no objeotions from members of
minds which have never ceased Qo speak to us. And
the Council, I sh%$l take it that the Co’uncil decides
now, her.e today, #these neighbours ,are entering our
to recommend to the Genera!l A)ssembly that the German
Organization of pesceJoving nations. This aevent ciun
Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic df
only be we&corned by a country
like France-which
Germany be admit&d to member&ip in the United
helped to found our Organization, immediat.ely after
Nations.
and because of a Sacon’d World War provoked by
inhuman excesses that had taken over the Gel;man
It was so decided.
Reich.
14. You will I am sure allow me to expatiate on a
8. By reco,mmending that these ,two States be admit?heme which is so &&y
linked ~to the history of
ted to membership in the United Nations, ;the Council
is mal&ng another sub,stantid contribation 60 the ‘cause my country and to say tist of all that France believes
it has played a role in the remarkable mevo$ution which
of ensu&ng international ,peace anld seGu.rity and-somehas occurred over the past 25 years. The governments
.thhipg which is also most important-%
the cause of
that have decided on France’s policy towards Germany
implementing
and coinsolidating the pninciple of the
have all been bent on replacing ,enmity by leconciliauniversality of (the United Nation’s, which is Btipdated
tion, mistruslt by trust, and rivalry by un~derstanding.
in the Charter.
How could one fail to mention helre the names of
Robert Schuman and o,f Konrad Adenauer, and naturally
.9. Permit me, on behalf of the Security CouncJl and
we should al#so mention the lofty figure of General
all its memberq to congratulate tile future new Memde Gaulle. This man went furthest in the direction, ‘or
bers of our Organization-the
German Democratic
rather in the revolution, whilch profoundly tra,neformed
Republic and .tie Federal Republic of Genmany-and
the nature of Franco-German relat~ioss. It is sufficient
to say that I am Isure Ithat the General Assembly will
here if I mention the treaty of friendship that France
in turn adopt a decision on the admission of these
and the Federal Republic of Germany condumded in
two States to m’embership in the Unitted Nations in
‘1963, by viintue of which Mr. Ge0rge.s Pom@dou, the
accordance with the Security Council recolmmendations
Pre&dent of the French Republic, finds himself this
and that it will comply in this ma%ter with the provisions
very ‘day at Bonn. The co-operation which links our
‘of Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Charter.
two countries can be viewed ,only with favour by the
rest of athe world, and this is all the more &rue since
10. By adopting such a decision the United Nations
it is nlo,t confined to the political problems of the
will contribut’e to the strengthening of intemationa1
mofment but, by redoubling the ties. between French
co-operation, the conlsolidati’on of peace and security
and German youth, it is helpi,ng to found the future.
in Europe and throughout our planet and the fur,ther
development of relabionls of friendship, co-operation
15. Lastly, I should tike to recall Ithat together
and mutual undemranding among States and peoples
France and the Federal Republic, in concert with
on the basis of universal recognition of the principle
seven other countltries, have ,embarksd upon a task of
of peaceful ooexistence.
great slcope. The nine covntries ,members of the Common Market wanted to inject new meaning into their
11. Now ,the Council w,il hear the statements of those
concept of Europe. They decided to break witi the
membas who may wish to speak on (this agada item.
notion of empire which was inherited from our most
remote past, and (evelryone knows how much this idea
12. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(Fraace) (interpretation
has dominated the fate of our coatinennt. They wanted
from French) : I;n recommendi8ng to the General Assemonce and for all to repudiate a mlirage jof their history
bly that it should receive the Federal Republic of
and to replace it by the only idea consis,tent with
Germany and the German Democratic Republic into
the conditions of existence in modern Europe, namely,
the family of the United Nations, the Counlcil has
material integration on such a broad scale that it
unanilm~oasly aIdopted a deoisioln #the historic nature of
becomes irreve&bla and a poltilcal agreement based
which is clear to everyone, an#d probably no one will
on the petrma,nent hmmonization
lof national interests,
be sutpx;ised to hear me ldesmibe thi’s as a historic
I shall not dwell on the merits, or terms of example,
decisioa. The representative ‘of France <must naturally
of such an enterprise in a world which, in its turn,
congratulate’ himself on seeing thait olur Organization is
shoul1.d also give up all temptation ‘towards empkeco’miag closer to i& ideal of universality. The reprebaading. I would merely emphasize 2lhat the Germs
sentative of France is obviously gra!tifiad at the thought
nation, which was the last victim of the mirage that
that the United Nations will ‘soon have in its #midst two
I have been discus’sing, finds in its past a we&h of
new Memblers with a wealth of labour and industry.
evidence of a humanitarian traditiloq, and we are glad
First and foremost, however, the representative of
that
Europe already, anld the Unnted Nations very
France continues to be strtmk by the importance of
shortly, can benefit from that tradition.
the subj.& put before ‘us folr our consideration.
16. Accolulingly, both at #the tikttwal level as wsll
13. The geographical area which is henceforth to be
as in lc&eotive tenms we have done what was within
represented in our midst is not just any geographical
our power to kran&rm ‘the politic,al conditions of the
6. In accordanoe with the afleement reached earlier
among members of the Securiry Counoil, which I have
already mentione8cl, )the Security Council, ilike the Committee on the Admission lof New Members, is ready
to adopt the ‘draft resoilution without voting. -

2

Eutopean continent. A,nd while it is true that France
.in the ,past has not e&&tied
si&ar adatiom with
,th& German Democratic Republic, it is France’s ‘intention, ti that oountry agrees, henceforth to develop with
4t the relationships of co-operation which ar’e character.&tic of #the ,ties between European countries.

.dividect nations wti, one day, follow their example if
#they succeed in settling their paobl~ms. I have no doubt
&hat those whom the United Nations fought 30 years
ago will soon confirm th:hQ new wiisdom. and theiT
desire foe peace in our *timit and will co;ntribute to
the work of our Organization, with the b&vidnd
genius which has already had such a @nerous and
fruitful influence on t&history of mankind.

17. The situation which we have reached in lthe
cour’se of a generation has ,deveJoped 8oonsiderably since
%he four Poweir,s ,$ook control of Hitlerite Germany.
21. Mm.
CISSE (Guinea)
(interpret&m
from
‘EVe@Iing
couns& us today to dive our support to
French) : In adopting this mor&g by consensus the
?be memb’ership appl.ications which have been submitted
repofit of the Committee on Admission of New Memto ‘us. That at&&e
is i,n acaordance with the Quadribers, recommending to the General Assembly the adpartite Declaration of 9 November 1972, whi’ch was
mission of the German Demo,cratic Repubfic, the
tralnslmitted to the Governme&s of the two candidate
Counlcil has just perPol;med an sot of justice which
States and &so to the Secretary-General of our Organhas long been aw&ted. That histo~ric decision, we are
ization land which was &-c&&d
by the latter to all
convinlced, wiKi maTk a new stage in the process of
.Member States [S/I0952-S/.Z0955].
In ithat text the
international
dttente which has been under way for
four Powers have etated ithat they would support the
some years now.
applications fo,r mmb8e&ip
of the Federal Republic of
Germany
and the German Democratic Republic as 22. My #delegation has always deplored, and continues .to deplore, the fact that certain Powers, including
Members of the U&ed Nations, an’d have affirmed that
the German Democratic Republic, Viet-Nam and
.that membership wouuld i,n no way affect the rights and
responsibilities
of the four Powers ‘or the ~o~~espondhg Korea, have been kept ‘outside the international Organization, even thou.gh they meet, mme than some
quadtnipaptite agreements, decisions and practices related
other
powers, al1 the conditions Iaid down by the
‘thereto.
Charter. Many concrote examples which I shall refrain
-18. I have mentioned the efforts at reasoned trust
from mentioning here, are alI factual evidence which
which have prevailed !ti the re,conciliatilon b’etween
prove convincin$y that th’e peoples of ‘those countries
aspire only POpeace and stability in the world.
France and the Federal Republic of Gemany and
which now govelfns their $iendship. I should like once
23. The German Democratic Republic, whose admisagain to emphasize the wisdom which has guided the
sion
we have just recommended to the General AssemFederal Republic of Germany and the German Dembly,
has
be,en, ever since its creation and the con&ma‘ocratic Republic on the relationships they have buZt
tion
of
its
existence as an independent and savcrelgn
between themselves. That wisdom has helped greatly in
State,
a
cou&ry
which aspires only to peace not only
making
possible the resolution (that we have just
with
its
neighbours
but aho with 811 countries which
adopted. If the great difficulties that were encountered
share
,the
salme
feeling.
could be overcome, the merit for that devolves in the
first place upon the GeEman negotiators themselves,
24. We take pleasure in stressing that that sentiment
Chancellor Brand,t and his Ministers on the one hand,
has subsequently characterized its attitude in its relaand the leaders of the German Dem!ocrat&c Republjc
tions abroad. That is why it, too, has entered innto
on the other. Last Wednesday their efforts led to the
direct co-operation in all fidlds-porliticd,
CCO~O~~C,
result which had bseen sought f,or so Jong: the two
oultural-with
the young independent States of Africa,
including my own country, the Republic of Guinea.
Govem,ments concerned have proceeded to an ,exchange
And if today the German Demoorati’c Republic enjoys
of notes which brings into operation ithe fundamental
Treaty,1 which is the basis of the relations that they
the a.dmirabion of more &an 80 countries, with which
it maiSntains diplomatic relations? it is indeed because
have ,decideld to ‘establish b’etween themselves.
of its policy of peace, solidarity and co-opecration,
19. I should also like to express a word of ,satisfaction
based on the equa&y of States and respect for their
about the Treaty of 12 August 1970 and those lthat
sovereignty.
were coauluded or iXnitiaHed b&ween the Federal RepubJic of Germany on the .oae hand and Poland and
25. My delegation also tsakes pleasure in noting with
Czechoslovakia
on the other. Those agreements unsatisfaction that the Democra&tic Republic of Germany,
d’eniably have facilitated the relaxation of tension not
already a member of several speoialized agencies of
only in Central Europe but ,also throughout our conthe United Nations, has always honourably acquitted
tinent. As evldenoe of that, I need only point to the
itself of all its tasks in those agencies. Its total, ansuccess
of the pr&minary discussions on the European
reserved assistance to the Yiberation movements cornConserence on Security and Co-operation.
man’& the respect and admirat<on of the Africa-n
States and peoples. It is in consideration of the facts
20. France, which has the fe&ng that it has constantly
I have m’engoned, and because of our mownVditiOn
We
coat8ribute8d to the work of which it is flow noting the
have
<chosen
to
be
brief,
that
my
delegation
announces
first positive a-es&s at the European Bevel, is naturally
its full sappoGt for the ‘application for admission of
pdeasad to see the Federal Republic of Germany and
the
D@mocrati,c Republic of Germany.
the &rman Democratic Republic alis0make thex entry
si,multaneojl,&y
onto the world scene. Perhaps other
26. Unfortunately,
my Idelegatlion is not in a Position
to make a similar annouacement with regard to the
1 Treaty 0~ the Basis of Relations betwen the Federal RFpubFederal Republic of Germany. We should therefore
lit 0% Germanyand the German Democratic Repubhc, slgned
like to qxess the strongest reservatiom Concern@3
at Berlin on 21 December 1972.
3

by the Ch,arter. Therefore, we can only be troubled at
the admission of a State such as the Federal Republic
of Germany, whose facts are not i,n keeping with the
requirements of the Charter. My delegation wishes to
express the ardent hope that the important decision
taken tosday by the Security Council will not b.ecoune
a day to regret.
31. Mr. JAMIESON
(United Kingdom) : My delegation welcomes the applications of the Federal Republic
of Germany and the Ganan Demo,oratic Republic fm
entry into the United Nations. We have therefore
joined in the #adop.tion by consens8us of the resolution
hefore the Council.
32. The phrase “a historic occasion” is overworked,
but Its use today is more than justified. The Sect&y
Council has adopted without dissent a resolution recommending the admission of rtwo States whi’ch were for
long regarded as bjeing mutually ho&e and as members
of mutually hostile military camps. Some members of
the Council have had long-standing and close ties with
the Federal Republic ,of Germany. Others have had
equally long-standing links with the German Democratic
Republic. But today the applications of both for membership of ,the United Nations have rmeived the endorsement of this Council.

paragraph 2 of the resolution, on the ad,mission of ,the
Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations.
27. My delegation, without wishing to disturb the
happy atmosphere of d&ale
which has marked this
debate, would like-without
dwelling at greater length
on *the factual #details and the political considerations
which have led to our reservations-to
explain what
has Led to the deterioration
of relations between the
RepubPc of Guinea and ,the Federal Republic of
Germany. My country, the Republic of Guinea, immediately after its independence ma&ained
political,
economic and cultural re&uions with th$eFedoral Rcpubtic of Germany, a country for which our people had
great respect. That country, to the immense surprise
of everyone, took advantage of that noble sentiment,
about which the Federal Republic :of Germany was
r&taken,
to infiltrate the ranks of four militants in
order methodically to set olut upon a course of economic
sabotage and systemafiic co:rruption of officials at till
echeloas in olur ~countxy. Thus, witth ‘one of the most
subtle kinds #of organlization, ,the Federal RepubBc of
Germany, through its technical-assistance personnel and
its Ambassador in Conakry, made k its business to
destroy our people, to wipe out our ‘sovereignty and to
make of our Icountry a puppet State in its pay. Repeatedly, my Head of State, President Ahmed %kou Tour&,
d.enounced those facts and ‘drew the attention of world
public opinion to them, appealing to the diplomatic
missions accredited to our courrtry urgently to help
us preserve our national cadres. In defiance of the
appeals of our Head of State, the Fedleral Republic
of Germany improved its metho,ds of setting up cells,
in agreemlent with the sworn enemies of the peace- arrd
justice-loving peoples, international iunperialis~mr headed
by Portugal, which le’d to ‘a very difhcult &ration,
which exploded on 22 November 1970 in a vast act
of armed aggression against our people-peacefully
sleeping after an arduous day *of Ramadan-plunging
GuJnea Into moarning and bloodshed.
28. For maany years the energies of my people were
diivcrted from their product&
activities, which did
consilderable da*mage to our development. In that stupid
act of aggression, in an attempt to bring ab,oat colonial
reconquest, my people lost many of its sons.
29. The people of Guinea is a peaceful people which
does not harbour grudges and which has faith, always
faith, in the future, However, there is something else
it cannot forget. It is the reality of tthe coali,tion between
South Africa, Portugal, Rho,desia and the Federal
Republic of Gemrany, which results in the intesnati~onal
community witnessing in ailmost total impotence the
strengthening of the iavest~ments ,0-fthe Federal Republic
of Germany in Namibia, paralysing the action of the
United Nations for a peaceful settlement in order to
restore to the people of Namibia iits right to selfdetermination. We are helpless witnesses to the development of military co-operation
betwe,en lthe Federal
Republilc of Germany and the abovementioned
coantries, co-operation the consequences of whi,ch are having
a dangerous effect upoa the struggle of our vahant
freedom-fightem in Guinea (Bissau) ,an!d Mozambique,
destroying innocent human lives land rsociaa structures
in the liberated areas.
30. I repeat #that my country is a peace-loving State
which aspires to respect for the principles laid down

33. In the case of my own countiy, fmorexample, we
have for long had )the closest of ties with the Federal
Republic of Germany. We are fellow members of the
European Economic Community and allies in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. Our two countries are
united in the importance we attach to these partnerships, which are the colrnerslones of ,olur ,seourity and
our prosperity. I am sure that the United Nations will
provide yet one more field in which we shall co-operate
to out mutual beneEt, ,and we warmly welcome the
application with which we have just dmealt. There can
be no doubt that the Fed~era.1 Republic cof Germany
will make impormnt contributions across the whole
range of this Organization’s activities.
34. Thanks to recent developments we have also been
able to offer a sincere welcome to the application of
the German Demooradc Republic. As is lcno.wn, my
Government established ldiplomabic relations with the
German Democratic Republic earlier thils year and
henceforth we look forward to increasing contacts here
in the United Natioas and to increasi,ng btiateral exchanges in every field.
35. Thus it is that I lthink that our wdcome today
to these two European States must go f’urther than the
customary pdsatitudes, the polite remarks about the
applicant States, the ,referensces to universality and so
on, which are usual on these occasions, F,or although
the Council’s action today foreshadows the accession
of two States at the very heart of Europe whose populations together amount t.0 77 mniUion people, it also
symbolizcIs something of the greatest conc.ern to all
of us who have the peace of the wodd at heart. Not so
many years ago only the most istaunchly optimistic,
cqui,pped with the moist rose-tiatod of spectacles, would
have foreseen the progress which we have witnessed
recently towards a relaxation ‘of tension and elimination
of the sotnces of conflict in Europe, Who at that time
could have predicted with ,any ~conf-ldence that this
Coun~cil would be able to adopt today’s draft resolution
4

without dhsent? And yet the fact ,that we have done so
delllonstrates the worth of the long drawn out process
Of Patient negotiation which has taken place, involving
bQth ‘the two G erman States themselves and (other
‘o@ers immediately
concerned.
36. This process of negotiation
which included the
“%otiation
in 1970 of the treaties) between the Federal
RWubIie of Germany and the Soviet Union and Poland,
contrast with the atmosphere of confrontation which
had beset central Europe si’nce the Second Would War.
’ have no need con this occasion to :describ,e s&sequent
events in f&l, but in Novemb’ea: last year talks b’etween
the Federal
Republic ‘of Germany and the German
‘emoccratic Repubflic cuhnin~at,ed in a General Relations
Treaty which provided for ithe [establishment of normal
re1ations between the Itwo. As memb’ers of this Council
will know, this Trea,ty is now in force as a result of
an exchange of notes which totok place on Wednesday.
nl e Quadripa.r$te
Declaration, t’o which the representative of France has already refellred and which has
bezn circuhted
to all Me#mb,er State: was antier of
Ihe steps in the course of events dhich led Ito the
“*kg
of the Security CouncP today, and I should
‘lke at this poi.nt to associate my Government with
:he remarks
#of ‘my French colleague concerning tha.t
De&ration.
37.

Burt today’s meeting is not the lend of the story,
Fcause it is symbc& of something else. The relaxa!on of tension i,n the very heart ,of Europ is cIosely
Inked with the wider search for de’tente. On 3 July
he Euroipean
Conference on Semity and C&operation
pill open in HeIsinki. This would not have been posible without
the improvement in the relations between
$St and West whilch I have desoribed. And in the
lrcumstances
,now created, ‘this confer,ence will give
s the opportunity,
which we must surely seize, to
lake
further
propress, ,to the benefit of all, witth
zalistic
measures to improve security, and to increase
le mutual
confidence which is essential ito it, to seek
ractical
ways to develop good neighbour co-operation;
nd to lower the barriers which have for too long
ivided
,the peoples of Europe. As my Secretary of
late said in the General Assembly on 27 September
972
“.
. , we must, if life Is to be tolerable, replace
le negative
conception ,of co-existence with a fabric
f trus t”-2
Simil~ly,
and as part ,of the same prooess, we
8.
&orne
the proepeot of negotiations on mutual and
alanced
foroe reductions which we hope will begin
L the autumn.
No one pretends that this will be an
Isy matter
to deal with. But if it is possible to reach
rreement
on measures ‘d&grmd to create confidence,
&se negtiations
offor the oppotiunity of finding some
a~ of lowtrring the Bevel of armed foroes and armain centr&l
Europe while at the game time
lemts
aintainin.g
undiminished
security for aill at each and
Iem stage of the process.
Let
me conclude by repeatifng that we look
9.
,Ma.rd
$0 continuing in this Organization as elsewhere
Ic co-operation
with the Federal RepubXc of Gmmany.
re look
forward equally to inoreadng contacts with
-

2 &&~ial

,ion,

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Plenary.Meetings,
2042nd meetmg, para. 108.

the German Democratic Rep&tic.
The contributions
that the Fedma Republi’c qof Germany and the Germs
Democratic Republic have made ito the process of
de’teilzte, not least by the conclusion of the her-German
agreements and anrangements and of the General Rslatiom Tlreaty, constitute &ciking
evidence of ,their
qualifications for admission to the United Nations.
Let me add, as the representative of a European
country, what pleasure the filling of this European
gap in our Organization gives my Government. But
perhaps the last word should rest with the millions of Europeans who, one day, may be able to
aecribse to a pmcess of ‘genuine de’tente, of which sour
action .today is a hopeful ,symboI, #not only tieedom
from crisis and war but also :an age of co;operation,
confidence Nmd prospenity, to the benefie not only of
Europe but b dl Memb’ers of the United Nations.
40. Mr. SCHAUFECE
(United Stat,es of America):
My delegation wishes $0 associate i&elf with ‘the statte
men& made this morning by the Permanent Representatives of France and the United Kingdom. We too are
pleased that tie Fedora1 Republic of Germany and .the
German Demolcratic Republic have lsubmitted applica.tions for membership in the United Nations. My Government will continue to support (those applications.
41. The United Safes views (the spirit of codoperation
displayed by the consensus in the Security Cou,nd
today as a h&her
indicat,ion that patience and good
will can help dleveIop tiew rdatioastips
in areas long
characterized by frictions. Thee new relationships can
serve not only the cause of peace but also #the day-today well-being of millions of people. This has a positive
ilmpalot on the Unibed Nations, the two German Stantes,
and the cause of &ternationaI peace.
42. The United States has sought {to bring about
iunprovements in international relations through careful
negotiations to replace hostility wilth multual understanding. Today’s action by the Security Counci.1 is
evi#denc.e that we all m mak!ing significant progress
towards accomplishi,ng these goals. Obviously this is
not .and (cannot be the work of one countiy or one
group of Icoun&ias. IIn ,the present -case we have sought
to co-operate with the Soviet Union as well as with the
Federal Republic of Germany and OIX other Western
allies who ahare with us-and with the intematqonal
community in general-a
common interest in elimmating the causes of &nsion iIn central Emope.
43. The Federal RepuMic of Germany has earned in
Its leadership
this process our particular admtiation.
deafi con-’
has sought-we
believe, successfully-to
stn~ctively with national proble,ms while taking into
account the responsibiliti’es which it and others bear
for the ntdatenance
of peace, stability and security
in Europe. We can, I believe, count son this same
conseructive attitulde on the part of the Federal Republic
of Germany in the work of the United Nations.
44.
We al,so welcome ithe declared intention of the
German Democratic Republic to wmk unreservedly in
fulfil&ing the United Nations ~missilon of peace and in
promoting the economic and social advancement of
aal peoples. Each German Stat.e hbas great resources in
scientific capacity, a skilled population md a strong
economy. Both States have indica+ed a desire ito be of
assistance in bringing about eoonomb and &ocial

progress around the world. We ‘are convinced that they
will be able to ‘do so. We are particularly gratified that
as Members of the UniteId Nations they will be able ito
wolrk with each other i,n contributing ito the successfd
achievement of Unite(d Nations programmes and objectives. The admission of the Federal Republic of
Germany and the German Democratic Republic to full
Unite.d N&ons membership this fall, when they will
receive &the approval of the twenty-eighth sesdon of the
General Assembly, will add important new strength CO
the United Nations-a
development of historic importance to this world body and to the goals it pursues in
the interests of us all.
45. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian) :
I should like to make the follocwing statement on tbJs
item o,n behalf of the delegation d the UNION
OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
46. The Soviet delegation has been very happy to
suppoit the application o.f the German Demoitrratic
Republic for admission Co membaship in the United
Nations and %he application of the Federal Republic
of Germany for admi~ssion to membership iln the
United Nations. We cannot fail to note the unanimity
with which the Security Council today adopted a
decision on the admission of ithese two German Sta’tes
to the United Nations.
47. This decision may be boldly &scribed as a truly
historic landmark in thle development of post-war
international ~relat$ons in Europe and the world and
in the histo’ry of the United Nations its&, which was
born in the fire and travail of the Second World War,
in the hash years of the struggle against aggression
and fas’cism, as <the hope of all mankind and as a
guarantee that ppaaee could be won and consolidated,
that the horrors of war would never Ixeturn, that the
“policy to#fforce” and its use in international r&t&%
would be endled for ever and that peace would triumph
everywhere on (earth.
48. Today the Securi#ty Council has unanimously supported ,the applicatioas for admission to membership
in the United Nations of ithe Gmman Democratic
Republic anld the Federal R.epublic of Germany, two
sovereign States which have recognized the United
Nations Charter and have undertaken to carry out all
the ,oblingations of Unlited Nations membership. This
Security Coancil action is a true reflection ,of the
enormous and irreversible changes which have taken
place in the coatemporaq
world as ,a result of the
unceasing efforts of all peac&oving and progressive
foirce!s, prim&y
of the counttries lof the socialist commu.nity, thcroaghout th,e post-war period, It is a direct
consequence of the easing of international tension,
which has m&e particular progress in recent years.
49. By &opting this ,decdsion ‘the United Nations is
drawing the final line on the bsalance-sheet of that
great world’ tragedy which began a third of a century
ago in Europe and has caused immeasurable suffering
tb the peo;ple!s of the worlsd. In the United Nations
system the policy and practice of di~soriminatioa against
mdividual State’s have been endled. A new eca’is dawning
in the hi,stov d ithe activities of the United Nations
;-the loag-awaited (era of universality.
50. ‘The adnission of the~German De~m~ocraticRepublic. to membership in the *.United Nations mmt be

viewed as yet another direct and espe&lly important
indication of the recognition of !the growing international role and authority (of the German Democratic
Republic, an independent, sovereign socialist State and
a consist,ent advolcate ,of peace, internatioaa1 secua%ty
anld social pqress.
The peaceful foreign policy of
the German Demofcratic Republic is of greatt significance
for the cause of peace and d&me in Europe and for
the organization of a&Euro~pean co-operation. The role
of the German Democratic Republic as an influence
for peace and sect&y in Eua-opean and world affaks
is growing steadily.
51. The German Democratic Republic maintains that
the favourable changes which have been achieved in
the international situation should be m&e irreversible,
Mr. Honecker, First Secretary of the Central Committee of ithe Sodalisit Unity Party of Germany, stated:
“This L Itile goal of olur policy tolo. We advolcate
compliance w’ith the latter and spirit of the treaties
which have been concluded; in accordance with
their purport, they should be the anost e&xtive
means of guaranteeing peace and thle easing of
tension.”
52. The broad international recognition ‘of the German DemocratJc Republic has also been reflected in
the faot that today the Germaa Demmcrati~c Republic
has diplomatic relations with more than 80 States on
all continents of the worl:d. This inlternational recognition of the Gmman Democratic Republic is clear
evidence of the irreversibility of the social and political
change,s of historic i’mportance which have taken place
in &rope and of the complete failure of the policy
of ,seeking to achieve diplomatic
isolation of this
socialist German State in i’n&ernational relations and
political discrimination against 3t in the United Nations
system.
53. This accomplishment required enormou:s efforts
and a consitant struggle on the part of the so&list
a’nd many ‘o’ther peace-loving States friendly (towards
the German Democratic Republic-States
whi’ch strove
pe,rsistently fo!r ,the x-eatization of Ithe principles of the
equality of rights of all States and peoples and respect
for (their sovereignty, an,d for observance of the principle
of the universality of the Unitted Nations, which is
sltipulated in the Chatier and has been reafhrmed by
decisions of the General Assembly.
54. The S,oviet Union has long been linked by the
firm’est bonds of close, sincere and selfless friendship
with the German Denzoorati’c Republic,
a so~oialist
German State, the ally and friend of the counttnies of
the so,cid:ist conmnmity. We were always among those
who pendered alp1possible support, to (that oonntry in
the matter of its admission to membership in the
Uniited Nations. Today we lcaln state proudly and with
a feeling of deep satisfaction and of duty done that
the efforts of those who consistently and constantly
advocated the just and equal treatment of all States
and wh,o defended and affirmed the principle of the
universality of the United Nations were not in vain.
They have been xx-owned. with sucoess. Thepe can be
no doubt that the.admission of the German Democratic
Republic to membership in the United Natioms will
serve,the “cause of strengthening universal peace. T&is is
an impoi+ta;it step ,of ,grdat; his.t~~d?l:dgnificance
and it

will serve $e interests of all peaoeloving States, the
United Natmns itself and the peoples of Europe and
the whole wocld.
55. With its highly #developed ,economy, advanced
sciellltific and technological (experience and gich cultural
tri&.ions
the Cbmmn Demoloratic Republic mak’es its
own weighty colnttibution to the development of international co-oparation and economic, ,trade, sciecntific,
technicail and cultural relations, and occupies a worthy
place among the most highly ‘developed States of Europe
and of the whole world. By an overwhewng majority
of votes at the twenty-seventh session of the General
As:sembly the Ge,rman Democratic Republic was elected,
M the same time as the Federal Republic of Germany,
to the Governing Council of ,the United Nations Environment
Progranun8e. That was (the first time the
United Nations had taken a vote afl&tinlg the two
Ger,man States mid it amounted to a vote of titernational
confidenIce in tiem; the same number of
vchtes- 120--were cast in favour of the election of the
C3erman Demooratlc Republic and the Federal. Republic
of Germ‘any to the Governing C~oancil, That was undoabt;edly symbolic. The German Democratic Republic
WRS next elected unanimously by the Econo’mic and
S,ocial Council to membership of the Ecolnomic Commission for Europe, where it snocessful~ly and fruiitfully
oo-operates with otther United Nations Members. No
one can doubt th,at as a fully fledged Member ,of the
united Nations the German Democratilc Republic will
put its resources, progressive political experience and
economi,c pote*ntial do full use in sleeking to rscalize the
noble pu,rpose’s of the United Nations and to bring
about international co-operation.
56.
For more than. 20 years the USSR and the counfxies of the socialist co~mmunity have stniven ceaselessly
stnd purposefully to restore iInternational justi,ce and
end the disoriminatio’n against the German Demoorat~c
Republilc
in the United Nation4 and in all other international
organizatioas. I must tell yofu that I am
pelreonally
very happy thait it fe$l to my lot a.5 Permanent
Representative of the USSR to the United
Nations
to enjoy the great honour of presiding ovecr
thpe Security, Council whein it adophed. this historic
clacision ,on the a’d’mission of ithe two German States
to membership in the United Nations.
57.
Today we are loudly acclaiming the major
political
advances which have: been achieved ,and are
being
achieved in Europe 8throngh the efforts of all
peace-loving
cou8nt8ries sctiing on the initiative of the
S ta% ~of the socialist commu~nity, That Europe’ which
nlo’re
than once has b’een a ,dangoroas hotbed of
aggressive wars (causing ,enormoas Idestruction and the
deaths of millions of people must recede a’nd is receding
into the past forever. It is our :sincese wish-and we
are doing .eve,rything we can to bring Ithis aboiut-that?
Europe sh&d be.co,me ,a new conti’nent, a continent of
peace, mutual trust and mutual co-operation among alJ
S,tates and peoples oln tie basis of the principles of
peaceful oo.existence. As ptrevious speakers have already
nc,t&,
we must count ammg the political advances, $
Europe,
tist and foremost, the ,co,nsoZdatiog ,in treqty
form of ahe prillciple of the i@iolability of the frontias
of European States,. i,n&ding ,the frontier between the
German Democratic Republic ,+nd the Psderal Republic
elf ~qm,~y,
#as<hey wqre. e@blished afterthe Sword

Weld WOK The treaties of the USSR anfd the Polish
People’s Republic with the Federal Repub:lic of Germany and the Genera1 Relations Treaty between the
German Demlooratic Republic and the Federal Republic
of Germany are havi,ng a favourablle influence on the
political situation in Europe, opening up broad op-’
poritunities and pl-ospeds for further important #positive
changes in Eu,ropean relations.
58. The delegation of the USSR considers that the
adlmission to the United Nations of the Federal RepubJ.&Z of Germany, like the admission of the German
Demoaratilc Republic, is oae of the mo!st important
events in the history of ,&helife and work of the United
Nations; it is equally a long ,ovedue, essential international political action capable of .exerfiing a favoutrable influence both on .the general state of international
relatioas and on <the activities of ache United Nations.’
59. Speaking at a reception on 21 May 1973 during
his stay in the Federal Republic of Germany, Leoni’d
&lich Brezhnev, General Secretary ,of the Central Committee of the @ommunist P&Q of ,the Soviet Union,
stalted:
“The hour is at hand when tie German Democratic
Republic anLndthe Federal Republic of Germany wil1
take their places in the United Nations an’d will be
able to make a worthy contribution to the work of
that world OFganization. A11 this substantially alters
b’oth the int~e,nationaJ situation of your country and,
to a considerable degree, the general climate of
I-elations between Western and Eastern Europe.”
60. In this cobnnexion we cannot fail ~to express our
satisfaction and our certainty that the trend towards
the easing bf intscnational tension and the co8nsolidation
of the policy of pesuce$ul coexistence wihll <prevail ovei
the negative trends of the glolomy years of the “toad
war” in world pc&cs. And in this sense the admission
of the Gerlman Democratic Republic and the Federal
Republic of Germany to the United Nations is an,
eloquent testimony of this positive and irreversible
process which inspires i,n peoples (the certainty ‘that
the cause of peace and international co-operation,
towards which Members of the United Nations must
strive-in
accordance with the obligation imposed’ by
the purposes and Charter of ‘the United Nations-will
inevitably triumph.
The stifiin,g atnmsphere of the
“cold war” years is gradually being replaced, although
not without dtificulty, by the invigorating climate
generated by the easing and wlaxation of international
tcnsaon. The p&cy of reaslov, peaceful coexidtence and
non-use of force in international relations is replacing
the policy of “negotiation from a position of strength”.
Confroatatibn and hro&ile allienation are giving way to
commuriication ,aad discussion, new evidence of which
is provi,ded by Leonid l&h Brezhnlev’s visits to Fran%,
the Federal Republic of Germany and #the United
States of America and his fruitf!uI talks with the leadas
of thosle States.
6i. As a ftiily fledged Member of (the United’Nations,
the l%deral Republic
of Germany-which
is econoti’cally,
scientifically, Fechnically a@ &lhira$ly one
of the highly developed, Scales of Europe and the
world-wil’l .$ind broad’ opportunities to make its ow11
wc&hy,contribiutioin to interntiltiona1 co-operation among
$1: $tates;..tfi$he’ multifaceted activities of the United

major factor: the need ‘to do everything possibIe tc
ens.upc that .the peoples of the earth may live fm
from the threat ,of war and live in security, co-opcrs
tion and association with leach other. This is ths
imperative dictate of our times. We must, devote
CILIT joint
egorts CO the achievement of this goal.”
65. Mr. JOB (Yugoslavia) : The unanimous adoptier
by the S’ecurity Cou’ncil ,of the resolution to recommed
to the General Assembly #the admission of the German
Democrati
Republic and the Federal Republic ol
G’ermany ~to membership of the United Nations h&
marks, and in itself constitutes, an event and a de
velopment of very great importance.

Nations and to the improvement of the political olimate
in Eu*rope and throughout the world.
62. In welcoming the admission of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations, I feel, as the representative
of the Soviet Union, that bthis is an opportune moment
to draw ,the attention of ,the distinguished *members
of ;th,e Sactity Council owe agtin to the important
political results ,of *the visit to the Fwderal Republic of
Germany of L. I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the
Central Co’mmittee of the Communist Pasty of the
Soviet Union, which took place in May this year. That
visit marked a turning-point in the relations between
States which in the very recent past had bseen diametricdly opposed on almost all major issues. We are sure
that there arc now good prospects for the establishment
between the USSR and the Federal Republi’c of Germany of relations of good-neighbourliness,
mutual
und.ersltanding sand co-operation in (the interests of
peace and for the ldevelopment of comprehensive and
long-term economic, $echnical anid cultural links and
co-operatioa b’etween the ‘two States. All this consolidates the snove towards new and normal political
and olther relations-long
‘overdue in a time of
peace -and
towards co-operation betwmeen the Soviet
Union an,d #the Federal Republic of Germany,

66. As a European country that suffered terribly, ati
fought and liberated itself in the Second World \F”ar,
as a founding Member of the United Nations, as a
socidist and mm-aligned nation long engaged in naive
efforts .to overcolme the cold war and its, or any other,
divisions in Europe and elsewhere, Yugoslavia is raw
deeply gratified by the major dmecision that we have
been able to take today. Indeed, fm the reasans
mentioned, we find ou~rselves vle,ry fortunate ,in having
this opportunity
to participate,
as members of th’i:
Council, in this historic act.
67. Having experien’ced fthe ravages of the two world
wars in the life span of one generation and conscious
of the new requirements of the contemporary world of
the Charter, of thre end of colonialism, of the nniverral
and essential demand anld need for (the demooratlzaliw
of internarioad
relations, and, particula’rly,
of t!~
necessity to settle international
issues and problnE
by peaceful means, Yugoslavia exerted, very early aftct
the war, special ,efforts aimed at nornmlizing
relaticcm
in Europe and transcending i’ts divisions by recognizins
the realities on its so,il. We racognized and establbhti
m&ions
with the Fecleral Republic of Germanv in
1952. We recognised anld established relations ;viLII
the German Dlemocrati,c RepubMc in 1957, Simulta~
neously, together with our non-aligned
partners rtod,
particularly, in the call addressed to the great Powys
by #the Belgrade Su,mmit Conference of Non-Aligacd
Count&s in 1961, we made an nrgent appeal fc:
moving away from ltbe dangerous and sterile. confrorm
tions ,dividing Europe and the worlid and ti embark2
upon the path of negotiations and coexistence. Somt
of these early efforts an!d contsributions d,id not nIwqs
meet with instant recognition and the immediate w&-i&
acoeptance then, bult we are ,glad to note that Euwp
has ave%r since been .mfoving towards an era of c+
operatilon.
68. The important network of agreements betwtia
the Federal Republic of Gmmany and the Soviet Union,
Poland anld now Czechoslovakia,
a’nd, of course, tie
impolrtant agreements between *two German Stana,
With all the concomi~tant instrumenta.&i&+s, constitute a
balssicand most essential sltsuoture, the foundadon up
whJch it was possible to build subsequent deveIopmentj
that made today’s meeting and decision a reality.
69. The positive and timely initiabives of #the Govzmmerit of the Soviet Union, of lthe Federal Republic of
Germany and other direct participants on both sides
were instrumental ia opening lthe way for these agfe+
ments. Let us also be aware and appreoiative of all
those untiring and imaginative
efforts of all thcsa

63. The Soviet Union is pursuing a Icon&tent and
purposeful policy designed to bring ab’out d&ente and
the strengthening of peace and the s~ectity ‘of peoples,
with #the support of and in co-operatioa with al’1
States of the sol&list colmmunity and ‘all peace-lloving
coun,tries ,of the world. The process of normalization of
relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and
the German Democratic Republic and between the
F&era1 Republic of Germany and the Pmolish People’s
Republic, the Czecholslovak Socialist Republic and
olther social& States, the admission of the two German
States to the United Nations, the construotive and
flomishing co-operation between the Soviet Union and
France, the ~measnres for the development and strengthening of good-neighbourly relations between the USSR
and Japan, lthe mutual rmd.erstandinlg reached with the
Government of the United States of America on a
number of very important questioas of international
politics and (the present visit to the United States of
L. I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Co~mmudst Party #of the Soviet Union,
and the further development and strengthening of
relations of friendship anld co-operation b1etweer-r,the
USSR and India and other countries of Asia and with
the coantries of Africa and Latin America mareall vital
links in ,the noble efforts of our people, Party and
Government to achieve &i&e,
the strengthening of
security, the renuaoiation of the us’e of force in internati’onal relations and #theestablishmenjt of lasting peace
on earth.
64. In this Iconnexion it is appropriate to quote from
L. I. Brezhnev% speech at the dirmer which he gave
yesmrday in the Soviet Embassy in Washington in
honour of President Richard Nixon. Mr. Kunt Wald.
heim, ,th.e Secretary-General of the United Nations,
was also preslent. Mr. Brezhnev said:
“I shall not be mistaken if I say that the spirit
of our talks and the basic direction of our j&t
efEorts have been determined by aecognition of one
8

statesmIen, Governments and political forces which,
directly ‘cr indirectly, with the support anld a&e urging
of all the peoples of Europe, have Icontributed to that.
70. We have always held the view that the recognition
of realities on the soil of Germany #and in post-war
Europe .generally, far from freezing ithem, lis the only
way to bridge the gaps and barriers ,of ‘divisiolns. Current
developmen,ts, acceleralted substantive progress in relations bletween European ~cotmtries across formerly forbidding ob#sta,olesof all kinds, and th’e progress made
trowards the European Security Conference to be held
shortly, prove in our opinion (that this is so. The
reco,gnitlion of realities, mutual accom~mnodation, and
not tryi’ng to gain on&dad
advantages at the expenise
of thle other side, tthe recognition anld stresslining of
com~mon inter&s and not blocs or any other rivalries
anid differences have again proved to be by far the best
method of arriving et generally benefioid and aloce.ptable solutions.
71. We have staunchly maintained Ithat active coexistence through the d~evelopment of free exchanges of all
ki.nds, and noit just ,the absence ‘of wear,not jest passively
coexisting side by side, is precisely what ,the i’mcrests
of European and world peace and ,secusity require in
our day and age. Fme and sovereign relations between
all States, based on equality, inldependence, respeot for
territorial
integrity aad non-int,e~rfe~ence b internal
affaiss, without the threat or use ‘of fsorlce,irrespeotive
of differences or :similarities in thleir sol&l systems,
remaia the only realisti~c and po;sisible basis of promssive ,co-operation in Europe and elsewhere.
72. In hopmg and wosrking for ,a major advance along
that road gut the European Security Conference-m
which the aforementiolned agreements between ,the two
German
St&s and ‘other cour&ies coastitulte an
indispensabble enab’&ing st’ep-we ape mi,ndful of the
utmost need thak the favourable idevelopments on the
continent should not result in ~mak~ingEurope introvert,
self-oeratmd an,d seIfish. Europe too-each and every
European State-lives
in a “world-village” where, as
we have allready had the occasion to say, no ‘one can
fare well because someone else fares badly. Europe and
the world shoul’d know, from abaadant and painful
ex,perience, that d&e&e has to be everybody% if anyone
is to be safe, that peaceful Europe cannot long endure
wi(th the flames of war still at its doorstep
73. We are co&d&,
and itherefore gratified, in our
knowled.ge that the clearing of the way for tie full and
equal conmibutilon of the Federal Republic of Germany
and of Itie German Democrati’c Republlic to allEuropean and universal co-operation among nations,
their admission to the United Nations, will enhance
the individual and collective capabilities of both German
States! as well as of Europe as a whole, towards
investmg their fug1 share in promoting the peace,
security and progress of all the members of the international community, on all’ continents. The pursuance
of these goals, ‘as well as of ,the o&r basic ,objectives
of our Org:ganization, such ‘as the lib-eration *of the world
from the anachronistic and intolerable evils of colonialism, raoism, and others, will be, we are hopeful and
confident, sltrengthened by the gmater contribtution that
tie two German States, which have solemnly declared
their accepta.nce of the living obligations contained in
and under the Charter anld their w$lingness to carry

#them out, are to make as Members of the United
Natiom.
74. The entry of the two German States, tith their
greatly talented people, endowed with resources in all
field,s of human endeavour, is a remarkable achievement instilling new strength into lthe United Nations,
That is why this is a #truly impontant page in lthe life
and progresls of ‘our Grganization, a fulrtber long stq
towmds its full univeisaliity. Despbte ,a&1the Cassandras
who, for whatever reasons, try to belit& <titheU~nited
Nations ok preddot the sepetition of the sad experiences
of a former era, our world *Organization is growing
stronger as its univers&ty is more Icomplete. Indeed,
we have to note w&h profoasid satisfatiion that ours
is aa arganizaticm which ‘everybody wants to get into,
not oat of, which is a sure sign of strength and health.
And ,&at IS the reason why we ado nolt congratulate the
German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic
of Germany only oa the C!o~un&s de&ion today, but
con.gratdate ourselv~es and our Organization as well.
75. In concluding, let me stress that we welcome with
particular pleasure the ~unanimous adoption of the
Council’s reso,lution, because of the friendly and developing nelations that my country has with both the
Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic,
relations that have been greatly
strengtheneld by the exchanges of visits between
President Tito, anld his counterparts in both German
States. Those ,relations have been further promoted
by the recem official visit to Yugoslavia of Chancellor
Brandt, whose peace-making efforts have so deservedly
earneNd him the Nolbcl Prize, and by the oi%cial vislit
of OLW Prime Minister, Dzemal Bijeldric, to the German
Democratic Republic. We are looking forward very
much Ito the approaching date of the General Assembly’s final1 de~cisioa anld to our owoperetion with the
two new Memblees {of the United Nations.
76. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria)
(interpretation
from French) : The Security Council has just unanimously approved the dcraft resolution submitted !to us
by the Comm&tee ,on the A,d~misdon of New Members.
Indec’d, that unanimity expressed by members of the
Cou,nc+l is the most eloquent proof Ithat Iour decision
is not only of rare importance but also in keeping with
a wish we have all long had.
77. The Council has been asked to consider the applications for admission presented by two States whose
absence had bleen Felt as a grav,e anomaly. The letters
sent by the Foreign Ministers of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to the Secretary-General were therefore more
than a mere formality. The appli,cations for admission
of the ltwo German States are in fact the visible and
spectacular sign of a process of de’tente and normalization which has steadily gained ground in Europe,
particularly
in mid.dle Europe. Th,e stages in that
process of d&elate, the consequences of wh3ch have
benlefited the whde of Europe, are well k,nown and
I think it unnecessary to remind the members of the
Council of them.
78. The whole world will Irecall, however, lthe profound
and favourable response to the agreements conclud,ed
three years ago by <the Federal Republic of Germany
on the one hand and with the Union of Soviet Socialist

Republics
and Poland
on tie &her, aareernents
fo&iow,ed by a certain number of treaties bs&een the
German States which led ~to the signing and ratification
of lthe fundamental Treaty (between the Fedural Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic
-a convention which cme into force very recently.

the consequences of a peacefd development in
Europe?“3
83. That wiJi m the part of Europe not ho turn
inwards, to make a contribution to world de’tente, is
being manife.sted today by ithe applications for admission of the Federal Republic Iof Germany and the
German Democratic Republic, two States which are
ulnderta.king in this way henceforth Q share th’e re.sponsibility &umbent
on Membler St&es of the Unit&
Narcions to maintain internattioaal peace aand security.
Theix devotion to the principles of the United Nation6
Cha&er has ~atieady been manifested impres,sivlely and
profoundly in the poioios of peaceful co-operation
which they have foGmlulated towards ,each ,other.

79. That work of peace and recom%ialtlion is wo&hiJy
asso’ciated with that men,tioned this morning, in very
impressive terms, by the representative of France, the
purpose of which was the goconciliation of the German
people with Ithe people of We,stern Europe, primarily
with the people of France.
80. Many speakem have II?ighitly stiessed the pisofomd
significance of the new agraements, particularly those
between the Federal Republic of G’ermany and the
German Democratic RepubEc, agreementa which form
the basis for the normalizatioa
not only of their bdathms bl&ween th,emseIve:s but also of their rehtiions
b’etwaen Eastern anld W,esltern Europe. The importance
of these agreements in themselves, the us&lness of
these juridical instruments, is, however, 1argdy surpasseId by the new spitit of truslt and co-oparatimon which
has been established in a part of Europe so often
war-torn and crisis-ridden. In expressing our lgratification at this new spirit, we sh’oiulld like to pay tiibute
to $&hes’tntas:men wh’o are responsible for this profound
change in the political clirnti~e of Europe.

84. I;n rsupponting their appUcat,ions for admission
we shoald like to express our conviction and certainty
that #they will, as f&y fledged Memblers of the United
Nations, make a valuable ‘and necessary contribution to
the work lof the Organization. Thtir membemhip of the
United Nattions will coatitutie not only a considerable
strengthening of tour Organizaticm, but al.so a ,de&ive
step towards its universality.
85. When the time comes, my country will of course
b’e expresesshgthrough a moire authorised spokesmm
all its feelings with regard tie the admission of fhese
two new Members, and our great sa&falction oln t&s
his,tolri’c occasion.
86. In greetilng the two future MembleTs we should
like 40 bid welcome to two European countries ti,nked
to our own ~coun&y, Austria, by Ithe history of our
continent and by a common cultural and Linguistic
heritage. The co-operattion which will be established
between us in the United Nations will once again be
symbolic of the new good-neighbourly
relations establishled b’etween Aus’tria, ton tie lone hand, and the
Federal Republic of Germany and the German Demmocratic Republic, on the other. The relations which
have &eady existe.d for more than 20 years between
Austria and the Federal Republic of Germany and to
whi,ch are now added the recentiydestablished Telatiofis
with the German Democr,tiic Republic, are based on
mutual respect fos i,nependence and sovereistlrcy.

81. I would be straying outiide the framework of
this bri,ef statement if I were to enumerate all ithe
efforts which have been mad’e and were I to congratulate individutiy
all those who contributed Ito the
success of that task. However, in awarding the Nobel
Peace P&e to the Chance&r of the Federal Republic
of Germany, Mr. WiJly Bran&, the international community intended thereby Ito pay singular tribute to a
man whose contiribu,tion to the work of peace in
Centratl Europe was ,of thre highest impo~&an~oc. This
Nobel Peace Prize of 1971 reminlds us of ithat of 1926
which was awcwcled, i,n recognition ‘of their effo& at
recon’oiliation bletween the German people and their
enemies in the First World War, to A&tide Briand and
Gustav Stresemann.

87. It is on that barsis that we ‘see the future of our
il’elations. It is in this European and world spirif, a
spirit ,of firm devotion to tie prinoi:ples of th’e United
Nations, that we take pleasure in noting ifhe wa%m
wolcomle given by the Council this morning to’ the
Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Re@ic.
88. Sir Laurence McINTYRE
(Austrralia) : The
Council has had befme it tolday the oepoti of its
Clolmmittee on the Adm&sion of New Members, which
has recommended to the Council that k &opt a resolution recommending in tipn to the General Assembly
that the G&man Demo,cratic R,epublic and the Federal
Republrc ‘of Germ.any be admitted rto membership of
th#e United’ Nations. In lthe course of ithe Committee’s
oonsideratioh of the applications folr memb,ership subm’ilt.ted by b,oth Governm!ennlts, <my ddegaltion #saidthat it
had eximii&d
them carefully and was satisfied that
b’otth coun&ies Were eminenfily qualified for membership

Si. 1.n stressing the relaxation of tension which haa
so felicitously come about in Europe and which marks
present relations between European States-whose
representative will be meleting in a few days in I%sinki for the European Conference on Security and
Coqeratioa-we
shouild like to expre.ss the hope that
ithe peace which has f&&y been won by ELKO~
will
benefit other continents, and I should like, in this
context, to quote what the Federal Minitieir of Foreign
Affairs of’ Austria; Mr. Kirahschlaeger, said to the
General. Assembly on’5 October 1972:
..,
“ . I fully realize that the solulbion~ of the problems ‘existing in Eurube woulfd sot by &~~lf eliminate
tension, warf(are and ~jnsti~ce in b&her par@ of the
wodd. It may, howsever, .be justified .to %sume that
a solution of Eufopean pocobllems in the ,spiti of the
United Nations Charter w@d not fail 40 have its
1 dinpact dn other con&e&
%o. The whole world
,’ has suffered ill $he course of this, century fain the
.. consequ&nc& pf two ti$ars which spread from Europe.
‘, Why, then, should tlii whole world not bentif% from

d Ibid., 265&i

10

meeting, para. 58.

fail to help relieve international
teausioxu everywhere,
and especially in Europe itself-which, I may say, would
b’e bsound to give roassluranee and hope to ;the people
of Australia, with llheilr reoofiection of all the AustiaSian
lives lolst on Europlean batiefieIds twice in ,this century
in the cause of freedom and human dignity.
95. In our deep satisfaction over the great change
that has taken plsoe in relations between lthe two
applicants-for
so long ,thought of as irreconcilablewe do not of course assum[e that alJ problems between
them have been solved; nor should we take it for
granted that the framework of the Irelationship between
them will necessarily remain static. We node, for example, the view of the Government of the Federal Republic
of Germa’ny that me terms o’f its Treaty with the
GemIan Democratic Rep~dAic
do not con&t
with (the
political aim of the F’ederal Riepubolic to work for a
state lof pesoe in Europe in which the German n&ion
will regtin its unity through free se&determination.
96. We can be fully justified in believing that (the
two States of Germany, by their Treaty of December
1972, and now by their preparatio~iom ~to enter the
United Nations ,and play their full part in its work,
have taken a long step towards that dkterzte which
p.eoples everywhere have longed folr-always with hope,
so,medmes with a sense of frustration.
97. Of all those Ion both sides who have worked long
an’d patiently to improve relations between the Federal
Republic and the D’emocratic Republic and who merit
our gratitude, nonle cam tdesXerve greater credit and
higher praise than the Chance& of ithe Federal Republic, Herr Bran’dt, for thhe unsurpas~sed scon&ibution he
has made to the cause of peace and uncIeTsta.nding,
noit oaily b’etwe1e.nthe C&man States but throughout
the whole of Europe.
98. Let me end by repeating that it has ‘given ,rny
delegation great satisfaction :to endorse our Committee’s
recommendation ,that lthe G’erman Demooratic Republic
and the Federal Republic of Germany be admi’tted to
membtiship
of the Unibed Nations; and we commend
that reco~mmendatioa whole-heartedly to the next session
of th’e General Assambly.
99. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia) : It is with great
pleasuxe thlat my delegtion has supported Nthse,applications of the Ger’man Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Geillmany for ,membership in lthe
United Nations. We look forward to welcoming the
delegations of those ‘two co.un&ies ho .the forthcoming
session of the General kss’embly. My delegation is
convinced that bolth Germanys will contribute positively,
to the efforts of the United NationIs to achi#eve i& aims
an’d purpases.
100. The ,deoision ‘of the Secuti~ty Council to recommend to the General Assembly that rchetwo Germanys
be admitted to membership of the United Nations is of
historic importance to the Uni&ed Nations and 40 the
world. That event has bleen made possible as a co+
sequence of various developments iln the world, among
which we no& in particular the atmosphere of dc’tente,
the ‘evolution of mutual accommodation and the development of m’ore cordial reIations ‘bemeen East,
and West.
101. *The, relaxation of ,,$-I$~
,l~?s. don?,, ,much tu,
dispel ‘the atiosph&e
of divtrust ‘that has kept the ,&Yo.

and were determined to f&i1 their obhgations #under
‘the Charber in accordance with their joint afhrmation
in the Tmaty that came into force yesterday. It has
now given <us great satisfaction to support the Co’mmisttee’s unanimous recommendation,
and I join with
my coIlleagues in exp~$ng
(the msmoere hope ithat it
W8 he overwhelmingly
accepted by ‘the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
89. Let me ‘say ithat Australia greatly values the
close
and frisendly relations that it has enjoyed with
tie Federal Republic of G’ermany in receti years. We
are confident that a wcarm and co-operative association
b’etween our two ‘countries as feilow Members of the
United Nations wi’l!l serve only to consolidate and
further strengthen those relations.
90. As to the German Democratic Republic, I should
like to recall that one ‘of the first acts of ,tl-re Australian
Governmlent which tiook office last December was to
enter intio dipl~olmatic rdatio’ns with its Government.
In the subsequent joinIt communiquC it was stated that
in reaching their decision to eotab&h diplomatic relations, bo;th Governments were prompted by a desire
to pro’mote friendly relations to the mutud advantage
of both countries; and my Govermnent announced last
week the &sign&on
of Australia% first Ambassador to
the German Demo~cratic Republic.
91. What we have dofne totday represents the first
step towards what can indeed only be described as a
historic decision by the United Nations. The second and
find step has to ble taken by the General Assembly,
and we can lolok forw,ard to it with co#nfidenoe as well
as hope. Even so, we must wait for *that final decision
beforte we can extend in full measure the welcome
that ,th,e ‘occasion’ will Call for; and my #delegation, as a
member of &is Council, which has ,ththe‘duty under
the Charter of examining and endoltlsing the qualifications of new apph~cants for memb,ership, will expeot to
j,oin whole-heartedly in that welcome,
92. In the meantime, let mc oIllly say again that a
historic decision is in the making, a ld,ecision which is
baound to afE&ot signlificantly and beneficially the whole
texture of the United Nations, its operations and its
influ~ence.
93. For the United Nations, aidmission of the two
Germanys would represent a giant stride towards
universality of’ membership, which all of us have held
as an ideal, but which we have arot always bjeen able
to apply in practice. Here we have the prospect of
Urnbed Nations memblership for two States, with. a
total population of some 77 million people, both dedicated, under the terms of their Treaty of 21 December 1972, to the purposes and ptincipl,es ~embo~died in
the Charter and to the settlement of their disputes by
peaceful means, without reslort to the threat or use
of foroe. It must be obvious that in &ma of population
and also of rthe energy, creati&y and versatile talents
of th)e German people, the full participatim
of the
two German States in tie aotivities of the United
Nations ,coul#d represent a substantial ,atccretion of its
strength and influence throughout
the intermutional
tpnm.lity.
94! Th,e very fact of attaiament of membershi? of
&e Uni~ted Nations by b&h Germanys coul’d scarcely
.l

Germanvs f,rom membership of the United Nations for
such a long time. The fact ihat they were oot Members
of the United Nations has never prevented Indonesia
fro,m #developing friiendly relations and cloee economic
co-operation with the two German States. Indonesia
has since the ‘fifties established diplomatic relations
witi the Federal Republic of G,ermany and co(nsular
rtilatioas with thse German Dremocratic Republic which
have reoendy been <elevated to the diplomatic level.
We therefom whole-heartedly wdoome the opportunity
to continue those friendly relations and close co-operation now also within lthe framework of the United
Na.tions.
102. The hopes for peace of the peoples of Eulroropein
parti,cular, an.d of t&e world as a whole, will be greatly
strengthened by ithe accession of #the two Ger,man
Stabes to our world Organizatioa. Furtherm’ore, their
accession means a notewo&hy advance towards nealization lof the princi,ple of universality which my delegation
regards as fundamentbal to the search for bternational
peace and understanding.
103. The in&ernatioaal community has come more md
mo,re to support the vilew Ithat catch of i,ts Members
without exception should ‘shoulder a portion of the
responsibility f,or the fate of humanity anld that in
o,rder to discharge that grave responsibility leach and
every nation ,must be allowed to play its appropriate
role in the world Orgarrization. We shoul’d also not
overlook the importance of the significant assistance
b’oth German States have given to the ~eoonomi~cdevelopment of many devdopinlg countries. My #delegation
hopes thjat their adtmission to the world Organization
will furth’er stremgthen the ‘efforts for the auccess,ful
achievem’ent of the objlectives and goals of the Second
Development Decade.
104. We live ,in ,an ‘era lof universal interdependence.
It is an era ,in which, if I may quote from Ithe. inaugural
a,ddress of Mr. Adam Malik, Foreign Minister ,of Iadonesia, as President of the twenty-sixth session of the
Eenerd Assembly, ‘(the Idiversity of nations is set in
the essential unity of mankind”.4 Such an understanding
of the present wodd order requires us $0 forge an
Organization whose membership enoolmpassas all the
nations of the world, including the divided nations,
without prejuldSce as ito political ideology or social
system.
105. The admission of ithe two German States to <the
United Nations will tset a preoedent for #other divided
cotmtries whenever they wish and agree to undertake
a si’milar step.
106. Mr, HUANG
(China) (tronslu2ed from Chinese) : The German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany appli,ed for membership
i,n the United Nations on 12 and 13 June 1973 respectively. Th’e Chhese ,delegation is ‘of Ime opinion that,
in accordance with th’e rel’evati prov&ns of Ithle United
Nations Charter, both the German Democratic Republic
am(dthe Federal Republilc of Germany are qualified for
m,embership in the Unibed Nationis, ,and we therefore
support their application and agree (that the Security
Counjcil shoul,d recommend to the General Assembly
4 Ibid.,

Twenty-sixth Session,

ing, para. 64.

the ad,mission of the German Demooratic RepubKc and
the Fed’eral Republic of Germany to membership in the
United Nations. Zt is ithe hope of the Chinese delegation
that upon the approval of the ab,ove-mentioned applications by th’e General Ass#embly ith’e German D,emoloratic
Repubhc and I&e Federal Repubhc of Germany will
make their due contributions to th’e realizatioa of the
purposes alnd prbciplles ‘of the United Nations Charter,
107. I. After
,the Second _.World War, for reasons known
to a& tiermany was ,divided into ‘tw’o States. Nearly
28 pears have ‘elapsed ,since the ,end of tie Second
Woxld War, but tie peace tireaty with Germany has
not yet belen colncluded and the two German States are
still living under abnlormad oolnditioins. We maintain
that a j,ust ,anld reasonable se’etiem~ent (of the German
question should be achieved at an early date cm condition that the interests and w+sh,eslof the people of
th,e two German Sltates shodd ble respected and that the
affairs ,of th’e German people should be settled by
the German people themslelves through consultations.
108. The Chinese people have long had friendly
relations wi,th the Gelrman pco’ple, China has established
diplomatic relations with both the German Democratic
Republic aald the Federal Republic of Germany. China
is ready to sd8evelop its rela~tions ,fufunther with the
German Demo,crati,c Republi$c and th.e Fedlerd Republic
of Germany 0.n thle basis ,of ;th#e Five Principlea of
Peaceful Coexistence. Wle bldieve that with th(e further
development <of ‘our State Irelatiloas an(d people’s contacts wilth tbe German Dlem!ocratic Republic anId the
F&ral
Republic of Germany, the friendship between
the Chin’ese aeopb and the Gerunan pleoplle will certainly
Eurth8erdevel’op and grow atronge~r.
109. Mr. ABDULLA
(Sutdan): It is with pax%icular
pleasure that the Sudan delegation as,sociates itself with
the resolution the Ccnmcf has iust adopted by consensus
recommending to the General Assembly imat the German
Denmcretic Republic aed th,e Fedferal Republic of
Germany be aldmibted tie membfeaslrip i,n the United
Nations.
110. My delegation finds itself in the happy position
of havmg enjoyed cordial relations with each of &em
for (some years. In the case of Ithe Federal Republic of
Germany, dipl’olmatio, aconomic and cultural relations
date back to the trme of the independlence of the
Su’dan in 1956. It is gratifying that thes,e relations
con&me to grow and develop in a (spirit of mutual
confidlence and undersbalnding, Similarly, bmy coumry
enjoyed commercial and cultural relations with the
German Democratic Republic for some itime, and they
ultimately
ldlevdoped into a fu~ll-fledged IdipIomatic
relationship.
111. My delegation will ~fi~erefore look forward to
refle’cting that r&tionship
in closer and fuller co-operation with the delegations ,of those Itwo counes
~ilthin
the United Nations in ;the very nlear future.
112. My delegation is also pleased tiat *the reasons
which made it impossible for Ifiose count&s Co become
Members of lthe United Nations have been removed,
It is, however, quite opportuoe ,and appropnlabe to
thei,r Isbrabegic positions in Central Europe that they
jain the international community
at a lti’rne when athe
movement for p&aoe and co-operat&t
is in process in

Plenary Meetings, 1934th meet-

12

obligations. Since it was )the ~generrailwish of the Cowoil
to refer the applications to the Cotmmittee cm admissims
before tcakina a final decision, we accepted that consensu~, &h&gh
we would have been prepared and
ready for ,the Council to tab a bde.oision sbraightaway
ain the applicatio.ns yesberday.
12 1. The Government of India has attempted to make
the rqwe,w&at,ion at ithe Uniti
Nabi~ns rno= aazd mno~e
unims&
Admission to Itie United N&QJX of the two
G~erxn~ States with a population 0.f neaa;ly 78 million
people marks aa inqmntarnt step towards a more
eff&ive world Organizatioa. We hope, ;therefore, that
wha thte Council takes iup ,the que&ion of admksion
of othe(r Stab, it will ldenmstrste lthe same sense of
urgency and ‘give the same degree of ensoarapmat
to milJioas of pjeople who afre sltill outside but who wish
ufrgentiy and &mo+nstrably to dive in peace and prospcrtiy md in oo-operation with the resit of thtir f&lowbeings in the world.
122. Several speakers blefore ,rntehave emphasized how
the present applications of the two Gapman States calme
about as a r&u&t of the d&ente in mpe
and dactibti,
do&less btiefly, the steps leading to such a de’teltte.
Weew&come ,&ose devdopmants and co&me to’ b,elieve
that European securilty is not only vital in itself but
oontribwttzs in a large measure b in&rnatioaal
peace
and s’ecutity. We furthzr b&eve that a very ‘large
mlrnber of the newly indepen;dent cou&ies, particularly
h Asia and Africa, by hee@ng Iout of the old pdicy of
confrontation and by EojJlowing (the path of non-al&nmsnt, did help the procas oP d&enle not only in Europe
but dslewhe’re ia the world ‘~1swell. With lthis added
strength of success, it is oulr h.ope that it ~81 cetitiy
be ourr endeavow to mahe Ithe policy of non-alignment
work towards greruter goals of peace and secutity
throughout the wo& and to sjttive tow~azds a world
not torn by conflioti.ng economic infierests, by hegemony
and spheres of hflu%nence,by a balaaoe of terror and
power, but towards a world where we can alJ live and
work tog&her as goNodneighbours and share the achievemen& of mankind im a jnslt, honourable and friendly
m~anine~r.
123. In ithis task the Geaman Demolor&c
Republlic
and ,the Federal Republic of Germany have a&ready
made icmportanlt contributiaas
bloti b%aterally and
mziltilatera~ly. Their admission to rthe United Nations
would! Y)D the one hand, give fomlbal recognirtioa of
their lmpo@tant oonitributloa aad, on the other hand,
enswe that the kes~oillil;Ces,vigour and wisdom, as well
as ;the rich historical and oultural traditions of these
two great countries, woiuld support, sustain and coordinate losur c&e.ctnve ,effomrtlsin the years to come,
124. W&h a ,population of 17 mi&n
people and an
area of 41,635 square m&s, the Ge;rman Democratic
Republic is totday one jolf &he leading tidustriria;l nations
of Europa. It has wo&ed hard for frienldly !r&ttions
with o&or oouatri~es and has erstab&hed diploma,&
relations with 84 States in all parts of the world.
The German Dlcmocratic Republic is ‘a membear of
several s~peciarlizlsd agencies and other international
organizations and i’t is expected to join the International
Ato#m,ic F!u~~rgy Agency sho,tiy.
125. Friendly ties betwem the Gserman Democratic
Republic aaud India have grown ~stea&ily. P ds now one

Europe. The energy and dynamism ,of each of t&m
will no Idoubt teave *their marks in that movemsnt.
113. While we join ithe international
community
in
welcoming the movement for paawe and prolsperily in
the nonthem hemisphere, we sho’ti con&antly remind
ours&es that peace and prosperity can be meaningful
on!ly in its universal application. Th,e more ,un.ivelrsiaI
the movement becomes the more appreciation
and
support it merits in .the third world.
114. In Africa and in the Arab world in particular,
where the new candidates entertain or sue likely to
elntertati
good relationIs with the coa&ries of rcbose
Iregions, hope will htinge on the role and contrib~ution
of the two countrias towards inbrnational
peace and
s’eciurity in ithosre parts. For nowhere in the world is
peace mcM?ethneartened (than in the Middle East, where
Zionism occupies and oppresses, md i’n sou~them Africa,
where racism, apartheid and c&n&is,m
domlnati and
explo& in the Portugnes~e-occupied &&odes,
in Zimbabwe, in Namibia anid in South Africa.
115.
We fare (confident that the two new candidates
can play a polsitive role in proportion ibo Itheir great
piolitical, economic and mo& capaci,ties and !t~~~~sces,
whether in tie Middle East, in Southern Aftica, or
eIsewh,elre, t,owards the promotion of pacre and the
advancement of mankind.
116.
Once more my delegation exbenb a warm
welcome to the German D.emooratic Republic and to
tile F&era1 R’epublic of Germany, md to the in,&ernatioaai comrmmity.
117. Finally, Mr. President, you dleseave our profound
appreciation
aad congratulations
for the skilfd and
&&catted manner in which you have guided the Comd
durring all &e various stages of these ~two applications
for memblership, to this su~coastsfuu8
and happy con&sion.
118. The PRESIDENT
(translated
from Russian) :
I thank the representative d tie Sudan fmor the kind
words he ad!dlEssed to ,me.
119. Mr. SEN (India) : The Security Co,uncil melerting
today to appro’ve the applicatio,ns from the G:erman
Democratic
Republic and tie Federal Republic
of
ciermany for admis&n tie membership ‘of the United
Nations is of unusual significan$ce. The Utited Nations,
which wals formled lo pcl’event ‘%uccaedinlg generations
iTr0.m the scourge of war, which twice in our lif&me
has brought untold sorrow to mankitnd”, has ta&n
today the first Formal and civilised sztep Do remove the
diff,erenoe bletween the victors and ,the vcanquished.
I say “civilize~d” belcause we cannot and must not Bive
in Ithe past, but move forwud BO build together a
bletter fl&ure. This inldoeld Is the spi!rit of our Charter.
120. ILt ghm
us padcular phx~sure thmfolre SKI find
that the Committee on admbasions has reco~mlrmejnded
speedily and unanimously the aooeptance of both the
appliiahms,
that lthe simultaneous declarations by the
Gove~rnm~tis of Francle, the Soviet Union, the United
Kingdom and tithe United States of America have underw&te;n ;the appl.k&nm IanId that the LWO German Stabs
have solennnly ~declamd their willimgtlieas to canry out
thle &digatiotx contained in the Charter. In approving
tie applicat:ions, the Secua?ity Counci~l has judged Ithat
both the Sftates are able and willing to carry out these
13

of India’s importa& trradtig pavtmrs and ,mr co-opera&on in trade, industq, scientic md $echndogical
-exchanges ,shows promising possiblilities. The recent
estabhshment of d!iplomatic ~ela&ns was Mloweid
by
‘a visit this year Iof our Foreign Minister &I that country.
In la joint statement issued at the end of &is vi&t, they
advocated, among ,other ,th.ings, the memb~ership of
the German Demooratic Republic an’d ‘the Federail
Republic of Germany rto thle United Nations in the very
near future. Booth sides called for the admission without
further delay of ‘the Peo@e’ls Republic of Bangladesh
to the United Nations. We are therefore particularly
glad to sari-y lout the terms of the j’oint statement in
.so far as the admission of ,the German Democra&ic
Republic ,and .the Federal Republic of aermany is
concerned and sh&d soon have the pleasure of
~welcoming, both the German States in #the fortbooming
,s~~s,sionof ‘the Assembly as full Membens of the world
Organization. We lootk forward to working with them
in the fullest co-operat+on. We are co&dent &at as
,Members of the world Organiza$ion bolth the German
States will use ‘every opportunity for the maintenance
and th,e consodidation ,of world peaoe and for oollective
effoti for ,devd opment and progress.
1:26. The Federal Republic of Germany with a population of nealnly 62 miHion <anIdan (area of approximtiely
75,000 square miJes is a member of all the specialised
agemies land has baeen an observer member (of the
United Na)tioas since 1952. Its ~efie~ctiveparticipation
in these organizations is well known. As one of the
leading intdustrial and trading natmns of the world, the
Federal Republic of Germany has pursued a developmental policy which envisages promotion of .economic
,and social pro,gress in Ithe developibllg oountries in a
system of world-wide partnership. The total foreign aid
given by #the Federal Republic of Germany from 1952
to 1972 oomes to 56,600 mi&n
D.eutschmarks of
wh3ch 6,600 million Deatschmarks were given during
1971 allolne. The fmeign aid was 0.87 per cent of the
gross national produ’ct in 1971; Asia received 509.8
million Deutschmarks and Incdia 270 million Deutschmarks im 397 1, India’s ldevdo~pmental ,effonts have bsen
considerably fecilitakeld wilth the timely ~assistancefrom
thle F&ml
R’epubBc ,of Germany.

:So from both bilateral and multilateral points of view,
we are happy that the Federal Republic of Germany
will soon be joining ‘the Uni,ted Nations as a full Member and extend its co-operation in the cause of international peace and progress.
128. Ever since we achieved our own independence
we have steadily developed political and economic ties
with the two German States. Fur,ther, German scholars
artists, musicians and scientists have for several decade;
had special appeal to our own men and women of
intellect and sensitivity. For years now there has been
a profound cuhural interaction between the Indian
and German peoples. In welcoming the ChancelIor of
the Federal Republic of Germany in 1967, the Prime
Minister of India, Shrirnati Indira Gandhi, said:
“It would not be an exaggeration to say that no
European nation made a greater attempt to discover
and understand the ancient wisdom of India than
Germany did. The reason is obvious. Philosophical
inquiry is the fundamental basis of the genius of the
German people, which those famous last words of
Goethe: ‘Light more light’, sum up so completely,
Goethe’s sensitive spirit responded instinctively to
Sanskrit literature. It was the work of German
scholars, notably Max Mueller, that enabled us in
our ,turn to rediscover ourselves.”
129. The people of India have great admiration for
the people of the two Germ<an States, for the vitality,
perseverance and ability. The world has seen how since
the end of the war in 1945 they have been mainly responsible for the astounding recovery and the great
progress in comm,erce, industry and technology. With
their presence and participation in the United Nations
they can and will, we are sure, make most effective
contributions towards the great goals to which we are
all commi,tted through our Charter.
130.

Mr.

CUELLAR
(Peru) (ilzterMy country is most gratified
that the Security Council has given a favourabIe reception to ‘the requests for admission to *the United
Nations of the German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany and that it has decided
to recommend these to the General Assembly.
pretation

127. Indlia has maintained frien~dly ~-e&ions with the
German Fedleral Republic lever since the end of the
war and the fsuture offers promising prospects of further
growth anId co-operadon in m~any fields. At the end of
ou;r Foreign Minister’s visit to the Federal Republic
of G,ermany in May this year, a joint Istatement was
.issued. I rrhall qutie two sentences from that state
merit. The first is:

PEREZ

DE

from Spanish):

131. My delegation has no doubt that the forthcoming Assembly session will fully endorse the entry
of both countries to our Organization and believes that
it would be proper to extend to them our congratulations and our welcome at that time, but I cannot
refrain from stating now that Peru has supported by
its vote the entry of the German Democratic Republic
and the Federal Republic of Germany into the Organization, not only because it is aware that both fully
sa,tisfy the requirements laid down in the Charter but
also because their presence will make a valuable contribution to the attainment of the purposes and objectives of this Organization.
The entry of the two
German Republics would also be a ,tremendous step
towards that unshakable goal, which is to ensure that
the United Nations is the reflection of the international
community without exception.
132. We also wish to emphasize that this fact will
be evidence of the utmost significance and impact as

“The Indian side referred to the continuing support of the Indian Government for the Federal
Government’s peace efforts and indicated their interest in a further positive development in Europe,”
The second sentence I should like ,to quote is:
“In the bilateral talks it was noted that Indo-Federa1 Republic relations in the poli8tical, economic and
cultural fields had developed satisfactorily. The two
sides discussed possibilities of expanding their cooperation further on the basis of partnership already
existing in many fields.”
14

.to the increasing process of international
d&ente, in
which the firm political will and the wisdom of the
leaders of both German States have unquestionably
,.been decisive factors.
133. Lastly, we think that this is an appropriate
opportunity to point out that my country’s economic
relations with the German Democratic Republic have
.grown and developed advantageously in recent years
and that diplomatic relations have just been initiated
in most auspicious circumstances. Peru is sure that its
relationships of all kinds with the German Democratic
Republic, as is the case with the other countries of
Eastern Europe, will be characterized by close and
reciprocal collaboration and friendship.
134. We are also gratified to emphasize the excellent relationships of friendship and broad economic
co-operation that my country maintains and has maintained for more than 20 years with <the Federal
Republic of Germany. In the field of international cooperation, the presence of the Federal Republic of Germany has been a highly positive .elemcnt which has
had its impact not only in Peru and in Latin America
‘in general but also in all parts of the third world. Its
‘assistance to development has been characterized by
its fidelity to the principles and practices recommended
by the Organization.
135. The decision taken by the Security Council
and ‘that which we have no doubt will be adopted by
-the forthcoming session of ,the General Assembly will
‘inevitably have clearly beneficial effects for the United
Nations and the international community as a whole.
136. Mr. RIOS
(Panama)
(interpretation
from
$pcmish): My delegation has carefully considered the
requests for admission to membership of the United
Nations submitted by the German Democratic Re‘public and the Federal Republic of Germany. We have
no objections or arguments to raise against them. On
the contrary, we gave them our favourable and enthusiastic support this morning, certain that they will
properly complv with the requirements laid down in Article 4 of the Charter. We have before us documents S/
10949 and S/10945 which prove to us that the two
political entities quite clearly have fulfilled the formality required under rule 58 of <the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council
137. We are participants in and witnesses to a
decision which marks a high point in the life of the
United Nations.
138. The German nation, which is today divided
by different political and social systems, in the course
of its history has been a trail blazer in science and
technology. The German genius has been pre-eminent
in various areas of cultural activity. The German people is an example of devotion to work, discipline and
tenacity. Over a relatively short period of trme, on the
ruins left by a war waged without let or hindrance,
there were built two German States whose progress
and development today have reached amazing levels.
And in this context it is appropriate to point out for
the purposes of the work of the United Nations that
the economic prosperity and the industrial development achieved by these #two German States have been
reflected in the developing countries through a series

of programmes
of technical assistance and highly
diversified aid. Within the International
Development
Strategy and in the activities featured in the United
.Nations development decades, .the participation of the
two States with which we are dealing today has been
widely known and indeed outstanding. Quite logically, it
is to be expected that on their entry into the United
Nations we may witness a strengthening and a larger
contribution-,of
effort in these areas to which I have
just referred.
139. But while it is (true tbnut the entry of the two
German States into memb~ership of the L&bed Nations
is of greti impor-tarme for tie development plans and
programmes, it is ‘eqtually obvious that ~this faot creates
a series of political ramifications which are of even
greater magmtude. I would say that the approval of
these apphcations that we have given today is am event
of trrue practical significance in the attainment of a relaxation of tensions within the European Community.
It is undoubtedly one of the mast .significant st,eps
towards leaving aside once and for all the steriIe and
very often dangerous confrontations of the cold war.
Indeed, the G,ermans themselves take this to ‘inlean that
the Uniaid Nations is ope$ng the .door wide to them
to ienter into arrangements that will permilt of oloser
communiction
and (effective understmding for the settaement of ~diffenencerr and disagreemoms which lm the
past have had such sombre consequences. Perhaps, for
those samle very weighty reasons, we will soon see
comtmunications between the two Germanys normalizeld and Itie walls and regulations removed which heretof’ore have madIe the peaceful setilement of disputes
so difficult.
140. I should point out most emphatically that by
permitting entry ‘of the two German States into the
United Nations we are also paving ahe way for making
the proposted European Cor&rence on Secudty and
Co-operation
anld the sbengthening of international
seleurity more viable ‘anId enszlring Ithat it produces
posiQive results. This will uadoubtedlv have a bavourabIle i,mpact on rthle reduotioa of mili~tary forces and
the limitation oif strategic and other weapons.
141. I s6ould like to emphasise another equally dgn&ant factor: [the admission ‘of <the Federa;l Repub%c
of Germany anld the German Demooratic Reoublic to
mernb~einshin of the United Nations is specifically in accordance with the objective ,of utivers&y,
which has
uoasisteatly bleen Id’efmdmed with such zeal within this
Counicil.
142. Folr thle reasonis that I have given and on the
instructions of my Government. we have supported the
rersohtion in do~ouunent S/10957.
143. On b’ehalf SoCthe Gavernment ,amd ,peopIe of
Panama anId on mv own behalf, I w&come the plenipoaenbiaries Iof (the German States who are present here
and I exnresis my si,ncere hone thatt thle entry into the
United Nati8oo.s of tha ~count~i~esthey %represjentwill signifv a nos&ive step forward in the sielarch for peace
and n~o~sple&v for mankind. I request them .to convey
the exupession ‘of thewe sincere d,es$res ‘of Pan,ama to
their respective Governments and peoples.
144.. In conolusioln, I !shonlsd like on &is occasion to
offer loilllr sincere co-operation to the future ,delegations
15

o;E the Federal Republic of Germany larval the German
Dlemolcrartic Repnb&ic in everything ,$nsllt:rdabes to #the
tdcs and parp&s
of the U&ted Nations.
145. Mr. ODERO-JOWI
(Kenya): The approval by
con3eas~s of the draft !l?esO~urti~ concstig
;chie admission of the two Gmmaa States ~to membership of
the Uni&l Nation& ma&s lthe end d an era of rivalry
and lack of undastanding
charaateristic of tile negative
hangover of the plr&-S~eoond Wodd War era. The admission 104 ,the Gcrmaa Democmtic Republic and the
Federal Republk
of Germany to membership of the
Uni;ted Nations will opein thfe way to l&e achievement
of greaker intie033tiomtal W-operation in s&ing inter0ational prob4ems in consonance with the purposes and
prinlciples elf #the United Narticms Charter.
146. Anticipating
positive a&on by tie .&nerd Assembly, my d&g&on
w&~omes both countries to Ithe
United Nations famZy and cmgrat&tes
ti
for their
willingnes!s bo co-ogerate ti
the coliecitive wXi and
wisdom of humanity .im rthe pu!rsuit of peace laud order
and [tile promotion of the fundamental pdnciples of the
United Nations Chao%er.

we have minority racist and Facist rBgimes oppressing
and gtehally enslaving our pooplie, violating their human
and fun,damental righits, while at ,the same tiNme workig
in collusion With Portuguiase coloti&sm
40 frustrate
our people’s aspirations for freedom, hutman dignity
and hu’man pro,gress.
151. In welcoming the two new Members $0 the
family of the United Nations, and as we applaud this
event as a significant step cowards the achieve#m’ent of
universality of United Nations m,embersh,ip, we also
hope th’at this move towmds universality of membership
of ,the United N&ions will1 be matched by a determination to uphold the universality of ithe application of
the p&ciples
,and purposes of the Utited
Nations
Charter. We sirncorrdy hope tiat lthe Federal Republic
of Germany and the German Delmocrattic Republic will
join hands wi*th all foroes working ito &m.inate tithe ev&
of apcrrtheid in South Africa and lto bcring about the
restoration of the r&hits of the peioples o,f Namibia and
Southlern Rlmdesia and the giquicdatiou of Portuguae
coloniailism in Angola, Mozambique
a,nd Gu,inea
(Bissau).

147. Et is tie hope of #my delegation &at those counbrim s~bill plagued with titife and divldled by ideo;lolgies
and mutual hoetifity wild emulate the lexampl,e <of tie
twfo German Repubks.
We also h,opplet&at nations Pke
those of $&theMilddllle East which olre still s;o f,urions$y
at odds will Iliearn from tie two Bermam Republics lthe
effkacy 08 s~ebtting disputes ,and diffegenm by peaceful
means.
&oolks forward to the mlost fruit148. My &legation
ful and fratelrnti co-opmation
wirth tie delegations of
the German Deunacratic Rcepubli’c and tie Federal Repubtilc of Geumany *In ‘our oolmmon endaavour ~to give
effect to t&e purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter a& the various &ci,sions, resolutions
and declarations of rthis Oounci1 an’d rthte olther ‘organs,
agencies and b,ol&es w,ithin the Untied Na&i~on,s sy&m.
149. The admission $0 membe&$
#of tixe TJnw
Nations of the German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of German will give all our delegations the opportunity
to co-operate in accordance
wi’th the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations in order to work for a new
world order, progress for our peoples and international
peace and security.’ We are confident
that in this endeavour
‘the German Democratic
Republic and lthe Fade& Republic of Gfepmany will
make theiT ‘lomg-awaited ,po.siltive oonnltribnttions. My deSegatioa will co-opmtte
wi’th both their delegations
in harmony and in equity and with full respect for
thezir sovereignty and national id’en,tirty.
150. The admission of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to membership
of the United Nations will now bring the two Republics
face to face with some of.the burning issues with which
the United Nations is seized. As a representative of an
Afri,can coiunltry I cannot hesitate to point out that, in
olur judgement, the situation in southern Africa is olne
of the mo’st intractable and sedorus intepnatanal issues
that the Unibeld N&ions faces Cotday. In s,outhern Africa

152. Thle PRESIDENT
(translated from Rclssian):
There are no mote speakms on the list. The Security
Coancill has comple,bad i,ts ccmsid@ration of athe question
of the admission of new Members ito the United Nations
-thse German D,emo’cratilc Republi’c and ifhe Federal
Republic of Genmaay.

16

153. In accordance with the second paagraph of rule
60 of the provisional ties of procedure of #the Security Council, I request Mr. Kurt Waldheim, the Setret,a!ry-General, to forward to the General Assembly
the tex,t <of the resolution adopted today by the Security Council1 togethler w.ith the verbabim reoords of tie
Conacil’s meetings of 21 and 22 June.
154. I think that it is the genera!. opinion and hope
of ~IU members ‘09 &he Council tth& the General Assembly will take a favourable view of the Security
Co,ulncil recommendation concerning the admlission of
the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic lof Germany to ,memble&ip in the Unibad Nations and thti Jt will in *urn support these two major
European States in the mattes of tie adoption of a
positive decision on thelir aIdmission to thle United Nat.ions aa;d will Ith’elleby ensure their pa&ipation
in the
noble cause .of ,strengthening peace and international
security anfd developin,g co-o#peratIon blatween States
in the community of Stades Mambers #of the U&tod
Nations.
155. Befmolre adjourning th’e meeting I should like to
make ;the foldowiag ~~mouncecn~ent: at the #request of
Ambassador Bdero-Jowi, Paermanent Representtiive of
Kenya to the United Nations, *th,ePresideOnt of the Secu~ity Council intends to hold informal consultations in
the officie of (the Praide,ti
of the Security Council,
with all membms of she Council in coanexion with Ithe
ite,m otn ,the Cour&s
agenda relating bo consideration
of !thle siltu&i’oa i’n ithe MisddBe East. If ithere are no
othe’r r,equ&s ‘or .commenrbs, I sha8l take ilt that the
Council agrees w,ith #this proposal.
The meeting

rose at 1.25 pm.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
diporitaircs
du monde
Nations
Unies, Section

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: Uniled
Nations,
Sales Section,

UNIES

Nalions
Unier
sent en vente
dans
les librairies
et les agences
entier.
Informer-vous
qupr&s de votre librairie
ou adressez-vous
6:
des ventes, New York ou Genbve.

KAK

IlOIlYYMTb

M3AAHMFl

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPrAHM3A~MM

06bEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicaciones
de 10s Naciones
Unidas
erttrn
en todcrs partes
del mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero
Ventas,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Printed in U.S.A.

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

WAl.(Mfi

UNIDAS

en venta en librerior
y casas distribuidoras
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Secci6n

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in Other

currencies)

de

82226-August

1973-2,050
