S/PV.9006

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9006th meeting

Monday, 28 March 2022, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Barreau
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2022/172)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30148 (E)
*2230148*

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

concerned about the stability and the very existence of
their country.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2022/172)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s rules of procedure, I
invite the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/172, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council again on the situation in the Sudan.
Unfortunately, since the last briefing to the
Council in January (S/PV.8948), the situation in the
Sudan has not improved. The country has been without
a functioning Government since the coup d’état of
25 October 2021. Protests against the coup d’état and
the violent repression of such protests continue and,
as a result, in the absence of political agreement to
return to an accepted transitional path, the economic
situation, the humanitarian situation and the security
situation are deteriorating.
Time is not on the Sudan’s side. I speak to Council
members today with a sense of urgency, which is
also increasingly being felt by Sudanese stakeholders
2/19

28/03/2022

Let me begin with the economic developments.
On 7 March this year, the Central Bank announced the
floating of the currency. In the following three weeks,
the value of the Sudanese pound has fallen by 45 per
cent against the United States dollar. At the same time,
there have been dramatic price increases for, among
other things, bread, fuel, electricity, health care and
public transport. The Sudan also risks losing out on
billions in external support as disbursements from
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and other major donors have been paused and
will continue to be paused for so long as no functional
Government is in place.
No foreign investment is coming in and exports
have dwindled. Moreover, the Sudan is at risk of
missing critical World Bank and IMF deadlines for
international economic and financial support and the
realization of some $50 billion in debt relief, which the
Sudan was well on its path to receive after reaching the
heavily indebted poor countries decision point last June.
Notably, protests in Khartoum and other places,
while they are still generally political — that is,
anti-coup — are gradually attaining an additional
socioeconomic character, with more and louder slogans
denouncing rising bread prices and deteriorating
living conditions.
International humanitarian assistance has continued
and has never been paused. The number of Sudanese in
need is growing. The combined effects of the conflict,
economic crisis and poor harvests will likely double the
number of people facing acute hunger to approximately
18 million by the end of this year.
In the absence of a political solution to the crisis,
the security situation has also worsened across the
country. Crime and lawlessness are on the rise and
intercommunal conflict in Darfur has intensified. More
concretely, farmers have been dispossessed of their
land through violent attacks. Assets have been looted.
Villages have been burned. Women from all parts of
the country report deepening concerns about their
own safety, even in broad daylight. In the most recent
violence this month, at least 48 people were killed
and more than 12,000 were displaced in what is being
described as intercommunal conflict in Jebel Moon in
West Darfur. According to local reports, the conflict
there is also about control over gold resources.
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I have repeatedly urged the authorities to take the
necessary measures to help prevent further conflict.
We, the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), are supporting the
implementation of security arrangements in Darfur,
through the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee,
which UNITAMS chairs. The Committee indeed
contributes to stability. It has been able to address
some incidents among the signatories to the Juba Peace
Agreement. It has also recently been able to inspect
assembly areas of armed groups moving out of cities,
following a decree from General Al-Burhan earlier
this year.
The Permanent Ceasefire Committee is confronted
by exaggerated expectations, however, both from the
armed groups, in terms of the support we can give, and
from civilians. Clearly, the role and mandate of the
Committee are limited and remain distinct from the
protection of civilians. We have therefore welcomed
recent steps by the Government and the signatories
of the Juba Peace Agreement to begin the training
for and standing up of the joint security-keeping
force. A first batch of approximately 2,000 members
of the signatory armed groups and movements are
currently being trained by the Sudanese Armed Forces
as the kernel of this eventually 12,000-strong force.
Combined with local peacebuilding efforts, which
will need international support, those steps can help to
prevent or stop violence and strengthen the protection
of civilians. Let me just say here that I fully support
the request of the Government of the Sudan, which we
heard earlier, that measures to implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration for returning fighters
or for fighters who have to be dismissed from armed
groups should be supported internationally.
Demands for an end to military rule continue,
with frequent protests in Khartoum and elsewhere.
At the same time, protesters continued to be killed or
suffer serious injury from live ammunition. Since late
December, arrests have increasingly targeted protest
leaders, resistance committee members and political
leaders on criminal charges. Many have been denied
access to family or lawyers for weeks.
We welcome the invitation by the Sudanese
authorities to human rights expert Adama Dieng in
February and the access he was granted to high-profile
detainees. We hope that the authorities will continue to
engage with him.

S/PV.9006

It is of particular concern that women continue to
be targeted and subjected to violence and intimidation
by members of the security forces. As of 22 March, 16
women had reportedly been raped during protests in
Khartoum. Those cases have rightly triggered public
condemnation and mobilized groups across society.
In response to this pattern of sexual violence against
women, the Working Group on Sexual Violence — which
comprises the United Nations, local civil society
partners and the Government’s Unit for Combating
Violence against Women, under the Ministry of Social
Affairs — continues to meet regularly to coordinate and
strengthen responses to sexual violence. That included
a meeting with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict earlier this month. Government committees to
investigate allegations of violations have yet to produce
visible results.
More recently, there have also been disturbing
reports of increased tensions between and within the
various security forces. Some interlocutors expressed
concern that if a political solution is not found, the
Sudan could descend into conflict and divisions, as
seen in Libya, Yemen and elsewhere, in a region already
beset by instability.
Let me herewith move to our own UNITAMS good
offices function. Following the resignation of Prime
Minister Hamdok on 2 January, UNITAMS launched
intensive consultations on a political process for the
Sudan. I have previously briefed the Council about the
beginning of those consultations (see S/PV.8925), which
were held over a five-week period to hear Sudanese
views on a way out of the crisis and the restoration of
a credible democratic transition. The report on those
consultations, published on 28 February, provides a
summary of the opinions and areas of convergence and
divergence shared with the Mission in more than 100
consultation meetings with more than 800 participants
and more than 80 written submissions.
We heard from the military, political parties,
armed movements, civil society, women’s groups,
resistance committees, young people, Sufi leaders,
the business community, nomads, internally displaced
persons, the diaspora and other State and non-State
actors. Participants came from all parts of the Sudan
and one-third of the participants were women.
Encouragingly, consensus was visible on many issues,
including the need for an end to the violence, for a

22-301483/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

technocratic Government or a Government of experts
and for a transitional legislative council.
There was wide-reaching agreement on the
need to reconsider the role, size and membership
of the Sovereign Council and for the meaningful
representation of women in transitional institutions at
a minimum of 40 per cent in transitional institutions,
as well as for mechanisms to advance women’s rights.
There is overarching consensus on the need for
one unified professional army, for judicial entities
to be established and for the creation of conditions
for credible elections, as well as for an inclusive
constitutional process.
There was also significant agreement around
the need for robust engagement by the international
community in support of the political transition,
including the possibility of serving as guarantors for
any agreement.
All of that is remarkable in the light of the political
divisions that have paralysed the country in the past
couple of months. As one Sudanese commentator
remarked, the UNITAMS-led consultations have shown
the Sudanese that they agree on more substantial points
than they are aware of.
I am pleased to announce to the Council that
the United Nations, the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) have agreed to join efforts in supporting the
Sudan through the next phase of the political process,
drawing on our comparative advantages and respective
strengths. Our common intention is to facilitate an
inclusive Sudanese-owned and Sudanese-led political
process with the full and meaningful participation
of women, focusing on a limited number of urgent
priorities required to address the current crisis and
restore constitutional order.
Based on the outcome of our initial consultations, we
jointly consider those priorities to include, first, interim
constitutional arrangements, including the executive,
legislative and judicial organs of the transitions, as
well as their structure and functions; secondly, the
criteria and mechanisms to appoint a Prime Minister
and a cabinet; thirdly, a road map for the transitional
period and a Government programme focusing on an
achievable set of priority areas; including, fourthly, the
type, timing and necessary conditions for elections at
the end of that period.
4/19

28/03/2022

We expect to start an intensive phase of talks in
the next couple of weeks, fully recognizing that it will
be during the holy month of Ramadan. We anticipate
that stakeholders will participate in the month’s spirit
of peace and forgiveness. Over the past two weeks,
our three organizations — UNITAMS, the AU and
IGAD — have been working robustly to agree on a
common approach and lay the ground for that process,
including by holding individual and joint consultations
with some of the key stakeholders. Many of those
stakeholders have emphasized the urgency of the
situation and the need for a speedy yet sound resolution.
We share that concern and will undertake all efforts
together to advance that process.
While the focus of the next phase will be on
addressing immediate issues, a separate process will be
needed to discuss mid- and longer-term issues, including
a permanent constitution, levels of governance,
centre-periphery relations, equitable wealth-sharing,
and peace agreements and their implementation.
Hopefully such a longer-term process can subsequently
be led under the auspices of a domestically accepted
Prime Minister and Government.
The upcoming talks, however, have a narrow
and clearly defined aim: to return to constitutional
order and the transition, with an empowered civilianled Government to steer the country through the
transitional period and address the critical priorities. If
those political talks are to have a chance of succeeding,
favourable conditions and a conducive environment
must be created. That will entail, primarily, three
things: an end to violence and establishment of the right
to hold peaceful demonstrations; the release of political
detainees; and a firm commitment to phase out the
current emergency status in the country.
AU Special Envoy El Hacen Lebatt and I have
been conveying those messages both publicly and
also directly and privately to the military leadership
and all stakeholders. I have been informed over the
weekend that the military is now studying some
confidence-building measures that, if implemented,
could indeed enhance the environment for political
talks. We are coordinating closely with respected
Sudanese interlocutors, who are working diligently and
constructively to help foster consensus stakeholders
on a way forward. The international community has
also been playing a critical supportive role, both in
the consultations and now in our preparations for the
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

upcoming talks. I thank them and look forward to that
continued support.
In conclusion, let me say that the stakes are high.
The aspirations of Sudanese women and men for a
prosperous, civilian-led, democratic future are at risk.
Unless the current trajectory is corrected, the country
will head towards an economic and security collapse
and significant humanitarian suffering. All Sudanese
stakeholders will therefore need to be prepared to make
compromises in the interests of the people and for the
sake of stability and prosperity.
I am encouraged by the desire of the Sudanese to
reach agreement and the wide-ranging consensus that
has crystallized on several key principles during our
consultations. Our commitment and support to the
Sudanese people is unwavering. I would like to thank
the Council for its support for our endeavours at this
critical juncture. I also wish to thank my colleagues in
the African Union and IGAD, Special Envoy El Hacen
Lebatt and Special Envoy Ismail Wais for their fruitful
collaboration to date.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Perthes
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Perthes for his briefing
and commending his and his team’s continued efforts in
challenging circumstances.
Before focusing on the situation in the Sudan, I
wanted to note the concerns raised by the Government
of the Sudan in its letter to the Council of 22 March.
The United Kingdom fully supports the efforts of
the United Nations Integrated Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS) to monitor and report on
the situation in the Sudan, including in the area of
human rights, as mandated by the Council. For the
appropriate support to be provided by the Mission, it is
essential for UNITAMS to be able to provide a full and
balanced representation of the situation in the Sudan in
its reporting.
Since we last discussed the Sudan (see S/PV.8948),
there has been little cause for optimism. The military
seized power on 25 October, claiming that the civilianled Government was failing to deliver on key aspects of
the transition. In the five months since, the suffering of
ordinary Sudanese people has increased. They continue

S/PV.9006

to face violence, including, as we heard, sexual
violence; human rights abuses; economic hardship; and
humanitarian crises.
The civilian-led Government inherited enormous
challenges in 2019. Despite difficulties encountered
in the transition, the Sudan was on a path to a more
peaceful, prosperous and stable future. Regrettably, the
coup has put these gains at risk, including with respect
to economic reform, the peace process and human
rights. It is our sincere hope that there can soon be a
return to such progress.
In this regard, we welcome the collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), in particular the efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Perthes and AU Special Envoy
Lebatt towards the next phase of talks, with the aim of
restoring the transition. There is a great opportunity
to end the political crisis. We are encouraged by the
consensus on issues like the need for a civilian cabinet,
justice and accountability, and the role of women in the
transition. We urge all parties, including the military, to
engage fully and in good faith in the next phase of talks.
We deplore the loss of life at least 88 persons since
the coup began. These people were killed while calling
for freedom, peace and justice — something that
thousands of Sudanese people continue to do, despite
the threat of violence. We urge the authorities to allow
protest without violence, lift the state of emergency and
release political detainees, journalists and activists.
The political crisis and actions of the military
have contributed to delays in implementing the Juba
Peace Agreement, leading to further violence and
marginalization in such areas as Darfur. A regrettable
consequence of the coup is the economic hardship and
increasing humanitarian need across the country. The
United Kingdom has a strong track record in providing
economic, humanitarian and political support to
the Sudan.
Let us be clear. It is the actions of the military
that have led to the pause in international economic
support. We hope that the early restoration of a credible,
civilian-led transitional Government can create the
conditions for much-needed economic reforms and for
international support, including debt relief, to resume.
Instead of calling on the international community to
provide economic assistance, let us instead call on the
Sudanese stakeholders, especially the military, to reach

22-301485/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

28/03/2022

the sustainable political agreement needed to enable the
resumption of such support.

in the Sudan (UNITAMS) in the implementation of the
Mission’s human rights mandate.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains
committed to supporting the Sudan’s journey to
democracy and the realization of the Sudanese people’s
calls for freedom, peace and justice. As a Council we
should remain focused on these aspirations and support
the process facilitated by the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.

It is essential that the civilian movements agree
on the main points of the negotiations. Without this
consensus, it will be impossible to overcome the current
political impasse. Any way out of the crisis will need
to take into account the democratic aspirations of the
Sudanese people. We call on all stakeholders to engage
in dialogue in a spirit of compromise and responsibility.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative Volker Perthes
for his statement. For my part, I would like to highlight
three points.
First, France supports the efforts of the
United Nations, the African Union (AU) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to facilitate dialogue among the stakeholders in the
transition. The Special Representative presented us
today with a road map concluded after consultation with
all Sudanese actors. It is not a prescription, of course,
but an attempt to identify points of convergence, in
order to resume dialogue. We encourage this approach,
which it is up to the Sudanese people to embrace. We
again call on all international actors to support the
action of the United Nations, the AU and IGAD, not
to interfere with their efforts or to exploit the Sudan’s
fragilities, for the sake of its national interest.
My second point is that the immediate priority
remains to restore a democratic transition. Since the
coup, the country has been in a political stalemate
that is undermining the gains of the transition and is
threatening the stability of the country. Every day the
repression of demonstrations, the sexual violence that
the Special Representative mentioned in his briefing,
and the harassment of civil society are aggravating the
tensions. We condemn the violence that has left nearly
90 people dead since 25 October and many more injured.
It is the responsibility of the military authorities
to create the conditions for a way out of the crisis by
deciding to return to constitutional order, guaranteeing
fundamental freedoms, releasing political detainees
and prosecuting those responsible for abuses against
civilians. The right of Sudanese men and women to
express their views peacefully without fear of violence
must be guaranteed. We stress the importance of the
Sudanese authorities’ unequivocal cooperation with the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
6/19

My third point concerns the exacerbated fragility
of the Sudan. There is an urgent need to overcome this
political crisis, which only worsens existing fragilities.
We are particularly concerned about the resurgence of
violence in Darfur and the Two Areas that has been
accompanied by restrictions on humanitarian access.
In this regard, we welcome the continued work of the
Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee supported
by UNITAMS, which has led to some progress. It is
imperative that the authorities and the signatory parties
accelerate the deployment of the joint force and agree
on the modalities for the reintegration of combatants.
Humanitarian access must of course be guaranteed.
We encourage the authorities to continue their contacts
with the non-signatory groups of the Juba Agreement
for Peace in the Sudan and their efforts to ease tensions
in eastern Sudan.
Finally, we are extremely concerned about the
deteriorating economic and humanitarian situation
linked to the rise in food and fuel prices, which has been
exacerbated by the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
France will remain committed to the Sudanese people.
We are continuing our cooperation with civil society,
which is why we will maintain our level of humanitarian
assistance, as well as that of the European Union, whose
total aid amounted to €55 million last year.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Perthes for his comprehensive
briefing and reporting.
The United States fully supports the efforts of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) to monitor and
report on the situation in the Sudan, including on the
human rights situation, as it has been mandated to do
by the Security Council (resolution 2579 (2021)). We
agree with our colleague from the United Kingdom
that it is essential for UNITAMS to be able to provide a
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

full and balanced representation of the situation in the
Sudan in its reporting to the Council.
The United States fully supports the collaborative
efforts of UNITAMS, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to facilitate a Sudanese-led political process, one that
will restore a civilian-led transition to democracy. The
Sudan needs a transitional framework that is civilianled, moves the country towards free and fair elections,
reworks the role of security services as participants
of the Government, and is broadly acceptable to the
Sudanese people.
In order for this process to be effective, the military
and security services need to take concrete steps
to create an environment where all actors can safely
participate in negotiations. The Sudanese authorities
must immediately end the unjust detentions of civil
society activists, politicians, journalists, cultural
figures and humanitarian workers. The authorities must
allow media outlets to reopen and end communications
blackouts. And State actors must stop the terrible
violence perpetrated against peaceful protesters,
including reported sexual violence and attacks on
patients in medical facilities and on medical personnel.
We also call for the authorities to hold accountable
without delay those responsible for human rights abuses
and violations, including the excessive use of force
against peaceful protesters. The United States stands
with the Sudanese people in their pursuit of a democratic
human-rights-respecting and prosperous Sudan. That is
why, on 21 March, the United States designated Sudanese
Central Reserve Police for serious human rights abuses
committed during protests calling for democracy.
All people in the Sudan must be able to express their
opinions and peaceably demonstrate without threat
of violence or arrest. Our action demonstrates the
United States continues to implement the tools at our
disposal to stop the violence and press for a restoration
of the Sudan’s democratic transition. Restoring a
transitional Government that is legitimate in the eyes
of the Sudanese people will require demonstrable steps
towards a reassertion of genuine irreversible civilian
authority. In the meantime, we will continue to press
for sustained and unhindered humanitarian access to all
conflict-affected and displaced populations to facilitate
life-saving assistance.
In Darfur, security forces and former armed
opposition groups continue to clash and exacerbate the

S/PV.9006

intercommunal violence. We condemn the violence in
Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan, express our concern
for its impact on the people of the Sudan and urge the
Sudan’s authorities to implement the Government of the
Sudan’s own national plan for civilian protection.
Lastly, I hope that the Council’s Panel of Experts
on the Sudan can continue its vital work to report on the
situation in Darfur, including to document the violence
and its drivers. We heard the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General say how high the stakes are
here. We must therefore work to find the solution and
we must end the violence in the Sudan.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to read
this statement on behalf of members of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely Gabon,
Kenya and my country, Ghana.
At the outset, we wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes
for his presentation of the 90-day report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/172) on the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS),
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2579 (2021).
We also welcome the participation at this meeting of
the representative of the Sudan.
The A3 welcomes the additional briefing provided
to the Council by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and will in this statement comment
on the political situation, the security environment,
the persisting socioeconomic challenges and the
humanitarian developments in the Sudan during the
reporting period.
The A3 also takes note of the letter dated 22 March
2022 from the Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent
Mission of the Sudan to the President of the Security
Council providing clarification, as well as expressing
reservations, on the content of the report of the
Secretary-General and the activities of UNITAMS.
With regard to the political situation in the
Sudan and the implementation of the August 2019
Constitutional Declaration, the A3 remains deeply
concerned about developments since 25 October 2021
and the political stalemate, which could derail the
commitment to adhering to the transition to full civilian
rule that would lead to a new constitution and elections
in 2023.

22-301487/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The lack of civilian political leadership, including
the absence of a Prime Minister, in the transitional
process and the continued absence of significant
political constituents from the Sovereign Council
represent major challenges that the Sudanese people
must quickly resolve to prevent the country slipping
further into chaos.
In that regard, we urge all political stakeholders in
the Sudan to place the overall interest of the people of
the Sudan at the heart of their discussions and decisions
in the furtherance of a Sudanese-led and -owned
process to place the country on a pathway leading
towards peace and stability. We encourage UNITAMS
to remain engaged with the Sudanese people and recall
the announcement by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on 8 January that he had launched a
“United
Nations-facilitated
intra-Sudanese
political process, which is aimed at supporting
Sudanese stakeholders in agreeing on a way out of
the current political crisis”.
In that context, we note the assessment of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), following their recent visits
to the Sudan, that the current political impasse in the
Sudan is more complicated than widely appreciated,
with far-reaching implications for the Sudan and the
region and mistrust on both sides of the externally
led interventions.
The A3 therefore avers that UNITAMS activities
should not go forward in isolation but must be
coordinated closely with those of IGAD and the
African Union in the search for a peaceful settlement
of the current political impasse in the Sudan. The
role of regional leaders, as well as the support of
international partners, also remains indispensable to
the transition process in the Sudan. The partnership
between UNITAMS and relevant regional bodies
should further develop into a systematic, operational
and strategic partnership rooted in shared values and
a strong commitment to international cooperation that
is adapted to the complex security challenges facing
the Sudan.
We also encourage UNITAMS to adequately
utilize the necessary confidence-building measures in
the implementation of its mandate to build trust with
the parties in the Sudan. Equally, we urge the Sudanese
authorities, the political parties and civil society groups
in the country, including the Sudanese Professionals
8/19

28/03/2022

Association and the Forces for Freedom and Change, to
collaborate with UNITAMS.
Concerning the security environment in the
Sudan, the A3 continues to be worried about the
deteriorating security situation, which is related also
to other developments in the country, including the
political impasse and socioeconomic challenges. The
intermittent armed conflicts, intercommunal clashes in
parts of Darfur and violent crimes are a deep concern.
The A3 condemns all forms of violence directed
towards civilians and civilian property. While the A3
acknowledges the measures taken by the Government to
improve security, a lot more needs to be done to expedite
the implementation of the security arrangements under
the Juba Peace Agreement and the National Plan for
Protection of Civilians.
We urge the Sovereign Council of the Sudan to
exercise restraint and show tolerance when dealing with
the social forces in the country, which through peaceful
assembly and protests seek to express their desire for an
early resolution to meet their needs and the fulfilment
of their aspirations, including the improvement of their
living conditions and the return to constitutional rule.
We reaffirm that the population of every nation
constitutes an important component of the State and
that any actions against their legitimate interest would
ultimately weaken the State. We therefore urge the
Sudanese authorities to be mindful of the rights of its
people in law-enforcement actions.
We regret the criminal incidents of looting at the
UNAMID logistics base in El Fasher, as well as the
camp handed over to the North Darfur state authorities.
We urge restraint and encourage coordinated border
arrangements between the Sudan and Ethiopia in order
to avoid a recurrence of the incident of 27 November
2021.
We also remain concerned about the illicit flow
and large presence of small arms and light weapons
outside State control, which have fuelled the situation
of instability. We therefore encourage the continuation
of negotiations with all relevant armed groups along the
lines of the agreement reached between the transitional
authorities and the Sudan Revolutionary Front on
3 October 2020.
The socioeconomic challenges of the Sudan
continue to be immense. At the heart of the Sudanese
people’s rise against their Government in 2019 were the
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

sharply rising prices of food. Today, that challenge, if
anything at all, has worsened. The interruption of access
to markets and the suspension of financial-assistance
programmes has predictably had adverse impacts on
the Sudanese people, as reflected in the higher prices
of goods and services and the shortages of basic goods,
including food and medicine.
With the ongoing war in Ukraine, those impacts are
projected to be even worse. We therefore encourage the
Sudanese people to urgently and constructively work
on their political differences in order to enable donor
partners and international financial institutions to
positively engage in their fiscal processes and support
the implementation of the 2022 budget of the country,
which was adopted on 22 January.
A review of the current situation in the Sudan
cannot leave anyone in doubt about the huge
humanitarian challenges that the country faces. We
therefore call for sustained international support for
the humanitarian programme in the Sudan for the
more than 10 million people who remain acutely food
insecure, the 3.1 million internally displaced persons
and the more than 1.1 million refugees in the Sudan.
Lastly, we would be remiss if this statement failed
to call on the international community to support the
funding of the Juba Peace Agreement to realize its
objectives. In that regard, we welcome and appreciate
the kind gesture by Norway in donating $800,000 to
the multi-partner trust fund for the Sudan. We continue
to remain engaged with the penholder on the Sudan, as
we anticipate the renewal of the mandate of UNITAMS
by June 2022
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes for his
briefing on developments in the Sudan. We welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the Acting
Chargé d’affaires of the Sudan. We read the most recent
quarterly report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/172)
very carefully.
The situation in the Sudan remains complex.
The political crisis has not subsided. There are acute
humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges. The
situation has been compounded by a near complete
suspension of donor assistance. In those conditions,
we note the Sudanese authorities’ intensive efforts
to stabilize the situation and establish a constructive
national dialogue, both in the centre and at the periphery.

S/PV.9006

We welcome the creation in January of a committee
with the mandate to find a resolution and identify
candidates for the post of a new head of Government
and the extension of the ceasefire regime in the entire
territory of the country. We also welcome the military’s
stated intention to hold general elections in June 2023
and its commitment to the Juba Peace Agreement of
3 October 2020.
We further view in a positive light the involvement
of the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in the political process of
the country and their decision to create, jointly with the
United Nations, a coordination mechanism to support
intra-Sudanese dialogue. We hope those decisions will
bear fruit.
We continue to call on all Sudanese parties to be
guided by the greater national interest, to be responsible
and to refrain from taking steps that could lead to
new clashes. We are in favour of addressing existing
disputes through dialogue.
We cannot agree with the biased and politicized
approaches towards what is happening in the Sudan
contained in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral. Rather than focus on the tasks facing the
transition period of creating institutions to ensure
the preparation and holding of general elections in
the country, the report focuses on important but
secondary questions.
Human rights topics, for example, are stressed, as
well as the rule of law, and there is an excessive discussion
of the gender dimension. The functions of assisting and
mobilizing assistance for the special political missions
are being replaced by monitoring and observers. That
does not promote the spirit of cooperation between the
United Nations and the authorities of the host country.
We support the concerns about the methodology of
the report and its assessments expressed in the letter
of 22 March from the Sudan to the Security Council.
We call on the special political mission and Mr. Perthes
himself to fully comply with that mandate and pay
equal attention to all its components.
It is important to work on achieving a lasting
agreement among the different Sudanese political
forces and social, regional and ethnic groups. But we
must not neglect the direct objectives of mobilization
of international assistance to the Sudan and assistance

22-301489/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

for the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, as
reflected in Security Council resolutions.
The Russian Federation is categorically opposed
to measures that exert political pressure, as well as
the blatant economic blackmail that is still being
used against the Sudan. We believe it could be
counterproductive and unacceptable to engage in any
external interference in the affairs of that country.
We are convinced that the people of the Sudan can
decide for themselves and solve their own domestic
problems. The imposition of dubious socioeconomic
schemes and universal “democratization” templates on
their leadership and the politicization of the provision
of economic and financial assistance have already led
to divisions in society, as well as a loss of civic trust
in the transitional authorities, which in turn have led
to general instability and new separatist trends in
the country.
We have also noted, in some statements of Council
members and statements made by Western countries
published in Sudanese media on 21 March, that blame
has been placed on Russia for worldwide economic
instability and price increases — in particular the prices
of energy, provisions and food, including in the Sudan.
Make no mistake: a potential food crisis will be
caused not by the Russian special military operation
in Ukraine but by the illegal unilateral sanctions
imposed by the West, which have decimated logistical
and financial supply chains and fully excluded Russia,
which is a producer of food and fertilizers, from the
Swift system. The seizure of cargo carriers also poses a
threat. Limitations have also affected their cooperation
with humanitarian agencies of the United Nations.
We do not know who believes the assertions of
Western countries. It is definitely not the Sudanese, who
have had the experience of being subjected to unilateral
restrictions and are still being blackmailed with regard
to economic assistance. We call on countries who
currently experience economic difficulties, many of
which have been created artificially, not to give in to
anti-Russian slogans but rather to view the situation in
terms of their own vital interests.
In conclusion, we would like to note that we
took note of the report of the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, the Permanent
Representative of Ghana, on the work of that Security
10/19

28/03/2022

Council subsidiary body over the past 90 days. We
continue to believe that the restrictions imposed 15
years ago on the Sudan because of the situation in
Darfur have done their job.
We would also like to note that in resolution 2620
(2022) of 15 February, the intention was expressed to
establish by 31 August clear and realistic benchmarks
for reviewing the measures imposed on the Sudan
because of the situation in Darfur. We call for that time
frame to be complied with fully rather than extending it,
since to do so would show only that some countries seek
to maintain international sanctions as an instrument for
exerting pressure on Khartoum.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Volker
Perthes for his detailed briefing on the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS). I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Ghana for his statement as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.
The ongoing political impasse on the Sudan is a
reminder of the inherent challenges to the democratic
transition process that began in December 2018.
The political and security developments since last
October reflect the tenuous state of the transition.
Those developments have further aggravated political
instability and negatively affected the implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement. They have also hampered
the progress made on political and socioeconomic
fronts during the past two years.
Mutual trust and understanding among the
Sudanese stakeholders are key for addressing the
current impasse. We hope all stakeholders, including
the military and the civilian political forces, will show
the political will to build consensus and foster national
unity. The transition process needs to be inclusive and
address the concerns of all stakeholders in order to meet
the democratic aspirations of the people of the Sudan.
We believe that the 2019 Constitutional Document
remains the basis for the transitional period and the
way forward should be guided by it.
We are encouraged by the recent proactive
engagement, in particular the dialogue, among the
political actors and the Sudanese authorities. We have
also noted the efforts, including those undertaken
by the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to break
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the political impasse. We hope that all those efforts
will facilitate a return to the constitutional status and
a transition path towards civilian rule, democracy and
peace in the Sudan.
We also underscore the importance of the
comprehensive implementation of the Juba Peace
agreement. In that regard, we welcome the progress
made in security arrangements, including the formation
of the Joint High Council on Security Arrangements in
Darfur and the Two Areas, the setting up of protection
forces and the integration of formal fighters. We hope
that implementation will gain momentum in the coming
months, in particular through the establishment of a
transitional legislative council.
On the economic front, recent developments resulted
in the international community revisiting the positive
decisions taken to support the economic recovery of
the Sudan over the past three years. We hope that the
international community and the partners of the Sudan
will reconsider their decision to stop economic support
and assistance given its adverse impact on the civilian
population. The Sudan needs our collective support.
On the security front, we remain concerned at the
situation in eastern Sudan. In Darfur, the incidents
of looting and violence at El Fasher logistical base
and incidence of intercommunal violence earlier this
month remain concerning. We note that the Sudanese
authorities have continued to make efforts to provide
physical protection in Darfur through the deployment
of joint Government forces to de-escalate violence and
calm tensions. Those are positive developments that
reflect a broadening of governance structures and a
sustained commitment of the authorities to implement
the national plan for civilian protection.
The establishment of a gender desk at the
headquarters of the central Darfur police is noteworthy.
The support of UNITAMS to the Sudan will be critical
during the coming months, particularly in assisting
the political transition, the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement and peacebuilding efforts.
We expect UNITAMS to focus on the
implementation of its core mandate in close partnership
with the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. We also noted the contents
of the letter sent by the Sudan on the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/172). We hope that in future UNITAMS
reports will take cognizance of the points made in the
letter, in particularly adhering to the mandate of the

S/PV.9006

four strategic objectives and regarding the sourcing of
the data.
India has long-standing relations with the Sudan
and its people. Over the years India has assisted the
Sudan through several projects under concessional
lines of credit, capacity-building and humanitarian
assistance. We wish to see the Sudan emerge as a
prosperous, peaceful and stable country in the coming
years. India will continue to support the Sudan and its
people in these challenging times.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I listened
carefully to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Volker Perthes’s briefing and welcome the
representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.­­
While the country has recently experienced
challenges, the Sudan’s political transition continues to
move in the right direction. The international community
should remain patient, take additional actions that are
beneficial to the Sudan’s unity and stability, avoid
artificial divisions and help the country explore a
development path that suits its national conditions.
I would like to make the following points.
First, every effort should be made to advance the
political process following the resignation of Prime
Minister Hamdok. The Sudan’s Sovereignty Council
indicated that it would remain committed to forming
a civilian Government and completing all transitional
tasks and that it would hold a dialogue with the relevant
political factions. That should be strongly encouraged
by the international community.
Special Representative Perthes announced the
launch of an intra-Sudanese political process and
reiterated the need for respect for a Sudanese-led
process. A total of 110 groups have joined so far,
and China calls for the active participation of other
political factions.
In its good-offices efforts, the international
community should fully respect the Sudan’s sovereignty
and leadership, focus on facilitating dialogue among
the Sudanese parties to resolve differences, and avoid
taking sides.
On 22 March the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan addressed a letter to President of the Council
expressing concerns about the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2022/172) failed
to reflect the situation in the Sudan comprehensively

22-3014811/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

28/03/2022

and accurately. It is hoped that the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) will in its work focus on its core mandates
and fully respect and give full attention to the views of
the Sudanese Government.

The Chinese Government has successfully
implemented a maternal and child health-care project
under the framework of a South-South cooperation
fund, benefiting more than 70,000 Sudanese women
and children.

The ways to realize democracy can be diverse.
There is no fixed model, nor should there be. The
international community should support the Sudan in
exploring a development path that suits its national
conditions and avoid imposing external solutions. The
Chinese Government’s special envoy for the Middle
East visited the Sudan last week and met with Lieutenant
General Al-Burhan and other Sudanese leaders in an
effort to help advance the Sudanese political process.

Thirdly, sanctions should be lifted as soon as
possible. Following the withdrawal of UNAMID,
the Sudanese authorities have assumed primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians. It is
therefore urgent to strengthen its security capacity. The
arms embargo has had a negative impact on the Sudan’s
security capacity- building, and the Security Council
should adjust the sanctions in a timely manner in the
light of the changing situation.

The security situation in Darfur is largely stable,
but intercommunal conflicts and criminal activities still
occur from time to time. China appreciates the work
of the Permanent Ceasefire Committee and supports
the Sudanese authorities in their efforts to ensure the
accelerated implementation of the national plan for the
protection of civilians.
China condemns the looting of African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and World Food Programme bases and
humanitarian convoys. We wish to be informed of the
progress made in the investigation of the incidents and
to see the adoption of measures necessary to prevent
similar incidents in future.
Secondly, it is important to relaunch economic
growth. At present, high inflation, diminished
employment opportunities and lower household incomes
are all factors of instability with respect to peace and
security in Sudan. We welcome the efforts made by the
Sudanese authorities to improve the country’s economy.
However, just when the Sudanese people needed help the
most, some countries and international organizations
decided to suspend international assistance, which
is obviously not helpful to the Sudan’s endeavour to
escape its current predicament.
China calls on UNITAMS to actively mobilize
economic and development assistance to the Sudan in
accordance with its mandate. China has always done its
best to help the Sudan’s economic development. China
assisted the Sudan with a slaughterhouse project, which
has begun implementation, and a well-drilling and
water-supply project is steadily progressing.
12/19

Resolution 2620 (2022), adopted last month,
requires the development of benchmarks for adjusting
the sanctions by 31 August. China hopes that that
requirement can be effectively implemented.
It must be noted that unilateral sanctions are a
roadblock to the Sudan’s development. Unilateral
sanctions often fail to solve problems and can create
fresh troubles, worsening the food, energy and economic
crisis, harming the Sudanese people’s livelihoods and
causing additional humanitarian consequences. We
hope that the relevant country can change its imperious
logic of sanctioning and pressuring other countries at
every turn and try to treat others as equals and work
together for win-win results.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes
for his excellent briefing. I have to say that he did paint
a very bleak picture of the situation in the Sudan.
We deeply regret that the fallout from the coup last
October continues to have such devastating effects on
the lives of the people of the Sudan. In that regard, let
me make three points this morning.
First, we roundly condemn the continued use of
violent tactics by the security forces against civilians,
which we have seen have resulted in the deaths of
and injury to hundreds. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms the sexual violence that has been used
as a tool to intimidate and punish women and men
exercising their civil and political rights. Mr. Volker’s
remarks today were particularly shocking.
The horrific reports of the gang rape of a teenage girl in Khartoum two weeks ago by a large group
of uniformed Sudanese security forces as she was
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

getting off a bus starkly exemplify the situation faced
by many women in the Sudan. We know that that is
not an isolated incident. We have seen a systematic
terrorizing of the civilian population by the security
forces, and that has been facilitated by granting them
new powers and immunities. I want to commend that
young woman’s bravery in coming forward. We call on
the Sudanese authorities to carry out an investigation
into that heinous crime.
We are also very concerned by the continued
detention of protesters, activists and leading political
figures, which is impeding a political resolution to
the crisis.
Across the country, we are seeing an upsurge in
violence, as parties now seem to be leveraging the wider
political crisis in order to consolidate their interests.
The increase in attacks on civilians in regions such as
Darfur and South Kordofan have unfortunate echoes of
previous conflicts. That situation reinforces the urgent
need to return to the path of transition, peacebuilding
and implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement.
The Sudanese authorities must also fulfil their Juba
Peace Agreement commitments on transitional justice,
including their important and urgent obligation to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
Secondly, we share the concerns Mr. Perthes
outlined today about the bleak economic picture in the
Sudan. But let me be clear, the economic catastrophe
facing the Sudan stems directly from the military coup
d’état. Hard-won economic and governance reforms,
which we had mostly welcomed here at the table, have
now been unwound by the coup d’état before they had
a chance to fully deliver for the very people they were
intended to help. We believe that to be deeply regrettable.
Of course, there is no doubt that the Sudan is
vulnerable to the knock-on effects of Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine, which is driving up the cost of basic food
staples. The World Food Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
now Mr. Perthes have told us that the number of people
who face acute hunger in the Sudan is likely to double
to more than 18 million by September. I believe that that
is an extremely — indeed exceptionally — worrisome
state of affairs and we will continue to be vigilant.
The people of the Sudan have borne enough.
To effectively address the looming economic and
humanitarian catastrophe, there must be a return to

S/PV.9006

constitutional order and a civilian-led democratic
transition. Meanwhile, the European Union and the
international community will assume their obligations
to ensure that humanitarian support continues to flow
to those who need it most in the Sudan.
Thirdly, we fully support Mr. Perthes’ work on
facilitating the political consultative process and we
welcome the fact that he works alongside the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. We call on all parties to engage with the
process in good faith and with an openness to finding
agreement on the way out of the crisis towards a
civilian-led transition.
That process must continue to be inclusive. We
believe that the definition of that word means that there
will be meaningful participation of women, who will
be critical to ensuring the lasting success of peace in
the Sudan. We cannot emphasize that enough. We are
very glad that the Secretary-General and Mr. Perthes
are paying attention to that concern.
Ireland remains steadfast in its support for the
people of the Sudan in their demands for freedom,
peace and justice.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes for
his comprehensive briefing and even more so for his
important work, in particular in conducting inclusive
political consultations with Sudanese stakeholders to
find a way out of the current impasse.
The political and security situation in the Sudan
has been marked by significant setbacks, following
the military coup d’état last October. Furthermore,
continued violence, an influx of refugees from
Ethiopia, the impact of climate change and the lack of
essential services have made a difficult situation worse.
As if all that were not enough, the fallout from the food
insecurity caused by the Russian aggression against
Ukraine, which is being felt worldwide, has placed an
additional toll on the Sudan.
The coup has put a stop to the traditional process
of rolling back key benchmarks, while deepening the
economic crisis and exacerbating the human rights
situation. It is depressing and utterly regrettable. We are
particularly concerned about the human rights violations
committed in the Sudan, especially by security forces,
including the use of live ammunition against civilian

22-3014813/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

protesters and the increased intimidation, harassment
and sexual violence practised against women and girls.
The Sudanese authorities must respect the right
of protesters. We call for investigations into the
disproportionate use of force by security forces and
all other actors. We strongly condemn the arbitrary
arrests, the detention of protesters, political actors
and human rights activists, the harassment of media
and journalists, and the deliberate attacks on medical
facilities and medical personnel. All such acts are a
violation of human rights. All those who violate human
rights and commit crimes must be held accountable.
Violence perpetrated by security forces must stop.
We do not wish to see the Sudan slipping back to the
time of Al-Bashir, without Al-Bashir. We appreciate the
efforts of United Nations human rights expert Adama
Dieng and reiterate that his work must be unhindered
and that Sudanese authorities must fully cooperate with
him. In that respect, we fully support human rights
reporting by the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, an issue of primary
importance for any meaningful progress in the Sudan
or elsewhere.
The thirst of the Sudanese for democracy,
peace, justice and freedom is simply remarkable,
as demonstrated through their continued resilience
and courage. I would particularly like to praise the
courage of Sudanese women, who were the backbone
of the revolution in 2019 and now are again leading the
protests against the military coup. Only an inclusive
negotiated solution will help the Sudan achieve
political and economic stability. As the next phase
of United Nations-facilitated discussion approaches,
the Sudanese leadership must prove its commitment
to working together in reaching consensus to ensure
a Sudanese-owned and Sudanese-led process and a
Sudanese-owned, Sudanese-accepted outcome.
Consultations must remain inclusive and ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women and
civil society, including youth groups. A constitutionally
legitimate transition must be established and a clear
path to civilian leadership and democracy in the Sudan
must be charted. Sudanese authorities must release
all political prisoners without further delay. Peaceful
solutions through negotiations cannot be found when
many intellectuals and actors are behind bars.
The lack of implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement risks the persistence of further instability
14/19

28/03/2022

without a genuine political process. As we have already
seen in recent months, political instability in Khartoum
has spilled over to other parts of the country. Particularly
noticeable is the surge of violence in Darfur, which has
been further exacerbated by the return of fighters from
Libya. We condemn the increased killing of civilians,
the destruction of property and violence against
internally displaced persons.
The Sudan cannot remain mired in a roundabout
in which hope and despair change places at the
will of strongmen. To avoid total political and
economic collapse and endless conflict and divisions,
authorities must meet key benchmarks and accelerate
the implementation of the transitional security
arrangements contained in the Juba Peace Agreement.
The international community has demonstrated that
it stands ready to re-engage politically, economically
and financially with the authorities of the Sudan.
However, for that to happen there is a need for genuine
and continued political commitment by those on the
ground. They hold the keys to their country’s future.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Perthes for his insightful
briefing and for his tireless efforts and those of his team.
The current constitutional and political crisis has
serious consequences for the people of the Sudan.
It has rapid negative impacts on the humanitarian,
human rights, security and economic situations, as
we have just heard from the Special Representative.
There is an urgent need for the Sudanese authorities
to recommit to the country’s democratic transition. We
strongly condemn all breaches of human rights. The
continued use of lethal force against peaceful protesters
is unacceptable. Such violence must stop to allow for
credible political dialogue to take place.
Norway appreciates the role of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS) in concluding the first phase of
the political consultation. Now, as the process moves
to the next phase, we particularly welcome the close
cooperation between the United Nations, the African
Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). We encourage strong Sudanese
ownership and leadership, while urging all Sudanese
stakeholders to engage constructively.
It is key to build on the lessons learned in 2019.
The process must be inclusive, must be representative
of historically marginalized groups, including young
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people, and must ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women.
Regrettably, progress on the implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement — one of the achievements of the
transition period — is slowing down. Renewed progress
will require the Juba Peace Agreement signatories to
engage constructively and abstain from illegal actions.
We expect the Sudanese authorities and Juba Peace
Agreement signatories, as well as non-signatories, to
take urgent and concrete actions to de-escalate and
reduce the risk of further conflict. Preventing further
armed conflict, violence and the proliferation of armed
actors in Darfur is of key importance not only to Darfur
and the Sudan, but the entire region.
In addition to Darfur, the situation in South Kordofan
has deteriorated rapidly in recent months. Increasing
military mobilization, the political exploitation of
intercommunal clashes, new displacements, increased
food insecurity and grave violations against women and
children are of great concern.
We urge the authorities to resume engagement with
the United Nations on the development of a national
prevention plan on all grave violations against children,
ensuring the timely implementation of the joint road
map signed in 2021. National authorities bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians,
including children, and the prevention of conflict
across the country. Accordingly, the national plan for
civilian protection should also be updated and swiftly
implemented. UNITAMS, too, plays an important
supporting role in preventing conflict and protecting
civilians, in line with its mandate.
The Sudan is in a dire situation, but the people of
the Sudan have not given up. They demand a return to
constitutional order and a continuation of the civilianled democratic transition. Only an inclusive political
settlement will enable Norway, in close collaboration
with other partners, to engage as we did before the
coup. That is the surest path to economic recovery
and development, to restart implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement, to improve the humanitarian
situation and to strengthen the protection of civilians.
UNITAMS continues to play a key role in supporting
the Sudan in reaching those goals. It is imperative that
we, as international partners, now rally behind the joint
good offices of the United Nations, the AU and IGAD.

S/PV.9006

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Volker Perthes, for his briefing. I also
welcome the delegation of the Sudan. I would also
like to thank the Panel of Experts for its January 2022
report (S/2022/48) and refer to resolution 2620 (2022),
which was adopted here last month (see S/PV.8964),
and welcome the new term of the Panel.
Brazil believes that a review of the situation in
Darfur, as well as benchmarks to assess the Security
Council measures on Darfur, are vital endeavours.
Clear-cut, well-identified and credible benchmarks will
provide the necessary standards to adjust actions on
the ground.
Let me now turn to the vital points raised today by
Special Representative Perthes.
The political stalemate in the Sudan is concerning
and complex. Its possible ramifications in and around
the country should be carefully assessed. Back in
January, when the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) had
just announced the inclusive consultations set out
in resolution 2579 (2021), the Council had already
realized some of the grim consequences of the events
of 25 October 2021 and the pushback against Sudanese
civil society that ensued. It is troubling to note the
additional bleak effects since then.
What is especially concerning right now is the
realization that the transition opened in 2019 has stalled.
Since 2019, we have followed in detail — including from
our embassy in Khartoum — the difficult decisions and
developments that the political transformation entails.
We empathize with the civilians who peacefully took
to the streets to seize the transition and help build new
institutions in the Sudan. Agreement around shared
concerns and values is one of the ways forward that
we hope to see in Khartoum, Omdurman, Nyala, Port
Sudan and beyond.
My delegation commends Special Representative
Perthes and UNITAMS for the first round of inclusive
consultations. The Council clearly mandated the special
political mission in the Sudan with that task. We know
that it is not a straightforward duty. The first round has
simulated the Sudan to reach further convergence, so
praise and support are indeed in order here. Those broad
consultations have also enabled diverse voices to take
part in the political debate once again. Women and men,
girls and boys and young Sudanese citizens have all

22-3014815/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

been part of the transformation since 2019. Inclusivity
is key to the way forward and should continue to be
built from now on.
No number of United Nations- or foreign-led
processes even come close to replacing local ownership.
Sudanese leadership, Sudanese guidance and Sudanese
inputs are all essential to building consensus and then
to helping to break the stalemate that has beset politics
in the Sudan.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation joins others in expressing its
thanks to Special Representative Perthes for his report
(S/2022/172).
At the previous meeting of the Council on the
subject (see S/PV.8948), the Special Representative
initiated a consultation process at an extremely
delicate political juncture with a view to breaking the
political impasse. We have followed the results of that
process very closely and I would like to acknowledge
his excellent work at the helm of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
Now that the first stage of the consultations advocated
by the Special Representative has been completed, it is
essential that the parties assume their responsibilities to
move forward in the same constructive spirit in which
they participated in those initial talks. It will now be
up to the Sudanese themselves to define the path of
the political process that will enable them to develop
a road map.
While divergences remain, there are also areas of
consensus, and it is those that need to be focused on.
It will be essential to prioritize those aspects that can
foster confidence-building. Only on the basis of trust
will it be possible to work towards resolving the more
controversial outstanding issues. We recognize the
inclusive nature of the consultations process in which
the voices of civil society, political parties, activists,
academics and journalists — to name but a few — were
heard. It is particularly important to note that one-third
of the participants in the consultations were women and
representatives of women’s rights organizations.
We hope that the conclusions gathered in the
synthesis document will be taken into consideration in
the next stage. The content of that document reflects
the priorities of the Sudanese people in order achieve
the objectives of the revolution. We will be closely
following developments in the next phase of the process,
as well as the involvement of the United Nations, the
16/19

28/03/2022

African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.
We are concerned that the situation of insecurity
in the country threatens to jeopardize or slow down the
political process. Violence in Darfur and other parts
of the country remains unacceptable. We condemn the
intercommunal violence, the sexual assaults perpetrated
against women, and the serious violations of children’s
rights, including the disappearance of minors.
It is deplorable that the broad powers granted
to the security forces supposedly to deal with the
demonstrations in recent months have often resulted
in abuse of force and human rights violations. In
this context, it is critical that direct interaction be
maintained with the expert appointed by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights to assess the
situation in the Sudan. We must also once again urge
the Sudanese authorities to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court.
Unbiased information is essential. The Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict has been clear
that the lack of access and the deteriorating security
situation prevents accurate information on the impact
of armed conflict on children. The number of foodinsecure people has increased by almost half a million
in recent months, bringing the total number of foodinsecure people to nearly 10 million. The drought has
significantly affected the agricultural and livestock
sectors.
At this time of shortage and vulnerability, the
assaults on facilities of the World Food Programme in
El Fasher and the looting of supplies are deplorable.
These attacks led to the suspension of operations for
weeks, leaving 730,000 people without food assistance.
We call on the authorities to ensure the safety and
security of both humanitarian personnel and supplies
being distributed.
I conclude with my country’s call for the Sudanese
authorities to redouble their efforts aimed at ensuring
the full implementation of the National Plan for the
Protection of Civilians and to move forward with the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement. These
steps are undoubtedly essential for the stabilization of
the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9006

I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Volker Perthes, for his briefing on the latest
updates and developments in the Sudan, including the
United Nations initiative to facilitate a Sudanese-led
dialogue. I also welcome the representative of the
Sudan, Mr. Ammar Mohammed, in today’s meeting.

of the security arrangements outlined in the Juba
Peace Agreement. We join the Secretary-General in
welcoming the steps to operationalize the Committee,
which requires international donors to allocate adequate
logistical and financial resources so that it can carry
out its tasks.

The United Arab Emirates welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations to facilitate consultations
with Sudanese stakeholders with a view to forging a
common understanding that will push the transitional
period forward. In this regard, we highlight the active
and broad participation in consultations, including
women and youth, as well as the consultations held
with international and regional partners, including the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. This demonstrates widespread support
for a Sudanese-led political transition that fulfils the
aspirations of the brotherly Sudanese people.

In conclusion, we reiterate that our primary
responsibility must be to incentivize greater progress
and achieve a successful political transition in the
Sudan. The Sudanese people have shown their
determination to overcome this difficult period and
build an inclusive, stable and prosperous State. We call
on the friends and partners of the Sudan, including
the Security Council, to support the aspirations of the
Sudanese people in a manner that respects the Sudan’s
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity.

With regard to the social, economic and
humanitarian situation in the Sudan, and despite the
economic reforms that have been implemented as part
of the political transition over the past two years, in
cooperation with international partners, the suspension
of international assistance has negatively affected the
economy of the Sudan. Inflation averaged 350 per
cent in 2021, food prices have sharply risen, and the
provision of basic goods and services is constrained.
The economic situation is further exacerbated by
climate change and the disruption of the agricultural
season. It is now projected that over 14 million people
will require humanitarian assistance in 2022, which
underlines the importance of heeding the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the States Members of the United
Nations to respond swiftly to the humanitarian needs
in the Sudan.
As part of our commitment to highlighting the
implementation of resolution 2565 (2021), we note
that fewer than 5 per cent of the Sudan’s people are
fully vaccinated against the coronavirus disease,
which requires investing in the Sudan’s health
system and combining vaccination efforts with other
essential services.
With regard to the security situation in some parts of
the Sudan, we recognize the important steps undertaken
by the Sudanese authorities to address these challenges.
We also view the role of the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire
Committee as critical in the context of completing the
integration of forces and beginning the implementation

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohammed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
have taken note of the briefing presented by Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
The Sudan is witnessing a massive movement
towards ensuring the success of the political transition
in the country, putting it on track towards democracy,
freedom, peace and justice. Shaping a future for
the Sudan is based on foundations that would
strengthen State entities and establish a system of
governance that guarantees the values of the glorious
December revolution.
In this context, actors on the Sudanese political scene
continue to engage in favour of national dialogue that
would preserve the gains achieved, thanks to Sudanese
youth’s determination and sacrifices for a brighter
future that they and the country deserve. We note in
this regard that the challenges of the political transition
in the Sudan since April 2019 have strengthened the
conviction of the Sudan’s transition partners, be they
civilian or military, that we must guarantee the success
of the transition period to achieve the desired goals.
I would like to focus on the following three points
concerning the political, security and economic
situation in the Sudan.

22-3014817/19

S/PV.9006

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, surmounting the current political situation
in the Sudan and restoring national harmony requires
consensus on a comprehensive vision based on the four
elements put forward by the President of the Sovereignty
Council, namely, to engage in an in-depth dialogue
involving all the political and social actors in the country
without exception, except the former governing party;
to establish a competent and unbiased Government;
adopting amendments to the constitutional document
to keep pace with the changes; and, finally, to hold free
and fair elections at the end of the transitional period.
The consultations that are currently being
carried out by UNITAMS need to be in line with this
perspective. The Sudanese political leadership has
welcomed the role of the Mission, provided that the
entire process is Sudanese-owned. The role played by
UNITAMS must be limited to facilitating dialogue
among the parties without attempting to influence the
outcomes of the consultations.
We also reiterate the need to unify efforts between
UNITAMS and the African Union. The Sudan believes
that the AU plays a key and important role in the success
of the transitional period in the Sudan and that it must
be involved as part of respecting the sphere sovereignty
of this continental organization.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation and
the implementation of Juba Peace Agreement, we note
that the Sudanese Government is coordinating fully
with the partners in the peace process to implement its
provisions. The Chairperson of the Sovereign Council
visited El Fasher in Darfur last month and presided over
a meeting of the Joint High Council on the security
arrangements. He also presided over a meeting of the
Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee. At the end of
his visit, the Joint High Council announced a number
of decisions taken, including the establishment of a
special force to maintain security and protect civilians,
as well as regrouping of forces of the parties to the
peace forces outside the cities in order to rehabilitate
them and integrating them in the regular forces or
demobilizing them with a view to integrating them
in the society. Campaigns were also launched to
combat criminal acts such as those committed against
the previous headquarters of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
Government warehouses and others that belong to the
United Nations agencies in El Fasher.
18/19

28/03/2022

As I made clear earlier in our statement about the
briefing of the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the
Sudan (see S/PV.9005), the greatest challenge currently
facing the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement
is the failure of the international parties to meet their
financial obligations and commitments concerning
the agreement. The Sudanese Government is doing
its utmost to reap the benefits of peace in precarious
economic conditions. We therefore once again appeal
to the international community to provide financial
support to complete the implementation of all the
provisions of the agreement, especially as the security
arrangements of the Juba Peace Agreement and related
demobilization and reintegration of forces related
to armed movements are very costly and complex in
terms of their organizational, logistical, managerial
and financial aspects.
Thirdly, the Sudan continues to implement economic
reform measures that are quite painful for large segments
of its citizens. However, they are needed to address the
inherited defects in the structure of Sudanese economy.
One measure taken by the Sudan over the past few days
has been the complete deregulation of the exchange
rate of the Sudanese pound against foreign currencies
so that banks and currency-exchange companies can
determine and announce the rates of the sale and
purchase of foreign currencies without the intervention
of the Central Bank. That is part of the integrated and
sustainable reform of the monetary policy to stabilize
the exchange rate and increase the ability of the banking
system to attract investment. We expect those measures
to have a positive impact on the banking system and
macroeconomics in the medium and long terms.
With a view to ensuring that the economic reforms
achieve their desired goals, we look forward to
resuming cooperation with and development assistance
from our bilateral partners and international financial
institutions that are keen on alleviating the reform
consequences and the burden of external debt. The
Sudan has taken the measures necessary, in accordance
with the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, to
address the inherited economic defects.
In that context, we hope to maintain support for
the social protection programme, known as Thamarat,
to address some of the social situations and implement
economic reforms so that their objectives can be
achieved. The international community should also
shoulder its responsibility by providing all forms of
22-30148

28/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian assistance to hundreds of thousands
of refugees from neighbouring countries hosted by
the Sudan.
We note that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/172) before the Council focuses heavily on
developments in the situation in the Sudan, as if the
work of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan were limited to
reporting to the Council on the situation in the Sudan.
Of course, UNITAMS has four strategic objectives,
pursuant to resolution 2579 (2021), which renewed its
mandate last year.
We are concerned, however, that the Mission’s work
in implementing strategic goals has been disappointing
and below expectations. During the reporting period,
the Mission made no progress. Although the report is
supposed to cover the past three months, it unnecessarily
covers events that took place before that period in order
to exaggerate the significance of certain events and
give erroneous information on them, especially with
regard to the section on allegations of sexual violence
and human rights violations.

S/PV.9006

Most of what has been included in the report is far
from true and in no way resembles the Government’s
reporting on the events. If the Security Council is to
be able to objectively consider and correctly assess
the situation in the Sudan by placing events in their
proper context, the reports of the Mission must be more
credible, objective and professional. We have provided
the Council with our comments on the report.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
our partners in the transition period in the Sudan
will continue their efforts to make the transition a
success, while affirming our commitment to dialogue
as an indispensable way to address the challenges of
the political transition in the Sudan. We also renew
our commitment to working with the international
community to address the challenges that may stand in
the way of the transition process in the Sudan to achieve
the goals to which we aspire.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the
meeting so that the Council can continue its discussion
on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

22-3014819/19
