S/2020/1055

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 28 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, as
well as the statements delivered by His Excellency Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation; His Excellency Mr. Dang
Minh Khoi, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia; and by
the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America, in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian Question” convened on Monday, 26 October
2020. Statements were also delivered by His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine, and by the representative
of Israel.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Chile, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, the European Union, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ireland, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, the League of Arab States, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Morocco, Namibia, Norway, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

20-14378 (E) 301020 111220

*2014378*

S/2020/1055

Annex 1
Statement by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Nickolay Mladenov
We meet this month as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
continues across the Middle East, threatening local health systems and fraying the
social and economic fabric of society as we struggle to meet the challenges ahead.
As the pandemic stretches on and its consequences accumulate, Palestinians and
Israelis alike are feeling the effects. I remain particularly concerned about the spread
of the virus in Gaza and the long-term damage to the Palestinian economy and social
cohesion, including its effects on education for the next generation.
Last month at the General Assembly, the Secretary-General renewed his
appeal for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, calling for a major push to
make this happen by the end of the year. In the context of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, that means focusing on preventive diplomacy to avoid escalation and war in
Gaza and working with all to alleviate the health and socioeconomic consequences
of the pandemic. It means modernizing the economic relationship between the
two sides and working towards re-establishing credible negotiations with the goal
of a two-State solution, in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. The
commitment of the international community to support both sides in this process
remains unwavering. What is required, however, is leadership from both Israelis and
Palestinians to work together and advance the cause of peace.
During the reporting period, the resurgence of COVID-19 seriously
compounded the humanitarian and economic challenges on the ground, with a
significant tightening of restrictions in Israel and Gaza and the extension of the State
of emergency throughout the occupied Palestinian territory for 30 days, beginning
on 2 October.
The humanitarian community continued its efforts to address the pandemic,
including by addressing critical gaps in medical supplies and equipment. Responding
to a severe shortage of equipment, including COVID-19 testing kits in the occupied
Palestinian territory, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
international organizations delivered materials for more than 100,000 tests, dozens
of ventilators and oxygen therapy machines. Those new supplies, along with millions
of personal protective equipment items, are crucial to efforts to contain the spread
of the virus.
Arrangements brokered by the United Nations continue to enable the
transfer of patients from Gaza for medical treatment outside the Strip and allow
for importing humanitarian supplies into the occupied Palestinian territory, even
as the Palestinian Authority’s decision to halt coordination with Israel remains in
place. I wish to reiterate, however, that the United Nations cannot replace the roles
and responsibilities of the Palestinian Authority or the Government of Israel. Any
increase of responsibilities for the United Nations in that regard should be limited
and time-bound.
I welcome the ongoing support from the donor community to the United
Nations COVID-19 response efforts and urgently call for increased assistance as the
crisis extends into the foreseeable future.
As we remain focused on urgent health concerns, the viability of the
Palestinian Authority is being severely undermined by an economic and fiscal crisis
that has been exacerbated by the Palestinian decision to end civilian and security
coordination with Israel. The fiscal crisis derives primarily from a collapse in

2/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

domestic tax revenues during the COVID-19 emergency and from the Government’s
refusal to receive its clearance revenues.
The United Nations stands ready to mediate solutions to the fiscal crisis and
to get the Palestinian economy on a better footing. I reiterate the Secretary-General’s
call for both sides to re-examine the nature of their economic relationship and to
improve it for the benefit of both peoples.
In that context, I appeal to the Palestinian leadership to resume its coordination
with Israel and accept its clearance revenues — money that belongs to the Palestinian
people and cannot be replaced by donor funding. When public health conditions
permit, Israel should facilitate freer movement of Palestinian workers and goods
into Israel and between the occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip. For its part, the
international community should accelerate humanitarian and development initiatives
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including those outlined in the humanitarian
response plan and the United Nations COVID-19 Response Plan.
On 14 and 15 October, Israeli authorities moved forward with some 5,000
settlement housing units. That resumption of major settlement activity, which follows
an eight-month break in Area C housing advancements, is of great concern. This
move by the Civil Administration High Planning Committee is one of the largest
collective housing advancements to date. Approximately 85 per cent of those units
are in settlements in outlying locations, deep inside the West Bank — all in areas
impeding the contiguity of a future Palestinian State.
While the location of those units is particularly worrisome, I reiterate that all
settlements are illegal under international law and remain a substantial obstacle to
peace. Settlement-related activities should cease, as they undermine the prospect
for achieving a viable two-State solution in line with United Nations resolutions,
international law and prior agreements.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities also demolished or seized
59 Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and three in East Jerusalem, thereby
displacing 82 Palestinians, including 23 women and 40 children, and affecting
200 others. The demolitions were carried out due to the lack of Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
A donor-funded school in the Bedouin community of Ras Al-Tin, in the
Ramallah governorate, faces imminent threat of demolition due to the lack of
a building permit. If demolished, it would affect nearly 50 children. An Israeli
court has issued an interim injunction halting the demolition pending further legal
proceedings. There were no demolitions of residential structures in East Jerusalem
in the reporting period.
I urge Israel to cease demolitions and seizures of Palestinian property
throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in line with its
obligations under international humanitarian law, and to allow Palestinians to
develop their communities.
Over the past months, Israel did not responded to visa-renewal requests for
international staff members from the United Nations Human Rights Field Office in
Gaza. While the Office continues to deliver on its mandate, most international staff
members in the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) are now working from outside the mission area. After the release of the
report to the Human Rights Council on business activities in Israeli settlements in
February 2020, Israel froze its relations with OHCHR. I am deeply concerned that
critical mandated work on human rights by the United Nations is obstructed in that

20-143783/104

S/2020/1055

manner. I urge Israel to facilitate the return of international staff members to the
occupied Palestinian territory.
On 24 September, Fatah announced that it had reached a series of understandings
with Hamas, including an agreement to hold legislative and presidential elections
under a proportional representation system. Those discussions are a welcome
development and represent yet another effort to organize long-overdue and muchneeded Palestinian leadership elections on the basis of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization platform. The Palestinian people have not been allowed to elect their
leaders for too long. Democracy and elections are critical to enabling people to
determine the direction of their national cause. The United Nations stands ready to
support the Palestinian people in exercising their democratic rights.
It is unfortunate that violent incidents continued throughout the reporting
period. On 1 October, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) arrested two Palestinian men
who had crossed into Israel through the Gaza security fence, carrying a homemade
bomb. The next day, the IDF opened fire on a group of Palestinians who approached
the security fence in Gaza, injuring one of them.
On 5 October, militants fired one rocket from Gaza towards Israel. The rocket
landed in an open area in Israel, with no injuries or damage reported. In response,
Israeli Air Force aircraft fired two missiles targeting a military observation post in
Gaza, also with no injuries reported.
On 20 October, the IDF announced that it had located and exposed a Hamas
tunnel entering Israeli territory from the southern Gaza Strip. A few hours after
the discovery, Palestinian militants fired one rocket from Gaza towards Israel. The
rocket was intercepted by the IDF’s Iron Dome air-defence system, and no injuries or
damage were reported. The Israeli Air Force responded by striking an underground
structure in an agricultural field in Gaza. No injuries were reported.
In total, five rockets were fired by militants in Gaza towards Israel during the
reporting period. The IDF fired a total of 13 missiles into Gaza in retaliation.
While calm in Gaza has largely held, the arrangements and commitments
from all parties must be reinforced if they are to be sustained.
Turning to the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, two
Palestinians, including one child, were killed and 65 were injured in clashes and
other incidents. Seven Israelis, including two soldiers and one woman, were injured
during the reporting period.
On 4 October, Israeli forces shot and injured a 16-year-old Palestinian with a
live bullet during clashes in Beit Ummar village, north of Hebron. On the same day, a
15-year-old Palestinian boy was seriously injured in an incident in Hizma, near East
Jerusalem. Also on that day, a Palestinian armed with a knife attempted to stab an
Israeli security forces officer near Hebron. The attacker was arrested and no injuries
were reported.
On 5 October, Israeli security forces shot and killed a Palestinian man and
injured two others at a checkpoint south-east of Tulkarm while they were reportedly
throwing Molotov cocktails at passing vehicles.
On 25 October, a 17-year-old Palestinian youth died during an encounter with
the Israeli security forces near the West Bank village of Turmusaya, near Nablus.
There are conflicting claims about the circumstances and cause of death. I urge a
prompt and independent investigation into the events that led to the boy’s death.

4/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Settlers perpetrated 34 attacks against Palestinians, resulting in 30 injuries and
damage to property. Palestinians carried out 29 attacks against Israeli settlers and
other civilians in the West Bank, resulting in five injuries and damage to property.
The olive harvest is a key economic, social and cultural event, but each year
the ability of Palestinians to harvest is compromised due to access restrictions,
attacks and intimidation. Since the harvest season began, on 7 October, 23 farmers
have been injured, over 1,000 olive trees have been burnt or otherwise damaged
and several tons of produce have been stolen — in 19 separate incidents. Israeli
authorities must ensure the easy access of farmers to their land and must protect all
farmers and their property from attacks.
I am also deeply concerned about the deteriorating health condition of Maher
Al-Akhras, a Palestinian detainee who has been on a hunger strike for over 90 days
in protest of his administrative detention. On 12 October, Al-Akhras rejected an
offer by the Israeli authorities, whereby he would be released on 26 November, the
original end date of his detention order, only in return for immediately ending his
hunger strike. To date, there has been no agreement to end the standoff. Let me
reiterate that all persons held in administrative detention should be promptly charged
and tried in a court of law or released without delay.
On the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), I want to acknowledge
the efforts made by civil society and the Palestinian Government, in partnership
with the United Nations, on advancing the women and peace and security agenda
despite the challenging political and humanitarian context. This month, the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs in Palestine completed the development of its second-generation
national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
On 18 October, at a ceremony in Manama, Israel and Bahrain established
formal diplomatic relations, signing eight bilateral agreements, including a joint
communiqué on the establishment of diplomatic, peaceful and friendly relations.
The document affirms that the two parties will continue their efforts to achieve a
just, comprehensive and enduring resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
On 20 October, the first official delegation from the United Arab Emirates
visited Israel. The delegation signed four bilateral agreements with Israeli
counterparts, including an agreement on mutual visa exemptions for Israeli and
Emirati nationals.
On 23 October, the leaders of the United States, Israel and the Republic of the
Sudan announced that the Governments of Israel and the Sudan had agreed to end
the state of belligerence between their countries and to normalize relations. I join the
Secretary-General in expressing hope that this agreement will further cooperation,
enhance economic and trade relations and bring about new opportunities to advance
peace and economic prosperity in the wider Horn of Africa and Middle East regions.
I am concerned about statements made by senior Palestinian officials saying
that Muslims entering the Al-Aqsa Mosque on the basis of the recent normalization
agreements are not welcome and warning of dangerous consequences for such visits.
I note the delicate balance of the status quo at the holy compound. Any form of
politicization that may increase the risk of an escalation within the sanctity of its
grounds must be rejected.
In Lebanon, Prime Minister-designate Mustapha Adib stepped down from his
functions on 26 September, having been unable to form a Government. Subsequently,
former Prime Minister Saad Al-Hariri was designated by the President to form a
Government. The one-year anniversary of the October 2019 popular protests was
marked by peaceful demonstrations across the country.
20-143785/104

S/2020/1055

On 14 October, representatives from the Governments of Israel, Lebanon and
the United States met at United Nations premises in Naqoura, south Lebanon, to
launch discussions aimed at reaching consensus on the delineation of the IsraelLebanon maritime boundary. The negotiations were mediated and facilitated by the
United States and hosted by the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon.
In follow-up to the Beirut port explosion of 4 August, on 27 September the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) deployed an engineering unit
to Beirut to assist with the clearance of debris and reconstruction, in coordination
with the Lebanese Armed Forces. The situation in the UNIFIL area of operations,
including along the Blue Line, remained generally stable.
On the Golan, while generally calm, the situation remained volatile, with
continued violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On 20 October,
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) observed heavy
explosions in the vicinity of Al-Qunaytirah, in the area of separation. Subsequently,
the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had carried out a precision
strike against military infrastructure in the area. UNDOF continues to liaise with
both parties to remind them of their obligation to respect the terms of the agreement
and prevent an escalation of the situation.
In conclusion, let me say that, if the pandemic has taught us anything, it is that
the virus feeds on instability and expands absent a coherent, coordinated approach
to contain it. The United Nations will continue to advocate for increased cooperation
in response to the health emergency, including by urging the parties to work together
to mitigate risk, save lives and avoid unilateral actions that undermine those efforts.
At the same time, the pandemic has heightened the urgency of exploring all
avenues to make progress towards resolving the conflict and ending the occupation,
in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral
agreements, in pursuit of achieving the vision of two States. Palestinian President
Abbas has called for an international conference to restart the peace process with
the specific goal of two States — Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State — within secure and recognized borders,
based on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
We have spoken often in the Council of the need to act, of the urgency to act,
to prevent the collapse of the two-State paradigm and to give hope to the Palestinian
people, particularly the youth. Now, a quarter century after Oslo, their right to
statehood can be achieved through peaceful negotiations. That is something young
Israelis want too. No one wants war and conflict. But, if leaders are unable to deliver
on the hope for peace, that will only encourage radicals and extremists.
I sincerely hope that new avenues of cooperation to advance Israeli-Palestinian
peace will emerge. The normalization agreements between Israel and three Arab
States must help create such opportunities. As we have seen in statements from
Amman to Cairo, from international partners and the League of Arab States, the
commitment to the two-State solution, in line with United Nations resolutions and
international law, continues to be affirmed by broad regional and international
consensus.

6/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 2
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Sergey Vershinin
[Original: Russian]
As Security Council President, Russia convened today’s meeting in view of
the international community’s important role in devising consolidated approaches
to settle regional crises. The long-standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies at the
epicentre of the upheavals in the Middle East. This problem has remained a source
of international and regional discord for more than seven decades, while providing
an ideological rationale for terrorist and extremist groups around the world. Absent a
settlement, the conflict has brought unspeakable suffering to the people of Palestine
and Israel and to the Arab States and the numerous Palestinian diasporas located
there, including people living in Palestinian camps.
This state of affairs resulted from attempts to reverse the situation singlehandedly, without collective or coordinated efforts, reaching a point where unilateral
initiatives have not only ignored but have undermined the international legal
framework for the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, as approved by the United Nations
and set forth in Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. That has led to
a new impasse that threatens to undermine stability in the region.
While maintaining constructive partnership ties with all the countries in
the region, Russia views the improvement of Arab-Israeli relations to be a positive
development. At the end of the day, achieving a comprehensive and just settlement in
the Middle East remains an integral part of Russia’s policy in the region.
At the same time, as the Arab States and Israel normalize their relations, the
Palestinian question should not be sidelined. This problem will not go away. We
hold the time-tested view that all-round stability in the Middle East, by definition, is
unattainable without a lasting solution to the Palestinian issue. The leadership of all
Arab States shares this view.
We must focus on facilitating the resumption of talks between Israel and the
Palestinians without delay. It is important that the political process be rooted in
international resolutions and the existing agreements and understandings between
the parties.
The purpose of today’s meeting, as we see it, consists of reaffirming the
international legal framework for the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, primarily
the two-State solution, with a Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. However, we should not forget others final-status issues, like
refugees, water resources and the status of the holy sites of the three world religions
in Jerusalem. We also take into consideration the fact that the Arab countries remain
committed to their well-known initiative.
Still, the parties should strictly abide by the obligations they have assumed —
to renounce unilateral steps in resolving final-status issues, to cease settlement
activity and the demolition of Palestinian buildings, to eliminate from the agenda
all plans for annexation, to stop the violence and to work together to fight terrorism.
Of course, much will depend on the progress and outcome of intra-Palestinian
dialogue. Russia and its Egyptian partners are helping Palestinian organizations
unite under the Palestinian Liberation Organization platform. That is a crucial
condition for the attainment of the Palestinians’ national aspirations, based on the
United Nations-approved proposals of the Middle East Quartet of intermediaries.
20-143787/104

S/2020/1055

We believe that the Quartet should act with more urgency. This is a unique
mechanism for mediation that was approved in Council resolutions. It can — and
must — play the role assigned to it in developing direct Palestinian-Israeli talks.
Russia has proposed that the first stage of those talks begin without any
preconditions, so the sides can come to an agreement through a bilateral dialogue
without external pressure. History shows that a lasting settlement of any conflict is
possible only when the protagonists hold talks on a mutually acceptable platform.
For our part, we will continue working towards that objective with all the interested
regional parties, at the Security Council and within the framework of the Middle
East Quartet of international intermediaries. We are resolved to working closely
with our colleagues in this format: the United Nations, the United States and the
European Union. We also welcome parties in the region to join in those efforts.
We noted that, in his September address to the General Assembly (see
A/75/PV.10), Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas reaffirmed his openness to
Quartet-led talks with Israel. Another instrument of this kind is the Moscow conference
on the Middle East. International consensus on this issue has been enshrined in
resolution 1850 (2008) and in decisions of the Quartet. The Russian initiative on
holding a Palestinian-Israeli summit meeting in Moscow also remains relevant.
Immediate attention should be given to the socioeconomic developments in
the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as to the grave humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip, which has been further complicated by the coronavirus pandemic.
In that context, we call on the international community to make use of its donor
potential to help people in the Gaza Strip. The United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a key role in that
regard, and we urge donor countries to support its activities.
In October 2021, we will mark the thirtieth anniversary of the Madrid Middle
East Peace Conference. The Conference defined a Middle East settlement that must
be comprehensive, cover all negotiation tracks and take into account decisions
and principles based on international law. We believe that the Madrid legacy
remains relevant.

8/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 3
Statement by the Deputy Foreign Minister of Viet Nam,
Dang Minh Khoi
I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting, and I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing.
Viet Nam remains deeply concerned about the overall situation in Gaza
and other occupied Palestinian territories, but most importantly the humanitarian
conditions in those areas amid an ongoing, complicated pandemic ravaging the
region. In Gaza, following the collapse of all productive sectors, basic social services
and infrastructure, 53 per cent of the population is living in poverty. Movement
restrictions associated with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have further
increased vulnerabilities.
In our part of the world, Viet Nam and other countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations with strong Governments and general stability are working
hard to contain COVID-19, with encouraging, yet modest results. It is therefore
hard to imagine the additional challenges faced by the Palestinian people, who lack
adequate financial and medical resources and basic facilities and live with constant
instability and fear in these difficult times.
While the primary responsibility lies with the Palestinian Authority, we call
on the international community to direct its support and assistance in all forms and
through all channels to help Palestinians overcome this multifaceted crisis. Support
needs to be effective, well-coordinated and people-centred, with priority given to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to vulnerable groups. Enhanced assistance
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, an agency with a long history of experience working in the region, is important
to help it fulfil its mandate of providing relief for the Palestinian people.
And yet the pandemic does not seem to curb hostilities. Violence is still
rampant, adding to the chaos that reigns in the occupied territories. We are alarmed by
the security situation in Gaza and have grave concerns about the killing of innocent
civilians, especially children and women. In the West Bank, house demolitions
disrupt the lives of ordinary Palestinian people.
We therefore continue to urge all parties to exercise restraint, de-escalate
tension, stop all acts of violence and take the interests of innocent civilians to heart.
Viet Nam is of the strong opinion that peace and stability are preconditions for all
development. Progress in the political process, such as preparations for the upcoming
Palestinian elections, cannot be sustained without stability and a strong commitment
to peace by all parties.
Viet Nam does not support unilateral acts that complicate the current situation
in the occupied West Bank, in particular the expansion of Israeli settlements in that
area. Those actions run counter to international law and agreements recently reached
between Israel and other countries in the region.
Viet Nam supports all efforts and initiatives that seek to enhance regional
peace, security and stability, including the proposal of Palestinian President Abbas
to convene an international peace conference early next year with all the parties
concerned. We believe that a comprehensive, just and sustainable solution to the
Palestinian question can be reached only on the basis of international law and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the United Nations.
In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm our solidarity with the
Palestinian people and our consistent support for their just struggle to affirm their
20-143789/104

S/2020/1055

inalienable rights. We also express our firm support for a two-State solution — the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine that coexists in peace with the
State of Israel along the pre-1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

10/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 4
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed briefing.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union and its member States (annex 29).
My first point concerns the Israeli settlement policy, which is illegal under
international law. This month, the Higher Planning Council of the Israeli Civil
Administration met for the first time since February. The Council announced a
significant expansion of more than 5,000 housing units in settlements in the West
Bank, including more than 1,600 units in areas in and around Jerusalem. We are
particularly concerned about those developments, which compromise the viability
and territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as the future
capital of both Israel and Palestine. We urge the Israeli Government to reverse those
decisions and put an end to its settlement policy, including in East Jerusalem and
sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1.
Despite the current coronavirus disease pandemic and its significant
humanitarian impact on already fragile communities, we note a worrisome increase
in demolitions and confiscations, including of humanitarian structures financed by
Belgium and the European Union. We are very closely following the situation of
the school in Ras Al-Tin and the villages of Umm Al-Kheir and Khirbet Al-Majaz,
whose populations are threatened with eviction and the demolition of their property.
The forced displacement of those populations would constitute a clear violation of
Israel’s humanitarian obligations as an occupying Power.
We are deeply concerned about the increased tension and violence between
Israeli settlers and Palestinians resulting from that settlement policy. We condemn
any use of violence. We call for combating impunity for the perpetrators of such
violence, including through effective prosecution. At this time of the year, the annual
olive picking campaign is taking place — a key economic activity for Palestinians.
We call on Israel to assume its responsibilities and ensure that the harvest takes
place without incident and that workers have safe and unhindered access to the olive
groves.
These developments demonstrate that, despite the suspension of plans to
formalize the annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory, the de facto
annexation continues unabated. That undermines the confidence that the parties
need more than ever to resume a credible dialogue.
My second point, therefore, concerns the need to restore that confidence.
That implies, first of all, that all parties put an end to unilateral acts. But that also
implies restoring cooperation, in line with existing agreements and in full respect
of international law. We share the concern expressed by the Special Coordinator
regarding the budgetary situation of the Palestinian Authority, as well as the impact
on the Palestinian population of the suspension of civil and security coordination
with Israel. We therefore call on the Palestinian Authority to resume fiscal, civil and
security coordination with Israel.
In the context of a resumption of dialogue, it is all the more important that all
Palestinian factions invest, with a sense of compromise, in the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank under a single legitimate and democratic authority. We strongly
20-1437811/104

S/2020/1055

encourage the holding of democratic elections in the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem and Gaza.
My third point is that Belgium, like its European partners, remains committed
to a negotiated and viable two-State solution based on agreed parameters and
international law. That means an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign
and viable Palestinian State living in peace alongside Israel. We encourage all
international and multilateral efforts to resume dialogue provided they are fully
consistent with international law and the agreed parameters and take into account
the legitimate aspirations of both parties. In that regard, we underline the role of the
Middle East Quartet and the Secretary-General.
We welcome the announcements — by the Governments of the United States,
Israel and the Sudan — of the normalization of relations between Israel and the
Sudan. We hope that those developments will create a new regional dynamic that
will contribute to the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the
two-State solution.
I would like to express Belgium’s support for the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the occupied Palestinian territory. We are
deeply concerned about the non-renewal of visas for the Office’s international staff.
We very much hope that this situation will soon be resolved, given the indispensable
role that the Office plays on the ground. Finally, I wish to support the appeal made
by the Special Rapporteur on the administrative detention of Mr. Al-Akhras.
Administrative detention must remain an exceptional measure that is applied for
a limited period of time and must take into consideration various guarantees, such
as the right to mount a defence and the right to a fair trial within a reasonable
time frame.

12/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English and Chinese]
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine and the representative
of Israel to this meeting.
The Palestinian issue is the root cause of turbulence in the Middle East and
must be put at the centre of the international agenda. Last month, during the general
debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, as well as during this
month’s deliberations of the Fourth Committee, many countries expressed their views
on the Middle East situation and the Palestinian issue. The Palestinian leadership has
also put forward new initiatives. It is worthwhile to earnestly study those initiatives
and take corresponding action.
There have been recent changes in the Middle East, including with regard
to the Palestinian issue. China is pleased to see that measures are being taken to
ease tensions in the Middle East and to promote regional peace and stability. At
the same time, we must play close attention to the recent escalation in the Gaza
Strip, to new settlement construction plans still under way and to the worsening
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. In that regard, I would
like to emphasize the following points.
First, we must stick to the right path of the two-State solution, which is
the bottom line for international fairness and justice. We should not turn back
the wheels of history. International consensus is embodied in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative,
which provide important parameters for resolving the Palestinian issue and must be
observed and implemented.
The two sides should pursue peace talks as a strategic choice and find an
expeditious resolution to the occupied Palestinian territories based on relevant
United Nations resolutions. In addition, they must demarcate final boundaries
through peaceful negotiations and refrain from taking actions that may intensify
conflict, in particular by abandoning annexation plans. We call on all relevant
parties to effectively abide by the agreement reached at the end of August, cease
violence and avoid escalation in the Gaza Strip. The settlement issue is one of the
core aspects of final-status negotiations on the question of Palestine. China agrees
with the statement made by Special Coordinator Mladenov on 15 October — that
settlement construction violates international law and weakens the prospect for the
realization of the two-State solution.
Secondly, we must steadily advance the peace process. What is lacking in
attempts to resolve the Palestinian issue is not ambitious plans or lengthy documents,
but the courage to deliver on promises and the conscience to uphold justice. The
international community, and countries with influence vis-à-vis Palestine and
Israel in particular, should be objective and fair. They should act based on the
fundamental interests of the Palestinian people and the countries of the region. They
should promote peace talks and sincerely endeavour to advance the Middle East
peace process.
Any proposed solution to the Palestinian issue should heed the opinion of
the parties concerned, Palestine in particular, and the voice of the countries and
organizations of the region, and should be reached through balanced dialogue and
20-1437813/104

S/2020/1055

negotiation between the parties concerned. In order to avoid long-term negative
consequences, efforts should be made to avoid the imposition of a solution.
In his statement to the general debate of the General Assembly (see A/75/
PV.10), President Abbas called for an international conference, to be held at the
beginning of next year, with the participation of all relevant parties, in order to discuss
a genuine peace process. China supports that call and hopes that the international
community will consider it and that all parties will work together to create favourable
conditions for the settlement of the Palestinian issue. We are pleased to see intraPalestinian reconciliation and progress in the political process. We hope that the
relevant countries of the region will continue to play a constructive role.
Thirdly, we must vigorously improve the economic and humanitarian
situation. The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated the already fragile
economic, public health and humanitarian situation in Palestine. The international
community should intensify its efforts to support Palestine in developing its
economy, improving the livelihoods of its people and countering the pandemic in
order to promote peace and stability with development. We encourage the two sides
to resolve the tax withholding issue through negotiation. We call on the relevant
party to completely lift the Gaza blockade in order to ensure access that all those in
need in the occupied territories have access to basic services and humanitarian aid.
In addition, we call for the effective implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The
demolition of Palestinian houses, the destruction of their property and the violence
against innocent civilians must stop.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) provides educational and health-care services to more
than 5 million Palestinian refugees and has made a significant contribution to
the improvement of their humanitarian situation in Palestine. The international
community should firmly support UNRWA and oppose the use of cutting off aid as
a tool to exert pressure.
China has always supported the Palestinian people’s aspiration to establish a
fully sovereign and independent Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and has always supported the legitimate Palestinian
demands and all efforts to settle the Palestinian issue.
Since the beginning of the year, China has sent Palestine several batches of
supplies, as well as medical experts to help fight the pandemic. We have also donated
to UNRWA and, through the Agency, provided personal protective equipment to
Palestine and Palestinian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. Shipments of such
supplies are being sent to UNRWA’s medical and health-care institutions to refugees
within and outside the territory of Palestine.
As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people, China will continue to be guided
by President Xi Jinping’s four-point proposal on the settlement of the Palestinian
issue, and will make positive contributions to the expeditious realization of a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue.

14/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
As always, we would like to begin by reiterating our commitment to taking
the necessary steps to build sustainable peace in the Middle East and to sending
a message of solidarity with the people affected by so many years of conflict and
mistrust between warring parties.
It is precisely due to the protracted nature of the conflict that the coronavirus
disease pandemic has a very different manifestation in contexts such as Syria,
Yemen, Lebanon or Gaza. At this juncture, it is necessary to avoid any obstacle to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
It is not enough to come here and express our views; that does not absolve us
from the central responsibility entrusted to the Security Council for the maintenance
of world peace and security, the achievement of which requires firm and effective
action to complement our position.
That said, we strongly support ongoing efforts to create conditions conducive
to peace, while highlighting the most recent normalization agreements between
Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, mediated by the United States. By
deepening regional cooperation and dialogue, this positive transformation could
well increase stability, prosperity and security in the region. We applaud that. At the
same time, we encourage all parties to immediately cease all actions that hamper
peace and to build a prosperous and just future for the peoples of the Middle East.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian situation, we support the initiative to
hold an international peace conference in early 2021, the format of which must be
discussed and agreed without delay, following an approach that favours concrete
and inclusive action. We recommend that such a dialogue have — as its starting
point — mutual respect, international law, United Nations resolutions and the faceto-face participation of both Israel and Palestine so as to address the aspirations of
Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace.
The complex humanitarian situation in Gaza remains critical and is exacerbated
by an alarming environmental situation, with limited access to drinking water and
the corresponding adverse impact on health, food security and development, in
addition to widespread insecurity, an electricity crisis and a lack of opportunities.
Meeting the deep needs of the Palestinian population and working to pave the
path for development in order to alleviate them is therefore an essential aspect to be
addressed in the peace talks.
In addition, we commend the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to help nearly 2 million
refugees, and call on donors to increase their contributions to enable UNRWA to
meet the growing needs of the population.
Turning to Lebanon, the economic situation, compounded by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, continues to deteriorate. Much remains to be done to strengthen
governance and institutional reforms in Lebanon. Our solidarity is more important
than ever.
As for the Golan Heights, although generally calm, the situation remains
volatile, with continued violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement.

20-1437815/104

S/2020/1055

We therefore urge the parties to exercise maximum restraint and not to violate the
ceasefire or the area of separation in order to prevent escalation.
In conclusion, with a view to achieving a negotiated peace between Israel and
Palestine, the Dominican Republic lends its impartial support to real and sustainable
solutions on the basis of international consensus that the only way forward is for
Palestinians and Israelis to negotiate a two-State solution.

16/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
First, I would like to state that Estonia aligns itself with the joint statement
submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 29).
Estonia welcomes the signing of the agreements between the United Arab
Emirates and Israel and between the Kingdom of Bahrain and Israel, as well as
the recent announcement of the agreement between Israel and the Sudan. These
are positive steps towards achieving peace and stability in the whole region. We
acknowledge the constructive role that the United States has played in that regard.
We encourage regional actors to embrace that spirit of compromise and continue to
implement confidence-building measures to contribute to the long-term stability of
the region.
We believe that these historic developments can also give momentum to
efforts to find a comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Israel’s
commitment to suspend the plan to extend its sovereignty over parts of the West
Bank is a positive step.
We urge both sides to re-engage in meaningful negotiations on all finalstatus issues in order to achieve a just and lasting peace. It is also important that
all regional and international players, including the Middle East Quartet, continue
efforts towards these negotiations.
Our position regarding the Middle East conflict remains the same. A twoState solution and lasting peace can be achieved only through direct negotiations
that take into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli
security concerns.
In the light of the recent developments, we also urge Israelis and Palestinians
to take further steps to build confidence, especially in the context of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We call upon the Palestinian Authority to resume cooperation with
Israel based on previous agreements, and would like to wish the chief Palestinian
negotiator, Mr. Saeb Erekat, a speedy recovery.
We note positively that the Palestinian factions have reached consensus
on holding elections. We hope that will soon translate into setting a date for said
elections throughout the occupied Palestinian territories, as well as a commitment
by all Palestinian factions to democratic principles.
We call on all parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that might undermine
the viability of the two-State solution. We call upon Israel to stop expanding
settlements and end demolitions in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in
East Jerusalem.
We also condemn all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror
and acts of provocation, incitement and destruction. The continued firing of rockets
into Israel is not acceptable.
In conclusion, I would like to once again urge both the Israelis and the
Palestinians to generate positive regional dynamics, build trust and commitment to
peace and re-engage in meaningful negotiations.

20-1437817/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Special Coordinator for his briefing. I welcome Minister Al-Malki,
as well as the Russian and Vietnamese Deputy Ministers and the Tunisian Secretary
of State.
We recall every month that the parameters for the settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict are well-known: two States, living in peace and security, within
secure and recognized borders on the basis of the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem
as their capital. This is not an ideological position disconnected from reality and
belonging to a bygone past. On the contrary, it is the only realistic solution to ensure
the stability of the region and, in particular, the security of Israel, on which France
will never compromise, and the Palestinians’ inalienable right to self-determination.
What is at stake is the credibility of the Security Council, which has endorsed those
parameters and is the guarantor of international law.
Along with its European partners, France has welcomed the normalization
agreements between Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, and welcomes
the announcement of an agreement with the Sudan. France hopes that they can
contribute to the stability of the region. The decision taken in that regard by the
Israeli authorities to suspend their annexation plans is a positive step. France calls
on Israel to make it a definitive measure.
France is concerned about the current dynamics of de facto annexation of
the occupied territories. In that regard, we condemn the decision of the Israeli
authorities to launch plans for the construction of more than 4,900 housing units in
the West Bank settlements. The expansion of the settlements is a flagrant violation
of international law and constitutes an obstacle to a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace, as set out in resolution 2334 (2016). That decision is compounded by the
launch of the bidding process for the construction of new units in Givat Hamatos,
scheduled for 2 November. The record rates of demolition of Palestinian structures,
including in East Jerusalem, are also worrisome. These demolitions must stop.
That is what we reaffirmed with Germany, Spain, Italy and the United Kingdom
on 16 October.
We must work to recreate a positive dynamic to enable the parties to resume
dialogue. In conjunction with its European and Arab partners, France is ready to
support a gradual resumption of talks based on concrete and realistic commitments
on both sides. France continues to coordinate closely with Germany, Egypt and
Jordan on this issue, in line with the Amman meeting of 24 September.
France will also support any initiative that is in line with the agreed parameters
and international law. In that regard, we welcome Minister Al-Malki’s detailed
proposal to organize an international conference and invite him to do so with the
help of all stakeholders.
We wish to take advantage of the presence of Mr. Al-Malki today to encourage
him to continue the initial efforts in the area of inter-Palestinian reconciliation.
We welcome the commitment of President Abbas to hold general elections in the
Palestinian territories. We call on the Palestinian Authority to hold these elections
without further delay in order to meet democratic demands and promote peace.
France and the European Union are ready to support him in that endeavour.

18/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Finally, we reiterate our appeal to all Member States, especially our partners
in the Gulf, to finance the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which is all the more essential in times of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. France has doubled its contribution to the Agency since 2017 and
will continue to support it in these difficult times. It will also continue to support
civil society organizations and to call for respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights.
France calls on the Council to join efforts to relaunch a political process
that has been at a standstill since 2014. That is our responsibility as guarantors of
international peace and security.

20-1437819/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
First, I would like to welcome the signing of normalization agreements
between Israel, on the one side, and the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the
Sudan, on the other. These developments are an important step towards more stability
and peaceful relations between Israel and the Arab world. As the Israeli Ambassador
said today, these developments offer new opportunities for further agreements. From
our perspective, they also provide unique momentum to stimulate the resumption of
cooperation and peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians.
We remain convinced that sustainable peace, security and stability in the
Middle East can be reached only through a just, lasting and comprehensive solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of international law, the relevant
United Nations resolutions and internationally agreed parameters. Just because
international law and Security Council resolutions are well-established, it does not
mean that they are less important or less relevant.
This conflict can — and must — be resolved once and for all, not just managed;
otherwise, we will see only a continuation of enmity, violence and bloodshed, as
evidenced by the recent missile attacks from Gaza against Israel. Let me reiterate
Germany’s condemnation of all attacks and threats against Israel by Hamas and
other terrorist groups, including the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel.
I regret that the Palestinian Foreign Minister has not criticized that, nor said anything
about hate speech against Israel, who has the right to defend itself against such acts
in a proportional manner.
We are deeply concerned about the most recent decision taken by the Israeli
authorities to advance and grant permits for the construction of more than 4,900
settlement building units in the occupied West Bank. That is a counterproductive
move. Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal
under international law. They severely undermine prospects for ending the occupation
and for a viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the framework of a negotiated
two-State solution. I very much regret that the Israeli Permanent Representative
did not mention anything about that regrettable illegal development. As we have
emphasized directly to the Government of Israel, that step also undermines efforts to
rebuild trust between Israelis and Palestinians in order to resume dialogue.
We call on Israel to immediately halt all settlement construction, including in
East Jerusalem and sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1,
as well as all confiscations, evictions and demolitions of Palestinian structures in
East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We trust that Israeli annexation plans are truly
and permanently suspended and call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements.
We emphasize that we will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines,
including with regard to Jerusalem, unless agreed to between the parties.
Germany remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution, with two
sovereign, democratic and independent States — Israel and Palestine — living
side by side in peace, within secure and recognized borders, on the basis of the 4
June 1967 lines. That is the only viable path to fulfil the legitimate aspirations of
Palestinians and Israelis for a life of peace, dignity and equal rights. We call on
both sides to refrain from unilateral actions, recommit to their signed agreements,
restore cooperation and resume credible dialogue. We are convinced that
confidence-building measures on both sides would provide a path towards a credible
dialogue and, eventually, towards serious, meaningful and effective talks on all
final-status issues.
20/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Together with Egypt, France and Jordan, we will continue our efforts, and we
offer our active support and good offices in facilitating a path back to cooperation,
credible dialogue and a negotiated, peaceful settlement. Serious, meaningful and
effective negotiations must be based on international law and agreed parameters, and
either be conducted directly between the parties or under an international umbrella,
such as the Middle East Quartet. In that regard, the Palestinian proposal to convene
an international conference is worth exploring. We invite Special Coordinator
Mladenov to consult with all relevant parties and to inform the Council about the
feasibility of such a conference.
We also call on both sides to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016), with all
its provisions.
We welcome the agreement among Palestinian factions to hold parliamentary
and presidential elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem and Gaza. We
hope that such elections take place soon. We offer our support and call on Israel to
enable the holding of such elections in East Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the Hadassah Medical Center
in Jerusalem for treating the Secretary General of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization Executive Committee following a life-threatening coronavirus disease
infection. We wish Mr. Erekat a full and speedy recovery. We are grateful to Hadassah
for living up to its declared mission to “extend a hand to all, without regard for race,
religion or ethnic origin” — a spirit that is so sorely needed in the Middle East and,
indeed, in the whole world.

20-1437821/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Russia, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet
Nam, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia and His Excellency Mr.
Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine, to
the meeting.
I would also like to express my appreciation to Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing on the current situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We continue to hear increasingly grim reports from the ground.
It is regrettable that another act of bad faith has been committed by Israel.
As we learned recently, on 14 and 15 October, the Israeli authorities approved the
construction of another 5,000 settlement units in the occupied Palestinian territory.
That development is not surprising or new. This creeping annexation is testament
that Israel’s annexation plan is alive and well.
Collective efforts to realize a two-State solution based on pre-1967 borders
cannot be achieved when international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions are repeatedly violated and ignored by Israel. Indonesia condemns this
latest flagrant violation of international law, and once again demands that Israel
immediately cease all of its illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
On that note, I would like to convey three pertinent points.
First, we call for accountability and an end to impunity. The expansion of illegal
settlements clearly violates Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334
(2016). Israel’s continued violations derive from decades of unchecked accountability
and systemic impunity. This has to stop. We, the international community, must act
together to end impunity and to hold Israel accountable.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive and inclusive solution.
A unilateral approach to finding a solution for the Israel-Palestine conflict is not
only unjust but unsustainable. A comprehensive and inclusive solution is needed.
Indonesia urges the international community to focus all of its effort on restarting
a credible multilateral process based on United Nations resolutions, international
law and other relevant internationally agreed parameters. The process should also,
first and foremost, involve direct engagement between the two conflicting parties —
Israel and Palestine.
I would like to reiterate and echo President Abbas’ call for the SecretaryGeneral to convene an international conference as part of a multilateral approach to
the peace process, with the participation of the Middle East Quartet and all relevant
parties. In addition, we would like to extend our support for intra-Palestinian unity
talks as an essential step towards internal reconciliation and a unified Palestine.
Thirdly, we note the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, which continues to worsen due to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, with more than 60,000 positive cases and 492 deaths,
according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). The
huge spike represents a significant burden and exacerbates an already difficult and
challenging situation, particularly for women, children and refugees. In October
alone, OCHA reported that more than 6,000 additional Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory had tested positive for COVID-19, resulting in 90 more deaths.
22/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

As such, the role of United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), is
more urgent than ever. The international community should remain committed
to supporting and ensuring predictable funding and political backing in order for
UNRWA to effectively carry out its mandate.
Today we are commemorating the seventy-fifth year of the Charter of the
United Nations, where we are recommitting to the spirit and letter of the Charter. We
heard the beautiful poem, entitled “Inheritance”, by Ms. Eleanor Wikstrom, Youth
Poet Laurate.
If the youth of the world ask us what we have inherited on this issue of Palestine,
the answer would be that the United Nations inherit the despair and suffering of the
Palestinian people. We inherit stories of conflict, violence and violations of human
rights by Israel in the Palestinian territory. We inherit the non-implementation and
non-fulfilment of United Nations and Security Council resolutions on the issue
of Palestine.
The question of Palestine requires a just solution. We, as the Security Council,
have a solemn duty to resolve it. Indonesia remains steadfast and committed to stand
with the Palestinian people to achieve their independence and sovereignty.

20-1437823/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed briefing on the
situation in the Middle East.
Amid the continuing normalization of relations between Israel and its Arab
neighbours and the hope it inspires, my delegation remains concerned about recent
developments in the Middle East, particularly with the decision of the Israeli
authorities to continue building new housing in the settlements of the occupied West
Bank, in addition to the forced evictions and the demolition of Palestinian structures.
The Niger deplores those events, which come less than a month after the
signing of normalization agreements between Israel and two Arab countries in the
Gulf, opening up a promising path for the resumption of dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians.
In view of the efforts made for so many years to bring the parties closer together,
and in the light of the positive developments since the 15 September agreements, the
Israeli authorities’ decision is likely to sorely test confidence between the parties
and bog down the peace process.
That is why we call on Israel to respect the principles of international law in
the occupied territories and to refrain from any measure to the contrary, which could
undermine the prospect of a resumption of peace talks with a view to reaching a
negotiated two-State solution, as endorsed by the international community.
It is more necessary than ever for the international community, the members of
the Middle East Quartet and, in particular, the Security Council, to spare no effort to
bring Israel and Palestine closer together and lead them towards the negotiating table
for the settlement of the conflict in a way that satisfies the legitimate aspirations for
the creation of a viable State for one and security for the other. The abandonment of
that path would have repercussions for the entire region and for international peace
and security.
The spirit of restraint and receptiveness of the Israeli authorities to the various
appeals from the international community, as well as the great political will shown
by President Mahmoud Abbas before the General Assembly, are assets we must avail
ourselves of at every opportunity in order to bring the parties back to dialogue.
The humanitarian situation in the region remains worrisome, particularly
with the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which spares neither Israelis
nor Palestinians. The pandemic has exacerbated an already complex health situation,
with a lack of adequate medical equipment and medicine, as well as a disastrous
economic situation induced by the continuing unsustainable blockade on the Gaza
Strip, which increases the vulnerability of the Palestinian population.
That is why the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East requires additional support to enable it to continue its
useful activities on the ground.
It is also incumbent on Israel, as the occupying Power, to assume its
responsibilities under international humanitarian law in the administration of the
territories under its control.

24/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

In conclusion, the Niger commends the tireless efforts of Nickolay Mladenov
and reaffirms its full support for the efforts of the international community to bring
about a positive outcome to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

20-1437825/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on developments and trends on the
ground. We also welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine, and our colleague,
Ambassador Gilad Erdan, Permanent Representative of Israel.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains steadfast in our view that the
only way to achieve lasting peace is on the basis of agreed and long-standing
international parameters, the relevant United Nations resolutions and a negotiated
two-State solution that recognizes the legitimate aspirations and security needs of
both Palestinians and Israelis. Both Israel and Palestine must make sincere efforts to
build mutual trust for the progress of direct negotiations and to not undermine the
peace process.
This year marks 53 years of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory. At
this time, the international community must reaffirm our collective support for a
two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders and spare no efforts to achieve
a viable solution to the conflict. We therefore welcome President Abbas’ call for
an international conference in early 2021 to resume peace talks between Israel and
the Palestinians. The time has come for the international community to meet our
collective responsibility under international law to bring an end to the occupation of
the Palestinian State.
On 14 and 15 October, the Israeli Government approved a plan to build 5,000
settlement units in the West Bank. Those settlements, as well as the acquisition of
Palestinian territory by force, are illegal. We denounce those illegal and provocative
actions and call for full respect of, and adherence to, the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, long-standing international consensus and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
Turning to Gaza, we condemn the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip by Israel
and call on the Israeli Government to immediately lift the siege of the Gaza Strip and
allow the free movement of people. It is time to fully end the occupation that began
in 1967 and resolve all final-status issues on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and subsequent resolutions on this item. We also call on Member States
to increase funding to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as it continues to provide assistance and protection to
millions of Palestinian refugees with limited resources.
In conclusion, we sincerely hope that a two-State solution, with Israel and a
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and security, will be realized in the
near future, and that this will lead to a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

26/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 13
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, Sergey Vershinin, for presiding over this meeting. I am
also grateful to the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his valuable briefing.
As a matter of principle, Tunisia has consistently supported the just cause
of Palestine and the inalienable and integral rights of the Palestinian people.
Accordingly, Tunisia has called for intensified efforts at the international level to
revive the peace process and launch genuine, credible negotiations between the two
parties to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, within a specific time frame, leading to
a just and comprehensive peace that would bring about an end to the occupation
and enable the Palestinian people to enjoy all its legitimate rights and establish its
independent State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The peace process has been at a standstill, particularly in recent years, while
the Israeli occupation’s policies and acts of aggression against the Palestinian people
have continued and escalated, exacerbating the atmosphere of despair, hardship,
tension and volatility in the region. We therefore wish to emphasize once again
that the international community, particularly the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet, must fulfil its role by salvaging the two-State solution and restarting
negotiations on the basis of the internationally agreed terms of reference. We also
emphasize that the Security Council must implement the relevant resolutions,
particularly resolution 2334 (2016), and prevail on Israel, the occupying Power, to
withdraw from all occupied Arab territories and comply with the internationally
recognized resolutions.
A just and comprehensive peace is the best and only way to restore security
and stability in the region. Today we have a genuine opportunity to move forward
towards that noble goal through the proposal of the Palestinian President, Mahmoud
Abbas, to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries, with the participation of
the stakeholders, with a view to embarking upon a peace process grounded in
international law, the resolutions of the United Nations and the relevant terms
of reference.
We hope that the Secretary-General, the Quartet, the Security Council and
all international and regional stakeholders will coalesce to lay the groundwork for
the initiative. Tunisia stands ready to contribute to any constructive efforts geared
at bringing an end to the occupation and achieving security and stability for all the
peoples of the region.
National reconciliation has an important part to play in strengthening
Palestinian unity and bolstering the two-State solution. Tunisia once again welcomes
the positive steps taken by all Palestinian factions towards that goal and welcomes
the consensus that Palestinian legislative and presidential elections can be held in the
next few months. We urge the international community to press Israel, the occupying
Power, to allow the Palestinian general elections to be held in East Jerusalem.
On listening to the briefing of the Special Coordinator, we were deeply
concerned to hear that the occupation authorities have continued to enact settlement
policies, demolish homes and target civilians. Such conduct is a grave violation of the

20-1437827/104

S/2020/1055

principles of international law and a flagrant act of defiance towards the authority of
the Security Council, given the absence of any form of accountability.
Tunisia condemns those practices, reiterates its rejection of Israeli annexation
plans and insists that such plans must be definitively abandoned. We call for protection
to be granted to Palestinian civilians, and for an end to the illegal blockade on the
Gaza Strip and to all forms of collective punishment, particularly in view of the
urgent and alarming challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Given the ongoing suffering in the Palestinian territories and in refugee camps,
Tunisia reiterates its absolute support for the mandate of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which plays a vital role
in alleviating the plight of refugees and supporting stability in the region. Tunisia
urges all regional and international actors to step up the humanitarian response in the
occupied Palestinian territory and help the Palestinian Authority tackle the effects of
the pandemic and the economic repercussions of the occupation.
Lastly, Tunisia remains committed to peace as a strategic goal and is ready
to support any initiative aimed at shoring up peace based on the agreed parameters,
including the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to uphold peace, security and the
principles of justice and peaceful coexistence among the peoples of the region. We
believe that the participation of the Palestinian side is a prerequisite for any initiative
to resolve the conflict and find a fair and lasting solution to the it.

28/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
We express our appreciation to Deputy Minister Vershinin for presiding over
today’s meeting.
Allow me to take this opportunity to welcome to the Security Council the
Foreign Minister of the State of Palestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and thank him for his
participation today. I would also like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
frank and useful update on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. South
Africa welcomes his Office’s concerted efforts aimed at resolving the long-standing
conflict that arises out of the occupation of Palestinian territories, and we urge him
to continue those efforts so that the United Nations may, as the representative of the
international community, play a key role in finding a solution to the PalestinianIsraeli matter.
We took note of the remarks by the new Israeli Permanent Representative
to the United Nations and the recent events in the Middle East between Israel and
United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan, three members of the League of Arab
States. We had hoped that those events would lead to less suffering of Palestinians in
prisons, or in exile or internally displaced from their homes.
As we heard from Special Coordinator Mladenov today, Israel continues
its illegal settlement expansion, in blatant violation of resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and international law. Earlier this month saw Israeli
authorities announcing the advancement of over 5,000 new housing units in the
occupied West Bank, making 2020 the year of the greatest settlement expansion
since 2012, with over 12,000 units being advanced.
While recent bilateral agreements have shown Israel to have agreed to suspend
its annexation plans, this continued and increasing settlement activity contradicts
those agreements and calls into question the benefits they offer for peace, as they
have not eased the occupation. In fact, those agreements appear to coincide with
increased illegal settlement activity and destruction of Palestinian agricultural land.
While formal annexation may have been suspended, de facto annexation continues
through those illegal practices.
Those newly forged relations and ostensibly transactional agreements have
done nothing to improve the lives of Palestinians, who continue to be denied
their basic human and civil rights while living under illegal military occupation.
As evidenced by the increase in settlement activity, we can see that Israel has no
intention of halting its de facto annexation efforts.
South Africa reiterates that settlements are illegal under international law and
directly contravene resolution 2334 (2016). These violations and inhumane actions by
Israel serve only to undermine any prospects for peace and jeopardize a permanent
and sustainable resolution to the conflict.
We often ask ourselves, and now we ask our fellow Council members, why
resolutions on certain issues are dealt with in a completely different manner than
other issues and resolutions on the Council’s agenda. We see this with the matter of
Palestine, and we are also seeing it this week with Western Sahara.
Israel continues to violate Security Council resolutions and international
law. Why, then, has there been no action to hold Israel accountable for those
illegal actions? If this were occurring with almost any other issue on the Council’s
agenda, we would not have hesitated to take action. Surely these double standards,
20-1437829/104

S/2020/1055

in a body whose responsibility is to maintain international peace and security, is
not acceptable. It is the responsibility of the Security Council to remain impartial,
as partiality and bias undermine and discredit the role of the Council and of the
United Nations as a whole.
From 1991 to 2007, there were a number of international conferences on the
question of Palestine. We had the Madrid Conference in 1991, which led to the Oslo
Accords in 1993, and which saw the first face-to-face agreement between leaders of
the Israeli authorities and the Palestinian Liberation Organization. The Annapolis
Conference in 2007 saw the parties committing to the road map for peace. Each of
those meetings was an important milestone in the Israel-Palestine peace process.
The initiatives by the Arab League and the Russian Federation have also played vital
roles in the peace process.
South Africa therefore fully supports President Abbas’ call for an international
conference, with the participation of all parties concerned, for discussions on a
genuine peace process, including the resolution of all final-status issues. We urge
the Council to heed the Secretary-General’s call for a collective and fresh push
for peace and reconciliation in the Middle East region. South Africa will continue
to work with all like-minded countries to support international efforts aimed at
the establishment of a viable Palestinian State existing side by side in peace with
Israel within internationally recognized borders, based on those existing on 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all the relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and internationally agreed parameters.
As South Africa’s Minister for International Relations and Cooperation,
Mrs. Naledi Pandor stated at last week’s debate on the situation in the Gulf region,
sustainable peace and stability in the Gulf and the wider Middle East region requires
an end to its core peace and security challenge, namely, the occupation of Palestine
(S/2020/1037, annex 7). In order to resolve this, any initiative to end the conflict and
bring an end to Israeli occupation must take into account the needs and aspirations
of the Palestinian people. No peace plan or initiative can have any merit or succeed
if all parties to the conflict are not included in such talks from the very beginning
as equal partners.
South Africa is encouraged by the Palestinians’ efforts at unity, including
efforts to agree on the dates for holding elections.
In conclusion, South Africa is deeply concerned about recent media reports
that Israel is refusing to renew visas for officials working for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. That has resulted in 9 of 12 officials
conducting critical work and reporting in the occupied Palestinian territory having
to abandon their posts and leave the country. We therefore call on Israel to uphold its
obligations as a responsible State Member of the United Nations to ensure that the
Organization and all of its various agencies, bodies and partners are able to continue
their vital work in the occupied Palestinian territory.
As it has demonstrated over the years, and based on its own history and recent
past, South Africa is ready to assist parties in resolving this long-standing, indeed
decades-old, question. Its resolution will transform the Middle East into a zone of
peace and unprecedented economic development.

30/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 15
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I thank United Nations Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
The United Kingdom has continued to support the progress made on
normalizing relations between Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates and Israel.
We hope others will follow suit for the benefit of the whole region, and we therefore
welcome Friday’s statement from the Governments of the Sudan, Israel and the
United States of America on the normalization of relations between Israel and the
Sudan. As United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has said, “this step is a
boost for the democratic transition in the Sudan and peace in the region”.
Last month, I stated that such agreements represent a profound shift in the
region, a shift that must now proceed in parallel with steps to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. There is much to be done to rebuild trust. The suspension of the
threat of annexation was the first step on this road. It must now become permanent.
It is vital that the Palestinian Authority resumes cooperation with Israel and that the
Israeli and Palestinian leaderships come together in dialogue to pursue the path of
peace. That is the consistent message of my Foreign Secretary.
To rebuild trust, we must see an end to the detrimental action on the ground.
We are particularly concerned by the announcement on 15 October of nearly
5,000 settlement units, many deep in the West Bank. The expansion of settlements
violates international law and is a counterproductive step in the light of the positive
developments between Israel and its neighbours of which I have spoken. Alongside
European partners, the United Kingdom has made clear our strong opposition to this
latest settlement advancement.
The United Kingdom also remains concerned about demolitions of Palestinian
buildings and evictions of Palestinians from their homes across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Demolitions and evictions in 2020 have proceeded at
a concerning pace. The United Kingdom is seriously concerned by the possible
demolition by Israeli authorities of a Palestinian school funded by the international
community in Ras Al-Tin. The right to education is basic and essential to having a
strong and thriving Palestinian education system that will provide opportunities for
the next generation. We call on Israel to halt such actions.
The United Kingdom has expressed our concern at the increase in settler
violence, the destruction of olive trees and the stealing of projects coinciding with
the Palestinian olive harvest. As the occupying Power, the Israeli security forces
must provide appropriate protection to the Palestinian civilian population.
In Gaza, while relative calm has resumed, the Israeli Defense Force’s
discovery on 22 October of a tunnel penetrating dozens of yards into Israeli territory
is of great concern. There have also been further rocket launches this month and a
return to launching improvised explosive device balloons by Gaza’s militant groups.
The United Kingdom condemns such indiscriminate attacks against Israeli civilians.
We continue to call upon Hamas and other terrorist groups to permanently end their
incitement and rocket fire against Israel. These negative actions must stop. We urge
the parties instead to pursue confidence-building measures to build the foundations
of future final status discussions. The Palestinian Authority must resume cooperation
with Israel. We urge progress on economic issues and the facilitation of trade.
Settlements, demolitions and evictions must stop. Rocket fire and incitement will
not be tolerated.

20-1437831/104

S/2020/1055

The United Kingdom remains committed to taking forward progress on efforts
towards a peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We continue to
support a two-State solution based on 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as a shared capital.
We restate our support for regional and international efforts aimed at facilitating
a peace process. Ultimately, there is no substitute for direct talks between the
Palestinians and Israel, which is the only way to reach a sustainable peace.

32/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank the Deputy Foreign Minister and the Russian delegation for convening
today’s meeting. I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov, as always, for his briefing.
He has provided us with a very informative report, and we applaud him and his
team’s efforts aimed at keeping the Security Council fully briefed. I would also like
to take a moment at the outset to wish Mr. Saeb Erekat, politician, lead Palestinian
negotiator and an architect of the Oslo Accords, a speedy recovery from the
coronavirus disease.
Once again, we find ourselves in the Council debating the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, and States Members of the United Nations will read out statements packed
with the same rhetorical fodder of hundreds of statements before them. It is time
to stop this unproductive practice. Jews and Arabs are Abraham’s children, share
Middle Eastern ancestry, culture and history, and deserve a future of peace as the
cousins they are.
As the Council is aware, just a few weeks ago, the United States co-hosted
an informal dialogue with the Security Council to discuss the historic Abraham
accords. Senior Emirati and Bahraini officials joined Senior Adviser Jared Kushner
to provide more details on these arrangements and to showcase what is possible
when leaders make courageous and bold decisions that advance the cause of peace.
As the discussion highlighted, opening direct ties between these three dynamic
societies and advanced economies has incredible potential to transform the region.
Normalization will spur economic growth, enhance technological innovation,
foster interfaith dialogue and forge closer people-to-people relations. And just last
week, President Trump announced another historic breakthrough, with the Sudan
also agreeing to normalize relations with Israel. For years, the Sudan harboured
the very terrorists — Al-Qaeda affiliates, Hizbullah and Hamas — who threaten
people around the world and wanted to destroy Israel, but whose leaders, today, have
announced a peace agreement. The conversation in the region is changing. As the
President said, a new chapter is beginning.
The simple truth is that each month the Council repeats decades-old approaches
to this conflict that go nowhere. Many States Members of the United Nations are
trapped in stale policies and narratives that will always fail to bring peace. President
Trump’s bold diplomacy and rejection of failed conventional attitudes lies at the heart
of the successful Abraham accords. His willingness to approach things differently
led to a historic breakthrough — the most significant step towards peace in the
Middle East in more than 25 years.
It is this same creative, realistic and fresh thinking that led to the President’s
Vision for Peace. We encourage our regional partners and the members of this body
to thoughtfully consider the United States Vision for Peace and to play a constructive
role in encouraging direct negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians
on the basis of the Vision. Unlike past efforts, the Vision is detailed, realistic and
implementable. We put an immense amount of thought and consideration into
drafting the Vision for Peace. Agreements are about details, and this plan has details.
One can like them or one can dislike them and offer alternatives, but deals are made
based on the details. This is why we have encouraged the Palestinians to offer their
position by utilizing the Vision and bringing their perspectives to the negotiating
table. The table has been set for two, and peace is within reach. Simply rejecting
the Vision out of hand does nothing to help the Palestinian people or advance the
cause of peace, and neither does holding more conferences or summits that are only
20-1437833/104

S/2020/1055

designed to rehash the same old tired points. We have been getting together to talk
for 25 years; I think now is the time for action.
We have heard many members of this body talk about the importance of the
Arab Peace Initiative as a basis for negotiations. The Arab Peace Initiative was
historic in its time, but it dates back to 2002, and it just does not provide the kind
of detail we need to reach peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis. What we
need today is progress, and this is what a peace deal based on the Vision for Peace
would deliver. A deal would bring much needed economic support and investment to
the Palestinian people. It would open up a whole new world of opportunities.
Within the United Nations, the United States continues to oppose the annual
barrage of more than a dozen perennial resolutions biased against Israel — resolutions
in which the text barely changes from year to year — a fact that underlines how
habitual United Nations attitudes towards Israel and the Palestinians have become.
This one-sided approach surfaces far too frequently in these resolutions and serves
only to undermine trust between parties and fails to create the kind of positive
international environment that we need to achieve peace. It is for this reason that
we are urging both parties and regional partners to be creative and embrace the
innovative approach that the Vision for Peace presents. If the international community
continues to operate under the same assumptions and simply repeats the same old
talking points, the unique opportunity we now have will be missed.
In President Abbas’ address to during the general debate at the opening of
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly (see A/75/PV.10), he called for
an international conference to launch discussions, and I have heard several of my
fellow Council members endorse this idea. We have no objection to meeting with
international partners to discuss the issue, but I have to ask: how is this different
than every other meeting convened on this issue over the past 60 years? I have
also heard some liken the idea for a conference to the 1991 Madrid Conference.
And, while Madrid brought everyone around to the table, it took bold leadership
and difficult decisions from the leaders on both sides — behind closed doors — to
actually move the ball forward in any meaningful way. We cannot keep doing what
we have been doing and expect things to change; in doing so, we are failing the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
For the first time in 25 years, the United States has demonstrated that
a different approach to the situation in the Middle East can yield results. Today,
because of American leadership, Israel is closer to its Arab neighbours than ever
before, and its direct neighbours — the Palestinians — should take advantage of this
positive momentum. History will judge how the Security Council responds to this
historic moment: it can either shrink from the challenge or rise to the occasion. We
encourage members of the Security Council to embrace the opportunities presented
by the Abraham Accords and encourage the Council’s support for the Vision for
Peace. If what the international community seeks is peace, security and stability
for the Middle East and its peoples, then I urge it to join us in supporting these
historic breakthroughs.
Our task in the Security Council, as laid out 75 years ago, is to support peace,
security and stability, including in the Middle East. This takes courage. Let us join
together in supporting these historic breakthroughs, the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, and their desire for peace and a better future.

34/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 17
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of
Palestine, Riad Al-Malki
At the outset, I wish to thank the Russian delegation for presiding over this
meeting and for the leadership role that Russia has played in pursuit of peace in the
Middle East. Let me also thank my brother Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti for participating
in today’s meeting, and to welcome Mr. Dang Minh Khoi. I also want to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
It is time to drop the old talking points. It is ridiculous to claim that the
Palestinians “never missed an opportunity to miss an opportunity”, when in fact
the Palestinian Liberation Organization signed an agreement with Israel just months
after the start of the first-ever negotiations between the two sides, despite all the
shortcomings of those accords, which history has proven. It is preposterous to
consider that Israel’s right to security could justify its occupation and oppression of
an entire nation for decades, or denying us our right to self-determination and to a
sovereign and independent State, or negating our own right to security.
It is absurd to claim that it is the Palestinian side that does not want
negotiations, when Israel is the one trying to illegally pre-empt the negotiations on
all final-status issues on the ground every single day. It is ludicrous to claim that
the obstacle to peace is Palestinian intransigence, when our positions are actually
aligned with the international consensus and the resolutions of the Security Council,
while Israeli positions and policies are flagrantly in breach of international law and
United Nations resolutions.
By 1999, the parties had identified final-status issues that should be
negotiated based on internationally agreed terms of reference and parameters.
Here is Netanyahu’s stance on these issues: Jerusalem, including occupied East
Jerusalem, shall be Israeli; illegal settlements shall remain in place; refugees shall
remain refugees; Israel shall continue to control our borders; and Israel shall control
all of the Jordan Valley, and with it most of our natural resources. These positions
are contemptuous and unlawful, and they translate into a simple truth: Israel does
not want to end its illegal occupation; it wants to make it permanent. Why are we the
ones who are labelled “intransigent”?
It is time to abandon the failed recipes of the past. We cannot allow Israeli
unilateralism to prevail while the world continues to call for bilateral negotiations. It
is no longer enough to call on the parties to negotiate. This call must be accompanied
by measures to incentivize respect for obligations and to dissuade the adoption of
illegal unilateral actions.
It is no longer enough to say settlements are illegal. One must ensure
accountability, distinction and non-assistance. It is no longer enough to speak of
a two-State solution. It must be accompanied with the recognition of the State of
Palestine and support for its sovereignty over the territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem.
We could have tried to find answers to Israel’s violence through violence, to
be heard and considered relevant. We did not. We could have adopted disruptive
behaviour, since constructive behaviour is underrated these days. We did not. We
could have contributed to transforming this political conflict into a religious one,
fuelling it so we were not the only ones to feel its flames. We did not. If we have been
punished while making such choices while Israel, on the other hand, is rewarded,
what is being encouraged, peace or violence?

20-1437835/104

S/2020/1055

Despite decades of oppressive Israeli policies and measures aimed at bringing
us to our knees politically and financially, President Abbas, in his message to the
General Assembly (see A/75/PV.10), called on the Secretary-General, as he has done
before the Security Council in the past, to undertake, in cooperation with the Security
Council and the Quartet mandated by this body to advance peace, preparations to
convene an international conference with the participation of all concerned parties
early next year, in order to engage in a genuine peace process, based on international
law, United Nations resolutions and the relevant terms of reference. This call is the
ultimate demonstration of our commitment to peace and to a path based on inclusion
not exclusion, legality not illegality, negotiations not diktats, and multilateralism
not unilateralism. I know many countries represented in the Council have already
expressed support for President Abbas’ initiative, and we look forward to continuing
to work with everyone to see it materialize, including through meetings of the
Security Council such as today’s, which is being held under the presidency of the
Russian Federation.
Only under pressure did Israel decide to freeze its plans for formal annexation
of areas beyond occupied East Jerusalem. However, it has not renounced its decadeslong policy aimed at controlling the amount of Palestinian land with the least number
of Palestinians — in other words, maximum Palestinian geography with minimum
Palestinian demography. Its de facto annexation continues with the advancement
in recent days of 5,000 settlement units deep into the West Bank, including in and
around occupied East Jerusalem. The international community must act to salvage
peace, or we will all bear the consequences.
As long as Israel does not bear the cost of occupation, but instead continues to
reap its benefits, it will never negotiate in good faith. The international community
must address the shortcomings of the past by linking its relations with the parties to
their respect of their obligations under international law and the peace process, by
helping them reach an agreement and implementing it and by enforcing a binding
time frame.
The international peace conference can generate the momentum necessary
and mobilize the international community at large to help the parties negotiate a
peace agreement that will forever change our region. Anything else is volatile — and
futile. Two thirds of our people were forced into exile, and we did not surrender. Tens
of thousands were killed, and we did not surrender. Hundreds of thousands were
displaced, and we did not surrender. The equivalent of half of our male population —
over 800,000 Palestinians — has been arrested, and we have not surrendered. What
makes anyone think we would surrender now?
Israel often wonders why we enjoy such international solidarity. It is because
former colonial Powers and liberation movements alike know these colonial
policies well: violence, subjugation, intimidation, mass arbitrary imprisonment,
discrimination, humiliation, fragmentation of land, confinement of the occupied
people, expansion of illegal settlements and exploitation. They cannot support such
actions. History has taught them better.
International consensus, the mandate and role of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Palestinian
people’s resilience have all been sorely tested, and yet they prevail. It is now time to
take the initiative. There is not a people too many in the Middle East, but there is an
independent State missing. The Middle East equation cannot be solved by denying
this fundamental factor.
This conflict cannot be ended without freedom for the Palestinian people.
Our freedom will never be compatible with Israeli soldiers in our streets, Israeli
36/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

drones in our skies and Israeli control over our borders. Ask Maher Al-Akhras, who
has been risking his life in a hunger strike for over 90 days in order to denounce
the most arbitrary form of detention, the so-called administrative detention. Ask
Amer Snobar, who, barely 18, was beaten to death yesterday by Israeli soldiers who
had apprehended him and kept hitting him on his head and neck with the butt of
their rifles until he could no longer breathe. Ask the mother of the child killed on
his way to school, the athlete whose leg was amputated after a sniper acted as if he
were playing a video game, the owner of a house built through years of sweat and
destroyed in an instant, and the farmer whose crops were burned by settlers. All of
them will say: “we will not coexist with occupation”. We want to end occupation so
we can coexist, so we can know justice, so we can be free and so our region can know
true peace and security.

20-1437837/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, Gilad Erdan
It is an honour to speak before the Security Council for the first time since
assuming my role as the Permanent Representative of the State of Israel to the United
Nations. I come to this position after nearly two decades in the Israeli Knesset and
Government. I have served on Israel’s security cabinet and in several ministerial
positions dealing with such issues as counter-terrorism and the ongoing attempts to
delegitimize my country.
I believe that the United Nations as a whole and the Security Council in
particular can be a force for good in the world, especially today, when the world is
facing harrowing health and economic challenges. In my view, the Council should
serve as a model for how nations can set aside their differences and unite to tackle
international problems and promote peace and security.
In the two months since I arrived in New York, I have witnessed a jarring
dissonance between what the Council chooses to focus on and what is actually
happening in the Middle East. During this short period of time, I witnessed the
Council ignoring opportunities to promote peace while simultaneously choosing not
to act in the face of grave threats.
I was told by many that the Council holds an institutional bias against Israel.
Despite these criticisms, I want to keep an open mind. I want to prove wrong all
those who tell me that the Security Council is a lost cause. Nevertheless, I have a
few considerations I would like to pose to the Council in order to better understand
its priorities in the Middle East.
In a debate entitled “The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question,” one would expect the Council to focus on the most important issues facing
the Middle East. However, once a month, for 20 years — which amounts to hundreds
of debates — Council members have routinely overlooked critical issues and focused
only on the “Palestinian question”.
Today’s debate is a perfect example. Should we not be discussing the
momentum of peace between four countries in a turbulent region? As the United
Nations organ entrusted with developing friendly relations among nations, surely the
Council should discuss the Abraham Accords and the most recent peace agreement
between Israel and the Sudan. Yet the only debate the Security Council held on the
historic peace agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain
was an informal one.
To understand how significant these agreements are, consider that it was
in Khartoum in 1967 that the Arab League adopted the Khartoum Resolution and
the infamous “Three Nos”: No peace with Israel, no recognition of Israel and no
negotiations with Israel. On Friday, the Sudan replaced three “no's” with three
“yeses”: Yes to peace with Israel, yes to a new Middle East and yes to a brighter
future for our children. Some 53 years ago, the Sudan symbolized the Arab world’s
refusal to accept the Jewish State’s legitimacy. Today it symbolizes the Arab world’s
growing acceptance of the Jewish State.
I look forward to hearing Council members’ insights on this unprecedented
paradigm shift and how we can build on these agreements. Perhaps we could discuss
today how the Abraham accords and the new Israeli-Sudanese alliance present new
opportunities for dialogue and prosperity and how these agreements will enhance
cooperation in the fields of security, sustainability, technology, innovation, health
and more. These accords are an important milestone that will serve to advance further
38/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

agreements with other Arab and Muslim countries. They disprove preconceived
notions of peacemaking in the Middle East and represent a new pragmatic approach
that is not held hostage by unrealistic demands from one side.
Maybe that is exactly why the Palestinian leadership opposes them. Instead of
viewing the accords as a new opportunity to kick-start negotiations, the Palestinians
have attacked the Emiratis, the Bahrainis and the Sudanese, calling their decision to
have relations with Israel a “betrayal” and a “stab in the back”. It should be clear to
Foreign Minister Al-Malki that everyone can now see that the Palestinians will lash
out against any country that seeks peace in the region, even its fellow members of
the Arab League. The fact that the Palestinians attack those who make peace with
Israel, demonstrates that, for years, the Council has been applying pressure on the
wrong side.
It is not surprising that the Palestinians refuse to see the agreements as an
opportunity for peace. President Abbas has refused every peace offer made by the
State of Israel. Actually, to be more precise, he has refused every offer that he has
bothered to respond to. Former Prime Minister Ehud Olmert is still waiting for a
response to the generous offer he made in 2008.
Instead, the Palestinian representative calls here for a peace conference. Do
not be fooled by this; it is only another distraction. Abbas knows a conference will
not bring peace. The only way to achieve real peace is through direct, bilateral
negotiations. Prime Minister Netanyahu has invited President Abbas to Jerusalem
many times. He has even offered to go to Ramallah, but Abbas continues to waste
time calling for another useless conference. The Security Council should instead call
on the Palestinians to begin negotiations based on the American Vision for Peace,
which is a good starting point for realistic, sustainable peace. In a debate entitled
“The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”, should not a
new era of peace that has a huge impact on the region be discussed?
In addition to discussing opportunities for peace, the Council must also discuss
the destabilizing forces in the region, namely, Iran. It is surprising, but I actually want
to thank that country. Indeed, I want to thank the regime for the role it has played in
bringing the moderate forces in the region closer together. Ironically, Iran’s extreme
and murderous ways have contributed to the signing of these historic agreements.
Nevertheless, Iran and its terrorist proxies remain the biggest threats to peace
and security in the region. Its stated aim of using violence to create Shia hegemony
in the region should top the agenda in all debates on the Middle East. Iran’s ongoing
aggression threatens to take many more innocent lives — of Muslims, Jews and
Christians — than it already has. Opposing Iran’s nuclear ambitions while allowing
it to buy and sell other lethal weapons puts the entire region in grave danger. The
fact that almost every member of the Security Council was willing to let the arms
embargo expire calls into question this body’s commitment to international peace
and security. The sanctions on Iran, which were reinitiated by the United Statestriggered snapback, remain in full effect. We fully support the American initiatives
in this regard.
Iran is also one of the biggest human rights violators in the world. One example
is its excessive and illegal use of executions. During President Rouhani’s tenure,
Iran has executed over 4,300 people, including minors, women, members of the
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, journalists and anti-Government
protesters. Should this not be discussed in a debate on the situation in the Middle East?
The Security Council must unite in establishing a maximum pressure
campaign against Iran. It must prevent the regime in Tehran from continuing to
develop its nuclear capabilities, obtain advanced weapons and violate human rights.
20-1437839/104

S/2020/1055

For Israel and other Arab countries, this is an existential threat. One day many more
countries will realize Iran threatens them too. Let us hope it is not too late.
When discussing security in the Middle East, there is another Iran-related
threat that is barely discussed by the Council. It has been nearly a month since
Prime Minister Netanyahu revealed new intelligence about a Hizbullah arms depot
embedded in Beirut’s Janah neighbourhood. The terrible explosion last August at
the city’s port killed some 200 people and injured thousands. This has not stopped
Hizbullah from putting Lebanese lives at the risk of another, similar disaster.
This is not the first time that Hizbullah has used Lebanese civilians as human
shields. Hizbullah acts in complete disregard of human life and of resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). If the Council truly cared about the future of
the Middle East, how is it possible that all Council members have not designated
Hezbollah in its entirety as a terrorist organization? Should this question not be
discussed in a debate on the situation in the Middle East?
Of course, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is also an important issue and
should be a part of the debate. Yet while discussing it every month for the last
20 years, key elements have been neglected. If you are looking for the real obstacle
to peace, Mr. President, look at the Palestinian’s long record of incitement and
hate. Palestinian Authority textbooks incite violence and promote terrorism and
antisemitism. Through its pay-to-slay programme, the Palestinian Authority rewards
terror attacks against Israeli civilians. Maybe part of the answer to the Palestinian
question can be found in that fact alone. The Palestinian Authority spends hundreds
of millions of dollars a year on its pay-to-slay programme. Just think how that money
could have been spent this year fighting the coronavirus disease.
The United Nations regularly produces distorted one-sided reports about
alleged Israeli violations of Palestinian rights. Perhaps a discussion should be held
about the Palestinian Authority’s violation of its own people’s rights, including the
basic right to choose their leaders. It is well known that Israel has held more elections
in a year than the Palestinian Authority has held in the last 15.
For decades, many in the international community have fixated on a single
solution to the conflict. They vote for the same anti-Israel resolutions, recycle old
talking points and ignore issues that are crucial for ending the conflict. They also
ignore the fact that this approach has only emboldened Palestinian rejectionism.
Perhaps Council members are too accustomed to the ritual of these debates to see
that they have been completely ineffective in answering the Palestinian question. We
all know what Einstein said about trying the same thing over and over and expecting
different results.
While the Council’s talking points have not changed for decades, the Middle
East has. Three historic agreements considered impossible to achieve were reached
in just two months. The Security Council should embrace the accords and use them
as a catalyst to promote peace and security in the region. It can facilitate the next
round of agreements.
I am committed to proving wrong all those who say that the Security Council
is a lost cause. However, ignoring the most pressing issues in the Middle East and
expressing bias when discussing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, makes that hard to
do. The Council must recommit itself to pursuing peace and security, and not let
politics dictate its actions in the Middle East. I remain optimistic that the Security
Council can fulfil its mandate and I look forward to working with its members in
that noble pursuit.

40/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 120 States members of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
I would like to congratulate Russia on its successful presidency of the Security
Council this month and express our thanks for the opportunity for the Non-Aligned
Movement to present its position on the question of Palestine — an issue that has
historically been one of vital concern and importance to the Movement.
During the Online Ministerial Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement, held
on 9 October on the theme “Bandung+65: More Relevant, United and Effective NAM
against Emerging Global Challenges, including COVID-19”, the Ministers adopted
a political declaration that stressed that a just, lasting solution to the question of
Palestine in all its aspects must remain both a priority on the Movement’s agenda and
a permanent responsibility of the United Nations, until it is satisfactorily resolved in
accordance with international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. The
States members of the Movement therefore seize this opportunity to reaffirm once
again that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, with the Israeli occupation at its core,
continues to pose a serious threat to regional and international peace and security
and requires urgent attention and action, in accordance with international law, the
relevant United Nations resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the United Nations
itself, using tools of multilateral diplomacy for the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
The Security Council has a clear responsibility in ensuring the maintenance
of international peace and security. It must uphold its Charter duties and act
to implement its own resolutions, which not only constitute the foundation for a
peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict, but are legally binding on all States
Members of the United Nations. The question of Palestine cannot be an exception.
We therefore remain deeply concerned that this body has for too long been unable
to fulfil its mandate on this important question owing to the use of the veto by a
permanent member of the Council. NAM members call upon the Security Council
to overcome its paralysis and fulfil its Charter duties with respect to the question
of Palestine, thereby restoring credibility to this body and upholding its obligations
in the achievement of a just and peaceful solution to this protracted conflict and
tragic injustice.
The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that resolution 2334 (2016),
which reaffirmed the Security Council’s many relevant resolutions on the matter,
provides the only viable path to peace, setting forth the essential requirements
and parameters for the achievement of a just outcome on the basis of the twoState solution based on the pre-1967 borders, in accordance with the long-standing
terms of reference of peace endorsed by the international community, namely, the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including the principle
of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, and ensuring
the fulfilment of the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights, including to selfdetermination and an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. Accordingly, we call for the full respect of resolution 2334 (2016) and for
the effective implementation of its provisions and obligations, particularly by the
occupying Power, including its obligations as a State to respect distinction, which is
a matter central to accountability.
We also underscore the need for the intensification of international efforts
aimed at bringing an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and at achieving
a just, lasting and comprehensive solution, which is also called for under resolution
20-1437841/104

S/2020/1055

2334 (2016). Similarly, the States members of the NAM continue to call for the full
respect and implementation of all other relevant resolutions, including with regard to
the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities and with regard to the status
of the occupied East Jerusalem, for resolving these issues would create the conditions
necessary for bringing an end to the occupation, justly resolving the conflict in all its
aspects, and making Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a reality, for the benefit
of both peoples, for the region and for the international community as a whole.
It is imperative that action be taken immediately, in line with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, to redress the situation on the
ground, de-escalate tensions and foster an appropriate environment for the pursuit
of peace, including by averting unilateral, provocative or arbitrary measures that
serve only to embolden Israel to further pursue its illegal policies and practices in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. Actions that violate
resolutions of the Security Council and the historic status quo of Jerusalem and
its holy sites are provocative and dangerous, destroy the prospects for peace and
should not be supported or celebrated by any country. Threats of annexation by
Israeli officials must be condemned unequivocally, and any measures taken in this
regard must be rejected forthwith as null and void and without any legal effect and
must be met with firm measures of accountability for such grave breaches, including
by lawful countermeasures.
In relation to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains of great concern to the
Movement, in particular the grave humanitarian situation, which regrettably
continues to deteriorate day by day. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call
for the complete lifting of the Israeli blockade, which continues to impose untold
humanitarian, social and economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian
children, women and men in Gaza. This crisis must be comprehensively addressed,
in accordance with international law, including humanitarian and human rights law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, and in the context of the overall situation
of the continuation of the illegitimate, belligerent, Israeli foreign occupation since
1967 of the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and in the context of the
unequivocal calls for an end to such occupation.
In the absence of a solution, the States members of the NAM reiterate
their call for the continued provision of needed humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestinian refugees. The Movement
therefore stresses the importance of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), along with other United Nations
agencies and international organizations, in alleviating the plight of the Palestinians
and calls for full support for the renewal of the Agency’s mandate to ensure the
continuity of its vital programmes and its contribution to regional stability. In the
light of the continuing financial shortfalls, we urge the international community
to provide UNRWA with the necessary funding to ensure the continuity of its
indispensable operations.
As Israel has clearly abdicated its obligations as the occupying Power to protect
the Palestinian civilian population, as prescribed by the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949, we also reiterate our long-standing call for international protection for the
Palestinian people. This is urgent for alleviating the dire state of insecurity of the
occupied population and for preventing more losses of innocent human lives. Failure
to do so can lead only to further escalations and the tragic deaths of civilians.
In this regard, we reiterate our grave concern about the lack of accountability
for all the violations committed by Israel, many of which may amount to war crimes.
The absence of justice only fosters greater impunity, leads to the recurrence of
crimes and destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby further diminishing
42/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

the prospects for peace. We continue to call for international action, particularly by
the Security Council, to ensure a cessation of and accountability for the violations
that are being systematically committed by Israel against the Palestinian civilian
population under its occupation. We reiterate that Israel must comply with its duties
and responsibilities under international law. Should it continue its blatant contempt
of the Security Council and of its international legal obligations, it must be held
to account.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan, the Non-Aligned
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December 1981 that purports to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of this territory and its institutional
structure, as well as the Israeli measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. Accordingly, and in line with our
principled position, we demand once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981)
and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to its 4 June 1967 borders,
pursuant to resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In addition, we reiterate our
condemnation of the unilateral and arbitrary proclamation of the United States of
America on recognizing the Golan Heights as part of Israel and renew our call on
the Security Council to unequivocally condemn this provocative act. Moreover, the
States members of the NAM emphasize the necessity of having Israel withdraw
from all Lebanese territories, including the Sheba’a farms, the hills of Kfar Shouba
and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar village up to the Blue line, in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions and in particular resolution 1701 (2006).
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to reiterate our call for the international
community to act collectively and responsibly to uphold international law and to
exert and intensify all necessary efforts in support of the just Palestinian cause,
the ultimate goal of which is to bring an end to this historic and grave injustice. We
reaffirm our commitment to promoting a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight of
the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm our support to the Palestinian people in their
struggle to achieve justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including to self-determination, freedom and independence in their
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

20-1437843/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, Sergey Vershinin, and the Permanent Mission of the
Russian Federation for convening today’s important debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov,
for his valuable briefing.
His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa of the Kingdom of Bahrain said
in his statement to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session that, in past
decades, the United Nations had helped to consolidate international cooperation
and preserve world peace for the good of all humankind. His Majesty emphasized
that the Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to its international obligations related to
maintaining the strength and stability of the international order and continuing to
play its role in achieving universal peace.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and its goals
of achieving peace, the Kingdom of Bahrain affirms its support for all international
efforts to promote a culture of peace as an urgent need for humankind in order
to foster the values of openness, moderation and tolerance. It is important for the
international community to develop a comprehensive vision to address security,
political, economic and health challenges. The improvement of the humanitarian
situation starts with the establishment of peace and the conditions for security and
stability for all.
The Kingdom of Bahrain also stresses the importance of resolving disputes
and differences through constructive dialogue and peaceful means based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, thereby helping to eliminate the
causes of tension, which hinder development efforts worldwide.
The international community must work on the basis of integrated policies
and with more effectiveness in the fight against the challenges facing the region,
particularly the ongoing efforts to address the coronavirus disease pandemic. To
that end, solidarity, putting aside differences, strengthening areas of humanitarian
assistance and improving future preparedness to prevent global crises are essential.
In accordance with its consistent policy of promoting a culture of peace,
coexistence, tolerance, understanding, acceptance of others and respect for
neighbouring countries, the Kingdom of Bahrain signed a declaration of peace with
Israel, under the auspices of the United States of America, in a historic step towards
peace in the Middle East — a courageous and extraordinary move to improve security
and stability in the region. The Kingdom of Bahrain also signed a joint communiqué
with the State of Israel on the establishment of diplomatic relations, in addition
to memorandums of understanding in a number of areas. In those memorandums,
fruitful bilateral cooperation is established between the Kingdom of Bahrain and the
State of Israel with a view to strengthening the foundations of peace in the region
and moving the peace process in a more positive direction.
We also affirm the long-standing position of the Kingdom of Bahrain regarding
the need to intensify efforts to end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in accordance with
the two-State solution, which is the best way of achieving a just and comprehensive
peace resulting in the establishment of an independent Palestinian State with East
44/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of the internationally recognized resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We welcome the signing by the United Arab Emirates of a peace treaty with
Israel, a treaty in which broad prospects for a comprehensive and just peace in the
region are opened up.
We also welcome the announcement of an agreement to establish relations
between the Republic of the Sudan and the State of Israel under the auspices of the
United States, as another historic step on the road to peace, stability and prosperity
in the Middle East.
The Middle East region faces profound and complex challenges that have the
potential to change it for years to come, especially as some countries are pursuing
hostile, destructive policies that jeopardize regional and international security and
stability. In that connection, the Kingdom of Bahrain condemns the repeated attacks
on vital installations in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by Iranian-backed Houthi
militias, and supports all the efforts and policies of Saudi Arabia to maintain its
security, stability and territorial integrity.
The Kingdom of Bahrain also supports all the tireless efforts of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to reach a lasting political solution that preserves the security
and stability of the Republic of Yemen in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and the related Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the Comprehensive National Dialogue and resolution 2216 (2015). The Kingdom
of Bahrain fully supports the sincere efforts and continued strategic role of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in protecting the region’s security and stability.
The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the signing of a permanent ceasefire
agreement throughout the State of Libya. The agreement, concluded at the United
Nations Office at Geneva between the Government of National Accord and the
Libyan National Army, is an important achievement and a necessary step that
will contribute to the security and stability of the State of Libya. The Kingdom
of Bahrain commends all the efforts that culminated in the agreement and hopes
that all the States and parties involved will keep working to ensure the stability
and territorial integrity of Libya and achieve the aspirations of its people for
development, prosperity, the elimination of terrorist organizations and an end to
foreign intervention in their affairs.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its long-standing position
regarding the need to foster a culture of peace and preventive diplomacy in order to
prevent conflict and promote the values of tolerance and coexistence so as to achieve
security and prosperity for the peoples of the world.

20-1437845/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I would like to commend the Russian Federation presidency of the Security
Council for its successful stewardship of the work of the Council in October. I would
also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr.
Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing on, and continued commitment,
to peace in the Middle East, including Palestine.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement submitted by the United Arab
Emirates on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 48).
While the entire world is overburdened with the challenges of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the people of Palestine under occupation face not only
the challenge of the virus but an even bigger crisis due to the ongoing and escalating
illegal policies and practices of Israel, the occupying Power. Israel continues
to exploit the pandemic, aggressively advancing its settlement colonization and
annexation schemes, entrenching its 53-year military occupation of the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Just a few days ago, on 14 and 15 October, the
Israeli Government approved the construction of another 5,000 settlement units in
the occupied territory, primarily in areas deep inside the West Bank. We remain
deeply troubled by the continuation of such illegal practices by Israel, which are
tantamount to grave violations of human rights of the Palestinian people. We call
upon the international community to impress upon Israel the necessity of halting its
systematic violation of international humanitarian law and human rights principles.
Deplorable humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions in Gaza resulting
from Israel’s 13-year blockade, which has inflicted severe deprivation and hunger
on Gaza’s 2 million inhabitants, have been worsened by hyperunemployment and
dismal basic services, particularly in the context of the pandemic. Added to this
misery, there have been increased incidents of demolition of Palestinian structures,
settlement expansion and settler violence in West Bank, including in East Jerusalem.
These will further exacerbate the economic and humanitarian impact of the spread
of COVID-19 in Gaza and the West Bank.
All the foregoing actions by Israel constitute egregious violations of
international law, including the United Nations Charter and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. They directly contravene all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). Israel must cease demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian property and should allow Palestinians in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, to develop their communities, in line with this resolution.
Our own struggle for independence and the painful experience of enduring
the worst form of genocide in 1971 has inspired us to always advocate in favour of
the oppressed people of the world. This has been the very premise of Bangladesh’s
unwavering support for the cause of Palestine.
As a clear manifestation of our unwavering support for the people of Palestine,
we fully endorse the calls to ensure the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the rights of self-determination, and the achievement of a two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The international community must turn the culture of inaction around and stop
allowing impunity. It must prevail upon Israel to end its occupation of Palestinian
territory. Bangladesh reiterates that the lack of accountability for Israel’s ongoing
violations has only encouraged such impunity, which is undermining any potential
46/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

to achieve a just and peaceful solution in accordance with the relevant resolutions
and other peace initiatives.
We join the international community in condemning these acts and asking
Israel to refrain from such actions. We also ask for maintaining the sanctity of
Islamic and Christian holy places, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, at all costs.
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect the Security Council to fulfil
its Charter obligations by enforcing its resolutions, in particular resolution 2334
(2016). As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we must
strive to resolve the Palestinian crisis in order to preserve the trust of current and
future generations in multilateralism and the Organization.

20-1437847/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil would like to thank the Russian presidency for convening today’s
quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East. It would also like to thank
the briefer.
The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains relevant to peace and
stability in the Middle East. The recent announcement of the normalization of Israel’s
relations with the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan is an important step
towards improving dialogue and diplomacy in the region. We welcome this historical
decision and acknowledge the role of the United States with respect to it.
Building on the momentum generated by the signing of the accords, we
encourage the parties to resume negotiations and engage in new and creative
diplomatic efforts in order to achieve a just and comprehensive settlement. Brazil
reiterates its support for a negotiated two-State solution, with Israelis and Palestinians
living side by side in peace and security in two democratic and sovereign States.
Strengthening the democratic legitimacy of Palestinian institutions is a key element
for achieving a solution based on the existence of two democratic and sovereign
States. We therefore commend the Palestinian Authority’s commitment to holding
parliamentary and presidential elections. We hope they can take place soon.
Brazil welcomes the launching of discussions on the delineation of the
Lebanon-Israel maritime boundary following the framework agreement announced
on 1 October. Having had the privilege of being commander of the Maritime Task
Force of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for almost 10 years now,
Brazil understands the importance of a mutually agreed outcome on this sensitive
topic and hopes to see continued progress in this regard.
The conflict in Syria has reached its tenth year and continues unabated,
with an increasing toll on human life. The situation is made worse by the spread
of the pandemic and its effects on the economic well-being of the most vulnerable
populations. Accordingly, the humanitarian exemptions for any sanctions programme
in relation to Syria must be closely followed, in order to ensure that they do not
undermine access to food and essential health supplies. The protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, and compliance with international
humanitarian law, must also remain a priority.
Brazil once again underscores its support for the work of Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen and encourages the members of the Constitutional Committee to bridge
their differences in order to ensure progress on the political track. We remain
convinced that only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated
political process, with due regard for the preservation of Syria’s territorial integrity,
will bring lasting peace and provide relief for the suffering of the Syrian population.
Brazil remains deeply concerned at the worsening of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, where the threat of famine is once again looming, intensified
by locust infestation and the COVID-19 pandemic. The continued clashes around
the country are also a cause of great concern, particularly the Houthi offensive
on Marib.
Urgent action is also needed with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, and
we join our voices to those calling for the Houthis to facilitate access for experts
to conduct an assessment-and-repair mission, in order to prevent a potential
environmental disaster from occurring in Yemen and beyond.

48/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

We urge all parties to agree on a nationwide ceasefire and to ensure safe and
unhindered humanitarian access, including by keeping the Sana’a airport open for
relief flights. We call on all parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and
to engage with the Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. We commend the parties, as well
as the Special Envoy and the International Committee of the Red Cross, for the recent
successful exchange of over 1,000 prisoners of war. We hope that this constructive
spirit continues to guide negotiations on the United Nations peace proposals.
Brazil welcomes the resumption of inclusive intra-Libyan talks through the
convening of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in November in Tunisia. Building
on months of extensive consultations, the Libya Political Dialogue Forum is a unique
opportunity for generating consensus around a unified governance framework for
Libyan institutions. We hope that progress on the political track will have an impact
on the situation on the ground and help to consolidate a lasting and comprehensive
ceasefire. The arms embargo is also an indispensable element to de-escalate the
conflict, and we reiterate our call for its full implementation.
We welcome the ceasefire agreement recently signed by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission in Libya, which will bring much-needed respite to the Libyan people.
We hope that it can pave the way for the implementation of other confidence-building
measures and allow further progress in the peace process.
Brazil reiterates that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are
mutually reinforcing and that regional socioeconomic development can be achieved
only through the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Safeguarding religious freedom
should also be kept a high priority, for minority communities often have to withstand
the most violence and persecution of any groups. We stand ready to contribute to any
diplomatic effort directed at promoting a more peaceful and prosperous Middle East.

20-1437849/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We appreciate the opportunity to participate in today’s open debate and to
be able to express our solidarity with a region of the world that we know needs
multilateral support to finally achieve a sustainable peace that has been desired for
so long.
This year, with the multidimensional crisis triggered by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we have witnessed the urgency for this land to
achieve a solution involving two autonomous, sovereign and independent States
living in peace within recognized borders, with the decisions and agreements of
the United Nations serving as the basis for a direct agreement between the parties.
We also believe that this process should be in line with prevention and sustainable
peace promoted by the United Nations and focused on people, addressing the needs
of the most vulnerable and, particularly in the contexts of global, regional and local
crises, of those who have been disproportionately affected, such as women and girls,
through strengthening the protection and promotion of human rights, in a manner
that is sensitive to gender and to conflict.
In this regard, we recognize the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) as key and emphasize that
it is one of the United Nations agencies with the greatest support from the General
Assembly for its operational activities, which we understand as a recognition of the
Agency’s crucial work in the field and its associated impact on international peace
and security issues in a geopolitically convulsive, complex and volatile region.
UNRWA plays a key role in health care, education and infrastructure, for the
protection of 5.6 million Palestinian refugees. In particular, at present, UNRWA
provides vital assistance in the multilateral response to the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza, despite the fact that the Agency’s financial precariousness has worsened and
been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic. We therefore reiterate our country’s
support for the work of UNRWA, as we have done in the Fourth Committee, and
we hope that its financial sustainability will become a reality through support from
the Member States. In today’s debate, we highlight the role of civil society, youth
and women in the Middle East and underline the importance of their integration
for cooperation, capacity-building and support networks at local, regional and
international levels.
We reiterate our commitment to international law and the multilateral
proposals designed to achieve sustainable peace. Further, as called for by the
Secretary-General himself, we support and welcome initiatives that strengthen the
work done on behalf of the two-State solution on the understanding that it is our duty
as the international community to create the networks that will assist the parties in
reaching that objective.

50/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 24
Statement by the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Cheikh Niang
First, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its professional
handling of this month’s presidency of the Security Council in the face of current
challenges owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
As the United Nations recently marked the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
signing of the Charter, the question of Palestine, whose fate is inherently bound
to the history and existence of the Organization, tragically remains unresolved.
Today, while their territory remains under continuing occupation and millions of
Palestinian refugees remain exiled from their homes, the Palestinian people faces
ever-increasing new challenges. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused the loss of
Palestinian lives. Compounded by social distress, economic downturn and concerns
about recent developments, including Israel’s ongoing annexation threats, the
situation put a just and durable solution of the question of Palestine into deep peril.
Since my last statement to the Council in July (S/2020/736, annex 24), the
signing of agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates on 15 September
and between Israel and Bahrain on 18 October, has brought a change in relations
in the Middle East. The State of Palestine subsequently rejected these agreements
because, while they ostensibly purported to halt Israeli de jure annexation plans of
more Palestinian territory, the Palestinian people had been excluded from the process.
The threat of annexation and occupation of their territory remains intact, as do the
colonization measures that entrench the occupation and facilitate annexation — all
in grave breach of international law.
As some States Members of the United Nations and their partners expressed
concern about the unilateral character of these agreements, others welcomed the
decision by Israel to suspend its planned annexation and called for the permanent
halting of annexation plans and measures. The Secretary-General expressed the hope
that the agreements could create an opportunity for Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to re-engage in meaningful negotiations to realize a two-State solution in line with
relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements.
Later, at the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly in
September, we heard numerous statements reaffirming support for the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and freedom, in favour of the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders and firmly opposing Israeli annexation.
The Committee calls for the total halt of any annexation plans by Israel, the
occupying Power, and supports any initiatives, including a possible international
peace conference, as repeatedly called for by Palestinian President Abbas, under the
auspices of an expanded Quartet, which would allow for the re-engagement of the
parties and the launch of a credible political horizon. The goal of seeing Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security along the pre-1967 borders with
East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State remains unchanged; we must
redouble our efforts in that direction and prevent that the current health emergency
and socioeconomic crisis push this issue to the backburner.
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov, in his 29 September briefing to
the Security Council (see S/PV.8762), stated that the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) had not seen any significant progress. Israel’s continued military
occupation of Palestinian territory is facilitating illegal settlement activity, which
is a situation confirmed by the Special Coordinator’s follow-up warning statement
of 15 October issued in response to Israel’s advancing plans to illegally build nearly
5,000 settlement units in locations deep inside the occupied West Bank. Settlement
20-1437851/104

S/2020/1055

construction is illegal under international law, remains one of the major obstacles to
peace and must stop.
A spike in expropriations, seizures and demolitions of Palestinian-owned
structures was also reported, together with daily violence, including Israeli settler
violence, against Palestinian civilians. At the same time, rockets continued to be
fired from Gaza into Israel, highlighting a persistent risk of military escalation,
which must be prevented at all costs. The arrest and imprisonment of Palestinian
civilians, including children, by Israel, as well as the use of administrative detention,
also continue and the abuse and neglect of Palestinian prisoners persist. We call on
Israel to halt such illegal actions.
The Committee remains concerned by the $200-million financial shortfall
faced by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) at a time when the needs of the 5.6 million Palestine refugees
supported by the Agency are increasing due to the global pandemic. We urge donors
to provide UNRWA with sufficient and predictable funding for its vital core activities
and emergency appeals.
The Committee notes with concern the rising COVID-19 infection rates in
the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as in Israel, and urges increased support
by the donor community to address the increased needs and vulnerabilities of the
population in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza.
The Committee is heartened by the recent steps taken towards Palestinian
unity and welcomes plans to hold legislative and presidential elections in the occupied
Palestinian territory in the near future.
The 2020 report of the Committee, contained in document A/75/35 and
enclosed in a letter of transmittal dated 1 September 2020, provides a list of
recommendations to advance efforts aimed at achieving a just solution to the
question of Palestine, including actions by the Committee, other intergovernmental
bodies, including the Human Rights Council, Member States, regional organizations
and United Nations entities, enhanced advocacy and outreach activities with the
international community and civil society, and specific support action in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee welcomes the Secretary-General’s clear
position on the question of Palestine, based on international law, countless United
Nations resolutions and the pursuit of a just solution, which echoes our own longheld stance on the matter.
Let me conclude by reaffirming the need for our collective show of solidarity
with the Palestinian people and their resilience and our commitment to continuing
to exert our best efforts towards the achievement of a just, comprehensive and
durable solution to their cause. In that regard, the Committee invites all Member
States to attend this year’s commemoration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People on 1 December and for all to use that special event to
recommit to, and revitalize our collective efforts towards, resolving the PalestinianIsraeli conflict, which remains the key to lasting peace, stability and prosperity in
the region.

52/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 25
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
to the United Nations, Maritza Chan Valverde
At the outset, let me express Costa Rica’s appreciation to the Russian Federation
for organizing this open debate and to Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.
Costa Rica welcomes the signing of the Abraham accords between Israel
and the United Arab Emirates and between Israel and Bahrain. We also welcome
the recent announcements made by Israel and the Sudan on the normalization of
relations and by Hamas and Fatah regarding the agreement to hold legislative and
presidential elections in Palestine — the first elections in almost 15 years.
Furthermore, Costa Rica commends Israel and Lebanon for convening
their first negotiations in 30 years on non-security issues. In Libya, my delegation
recognizes the significance of the permanent ceasefire agreement between the
Government of National Accord and the Libyan Arab Armed Forces. We commend
the mediation efforts within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission with
talks facilitated by Mrs. Stephanie Turco Williams, Acting Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We urge the parties to
fully implement the agreement, disengage from outside influences, curb incitement
to violence, open transportation routes and build on other areas of mutual interest
in order to achieve a better and more peaceful future for all Libyans. Despite those
positive developments, my delegation would like to reiterate three concerns.
First, Costa Rica expresses its deep concern over the recent announcement by
Israel regarding the continued expansion of settlements in the occupied West Bank
and in areas in and around Jerusalem. Costa Rica reiterates its strong opposition
to Israel’s settlement policies and continued demolitions, seizures, evictions,
dispossession and confiscation of Palestinian homes and structures in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. We reiterate that those settlements are illegal
under international law and also undermine the viability of the two-State solution
and the prospect of lasting peace in the region. We also call on the parties to fully
comply with resolution 2334 (2016).
Secondly, Costa Rica also reiterates its concern about the ongoing
humanitarian crisis faced by Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank, where more
than 38 per cent of Gazans live in poverty and 50 per cent are unemployed. In that
vein, Costa Rica would like to highlight the remarkable work carried out by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) despite the pandemic caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and
the economic constraints that the Agency faces. We reiterate our commitment to and
support for UNWRA’s mission, which provides services of the highest quality and
supports nearly 5.6 million Palestinian refugees so that they can live more secure
and productive lives.
Costa Rica is also extremely concerned about the increase in violent incidents
against civilians throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Adequate steps must be taken to prevent acts of violence against civilians, including
acts of terror, incitement, hate speech and property destruction, especially the
excessive use of force by Israeli forces against Palestinian civilians. We also condemn
the firing of rockets, drones and missiles into Israel and reiterate our strong support
for Israel’s security. Let us be clear — civilians are not a target, and they must
never be a target. We therefore encourage the Council to work together with the
relevant United Nations bodies to uphold the principle of the protection of civilians
in situations of armed conflict.
20-1437853/104

S/2020/1055

Thirdly, Costa Rica believes that the Security Council should not continue
with its routine of convening briefings and debates without sufficient follow-up.
We again call on the Council to assert its mandate under the Charter of the United
Nations and act as a matter of urgency to bring an end to the Israeli occupation.
Setting timelines and parameters to make the two-State solution a reality is critical.
Moreover, we strongly believe that the Security Council must look at ways in which
to build mutual confidence between the parties. In that regard, we must not ignore
the huge potential of women and young people to contribute to the resolution of this
conflict, and we greatly appreciate that women’s involvement in political and peace
processes will be reaffirmed by the Council later this month when it marks the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Costa Rica hopes that the recent agreements signed between Israel, the United
Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan will open the door for a new chapter of peace
talks in the region, in which the parties will have an opportunity to re-engage in
serious, meaningful and direct negotiations, based on international law and agreed
parameters, and in close collaboration with the Middle East Quartet. The success of
such negotiations goes hand in hand with a definitive commitment by Israel to taking
the annexation of Palestinian territories off the table and ending its settlement policy.
A just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is long overdue.
We will continue to spare no effort to turn our ambition, namely, the creation of a
sovereign, contiguous and viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security side
by side with Israel, into a reality. The Security Council has a key role to play in that
endeavour. Indeed, if the Council had been responsible all along in implementing its
own resolutions, peace in the region would likely already be a reality.

54/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations, Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta
[Original: Spanish]
We endorse the statement submitted by Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) (annex 19).
A global epidemic has dramatically changed daily life. The impact of the
coronavirus disease requires from us a dynamic, coordinated and effective response
based on complementarity, cooperation and solidarity. The long-desired right of
humankind to live in peace and security, with justice and freedom, which is the basis
of coexistence among nations, is constantly threatened.
We reiterate our deep concern about its impact on the countries of the Middle
East, and we call for the avoidance of any action that could lead to the further
deterioration of stability and security in that region, in particular for the Palestinian
people, whose situation is increasingly worsening.
Israel continues its occupation of the Palestinian territory, its policies of
annexation, the increase in illegal settlement practices and measures, including
the construction and expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
punitive demolitions, the seizure of property from Palestinian institutions, the forced
displacement of hundreds of civilians and the blockade on the Gaza Strip.
We call for a just solution to the conflict in the Middle East, which requires the
genuine exercise of the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to establish their
own State within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. That
entails responsible action by the United States and an end to impunity for Israel’s
crimes and its policy of annexation.
We condemn Israel’s attempts to annex new territories in the West Bank,
which constitutes a threat to the future of the Palestinian State after many years of
negotiation, in clear violation of international law and human rights.
We once again call on the Security Council to shoulder the responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security entrusted to it by the Charter of
the United Nations and to demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all
its settlement policies and practices. It is worrying that recently no measures have
been taken to put an end to the Israeli military aggression and occupation of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334
(2016) adopted by the Council, which remains silent while Israel consolidates its
policy of expansion of illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and
threatens to annex the Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other parts of
the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
We deplore the precarious situation of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East as a result of the withdrawal of
United States financial support.
We express our continued solidarity with the Government and the people of
Palestine and support for the State of Palestine to be admitted as a full Member of
the United Nations.
The aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions of the United States in the
Middle East severely violate the legitimate interests of the Arab and Islamic nations
and result in a dangerous escalation in the region.
20-1437855/104

S/2020/1055

We reiterate our opposition to the so-called deal of the century drawn up by
the current United States Administration, ignoring the two-State solution, which
has the historic backing of the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
other international actors.
The unilateral action of the United States Government in recognizing
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and establishing its diplomatic representation in
that city, disregarding its historical status, and the decision to recognize Israel’s
sovereignty over the Syrian Golan constitute flagrant violations of the United
Nations Charter, international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We
once again call for Israel’s total and unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan
and all occupied Arab territories.
We reaffirm our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
with Iran and our rejection of the United States withdrawal from the agreement, its
attempts to disregard the validity of resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed the Plan,
the reimposition of unilateral sanctions and the military threat against the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
We support the pursuit of a peaceful and negotiated solution to the situation
inflicted on Syria without external interference and with full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the
United States sanctions and the implementation of the Caesar Act, which are obstacles
to the reconstruction of that country after nine years of war — an undertaking that
is made even more difficult given the complex situation of the coronavirus disease.
Such measures constitute a serious and flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the human rights of the Syrian people.
It is unacceptable that some countries suffer from the application of arbitrary
unilateral coercive measures, in violation of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. We call for an immediate end, without political constraints, to
the illegal unilateral measures imposed against sovereign States, which, in addition
to their ongoing impact on the affected countries, make it difficult to deal with
the pandemic.
In that complex context, the United States is pursuing a foreign policy aimed
at undermining multilateralism and fuelling and promoting conflicts, divisions,
chauvinism and supremacist and racist positions, ignoring the call to join forces in
combating the pandemic and withdrawing from the World Health Organization.
We support the urgent call of the Secretary-General to end armed conflict,
hostilities and the scourge of war and instead create opportunities for diplomacy
and cooperation. All wars, including unconventional warfare and low-impact claims,
must cease.
For Cuba, the promotion of the right to peace remains a key priority. It is
the duty of all States, in particular the members of the Security Council, to uphold
multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter, including respect
for the sovereign equality of States and their political independence, unity and
territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement of disputes, non-interference in the
internal affairs of States and refraining from the use or threat of use of force in
international relations.

56/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the Russian presidency
of the Security Council this month. I appreciate your efforts to lead the Council’s
work in the light of the many challenges facing the international community,
particularly the repercussions of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I
am also grateful for the briefing provided by the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov.
Egypt associates itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 19), the Group of Arab States (annex
28) and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 48).
This year, as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations, which has given the peoples hope that security, peace and stability
will be achieved worldwide, we continue to witness the decades-long suffering of
the Palestinian people, despite the many resolutions adopted by the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, on that people’s right to an independent State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Palestinian people has remained under Israeli occupation and has been
denied its right to self-determination. Although negotiations have been held,
agreements have been signed and initiatives have been taken on the matter over
many years, none has achieved its objective as a result of Israeli practices designed
to impose a fait accompli and undermine the two-State solution in order to render the
independence of a contiguous, viable Palestinian State unattainable.
The world, including the Palestinian people, has faced many challenges
recently as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly with regard to efforts to
contain the pandemic and provide the necessary medical supplies and materials. In
addition, the economic repercussions of the pandemic have affected the ability of all
countries, particularly donor countries, to help the Palestinian people.
The settlement activities of Israel, however, have continued. The occupation
authorities have persisted in confiscating land, expelling Palestinian citizens,
destroying their homes and announcing plans to build more settlement units. At the
same time, Israeli settlers have violated the rights of the Palestinian people in the
West Bank. Holy sites, particularly Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
have not been spared violent acts, despite the city’s centrality to the followers of the
world’s three monotheistic religions.
Although Israel has announced the suspension of its plans to annex Palestinian
land in the West Bank, we hope that it will permanently cancel them, given that any
annexation plans violate the rules of international law and international legitimacy,
particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Egypt is also calling for a freeze on settlement
activity. The continued construction of settlements, such as the recent announcement
of 5,000 new settlement units in the West Bank, undermines the chances for
establishing a Palestinian State.
Such unilateral measures will only worsen the situation in the occupied
territory and the chances for peace, and will adversely affect security and stability
throughout the region. They will also lend support to extremist and radical voices
that are hostile to peace and coexistence among the peoples of the region.

20-1437857/104

S/2020/1055

Egypt has always asserted its constant position concerning the Palestinian
people and that people’s legitimate right to an independent State based on the borders
of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In the light of current developments,
Egypt believes that the only way to uphold the rights of the Palestinian people is
to halt Israeli practices in the West Bank and lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip.
Those steps would create a climate conducive to the resumption of negotiations on
the basis of a two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative, international law and
internationally recognized resolutions.
The other crises in the Middle East are not faring much better than the question
of Palestine. Our region is increasingly affected by a dogmatic terrorist project
that uses religion as a smokescreen to seize and monopolize power, destroying
the principles of the nation-State and citizenship, without regard to the cost to the
peoples of the region. It is regrettable that the United Nations and its organs continue
to turn a blind eye to the crude and destructive actions of the Governments of a
limited number of States in the region in support of these warped designs, while
those States continue to spread terrorism, chaos and sectarian divisions, flouting the
most important principles of international law.
Those malicious schemes are doomed to fail. In the end, the solutions that
will prevail are those that serve the interests of the peoples of the region and meet
their aspirations for security and development through sovereign democratic States
that respect the principles of citizenship and do not use religion as a smokescreen for
political ambitions or expansionist fantasies.
Egypt endorses the call for a global ceasefire, including the appeal made at an
early stage by the Secretary-General, to enable the peoples of the region to address
pandemic-related developments and lay the groundwork for a comprehensive political
process based on the terms of reference set out in the relevant Security Council
resolutions on resolving protracted regional conflicts. The United Nations must
ensure that efforts aimed at peacefully resolving the crises in Syria and Yemen are
guided by the peoples of those countries, free from foreign interference or dictates.
Egypt also supports the efforts of the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General for
Syria and Yemen to reach a political settlement, a comprehensive ceasefire and
the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, and emphasizes the
need for the Security Council to play a more active role in efforts for the political
settlement of those crises, which may help to establish conditions for the voluntary
and safe return of refugees.
Egypt reiterates its deep concern at the alarming findings set out in the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
(S/2020/531), published in June. Those findings relate to the origin of smuggled
weapons seized en route to Yemen, as well as to the missiles and uncrewed aerial
vehicles used in attacks on vital facilities in Saudi Arabia last year — attacks that
Egypt condemned in the strongest terms.
Egypt maintains its firm position in support of the political settlement of
the Libyan crisis under the aegis of the United Nations and in accordance with
the conclusions of the Berlin Conference. That position is that a ceasefire must be
established and hostilities must cease on the Sirte-Jufrah line, as stated by Egypt on
more than one occasion. In order to complement the continued efforts of Egypt to
support the political resolution of the Libyan issue — efforts that have included the
Cairo declaration and the hosting of meetings of tribal elders and other leaders —
the meetings of the Libyan military dialogue, which served as the first official talks
between the Libyan National Army and the Government of National Accord and, to
a great extent, paved the way for the meetings of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission

58/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

in Geneva, were jointly hosted by Egypt and the United Nations in the city of
Ghardaqah this month.
In that connection, Egypt believes that the best use must be made of the current
opportunity to stabilize the ceasefire and stimulate Libyan political dialogue, with
Libyans themselves playing a key role in shaping the future of their country and
approving any future security arrangements. Under those arrangements, all foreign
forces and mercenaries will need to leave Libya and well-known regional parties
will need to stop playing a dubious role in undermining the security and stability of
Libya and the entire region by transferring foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries
there to play roles that serve their own narrow self-interests.
The time has come, 75 years after the founding of the United Nations, for the
Security Council to assume its role in maintaining international peace and security,
fulfil the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the region to live in security and
peace, preserve the region’s resources, rather than squander them in conflicts, and
guide efforts to build a better tomorrow for those peoples and for future generations.

20-1437859/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
on behalf of the Group of Arab States
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the Russian presidency
of the Security Council this month. I appreciate your efforts to lead the Council’s
work in the light of the many challenges facing the international community,
particularly the repercussions of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I
am also grateful for the briefing given by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of |
Arab States.
The Palestinian question is one of the most prominent issues addressed by the
United Nations in the 75 years since its establishment. The justness of that cause,
however, has not enabled the Palestinian people to enjoy its legitimate rights, or
the Middle East region to enjoy peace. It remains a central issue for all peoples of
the region.
Over the decades, there have been many developments in the Palestinian
issue. A process was put in place with a view to finding a peaceful solution based
on the internationally recognized resolutions. Numerous negotiations took place,
agreements were signed and initiatives were taken. Yet the result that had been hoped
for, namely, an independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, has
not been achieved.
The Arab States had hoped that the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, would have improved in the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic, which created new challenges for all States of the world, including the
Palestinian people. Instead, it has deteriorated: Israel’s actions have intensified since
the outbreak of the pandemic. Everyone had hoped that the Secretary-General’s call
for a ceasefire in all international crises would have been heeded so that peaceful
solutions could be sought and the pandemic addressed.
The Arab States have repeatedly stressed that there can be no path to peace
in the Middle East without the Palestinian people exercising its legitimate right to
an independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital. The Israeli practices that
undermine the prospects for peace, particularly settlement construction, must
come to an end. The occupation authorities have confiscated more land, displaced
Palestinian citizens and demolished their homes, and announced plans to build more
settlement units, including, most recently, a plan to build 5,000 new units. Israeli
settlers have continued to violate the rights of the Palestinian people in the West
Bank. Holy sites, particularly in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have
been subjected to practices that undermine the status quo in the holy city.
Unilateral measures will cause the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, to deteriorate further, and the prospects for peace
to recede. They will also have a negative impact on the security and stability of the
region as a whole, give succour to hard-line and extremist voices and undermine the
prospects of an independent, contiguous and viable Palestinian State. The Group
urges Israel to cancel any plan to definitively annex Palestinian territory in the West
Bank, as such plans are a clear breach of international humanitarian law and the
internationally recognized resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).

60/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

The Group of Arab States stresses that it remains committed to its longstanding position that the Palestinian people has a legitimate right to an independent
State on the borders of 4 July 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the internationally recognized resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle of land for peace on the basis of the
two-State solution.
The Group of Arab States will continue to work for peace, security and stability
in the occupied Arab territory, including East Jerusalem, and across the Middle East
region. The Group values the ongoing efforts of King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein,
Custodian of Islamic and Christian Holy Sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to achieve peace
and preserve the historical and legal status quo in the holy sites, particularly the
Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The Group also appreciates the ongoing
efforts of King Mohammed VI of Morocco, who chairs the Al-Quds Committee.
The Group welcomes the fact that, on 30 March 2019 in Rabat, King Mohammed
VI and Pope Francis signed the appeal for Jerusalem calling for Jerusalem to be
a city of peace, fraternity, tolerance and coexistence among followers of the three
monotheistic religions.
Peace can be achieved in the Middle East only once the Palestinian people
can fully exercise its legitimate and inalienable rights, the Israeli practices in the
occupied territory come to an end and the blockade on the Gaza Strip is lifted,
with a view to creating an environment conducive to negotiations on the basis of
the internationally recognized resolutions and the agreed terms of reference. The
Group appreciates all international efforts towards that goal, particularly those of
the Quartet.
We also cannot fail to commend the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and
its new leadership to provide the necessary support for Palestine refugees and meet
their financial burden, which has increased owing to the pandemic, not to mention
the considerable work that has been done to develop the Agency’s working methods.
The Group is therefore grateful to all donor States and calls on them to continue
providing multi-year funding so that UNRWA can continue to fully discharge its
mandate to help Palestine refugees pending a just solution to the Palestinian question
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The Group looks forward to the day when the Palestinian people can exercise
its right to self-determination and an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital. That outcome would bring an end to the decades-long suffering of the
Palestinian people and enable the people of the region to enjoy security and peace.

20-1437861/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 29
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania and the country of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union remains united in its commitment to achieving a twoState solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967
and resolves all permanent-status issues in order to end the conflict.
The EU welcomes the announcement of the normalization of the relations
between the State of Israel and the United Arab Emirates and the establishment of
diplomatic relations with the Kingdom of Bahrain.
Israel’s commitment to suspend plans to unilaterally annex areas of the
occupied Palestinian territory is a positive step. Any unilateral decision that
undermines a lasting, agreed solution should be avoided. The EU reiterates that any
annexation would constitute a serious violation of international law.
The EU remains ready to support the Israelis and the Palestinians in efforts
to resume meaningful negotiations on all final-status issues in order to achieve a
just and lasting peace. The EU will continue to support all efforts to help resume
credible negotiations.
The EU reiterates its strong opposition to Israel’s settlement policy, which is
illegal under international law, and actions taken in this context, such as demolitions
and confiscations, including of humanitarian structures and EU-funded projects,
evictions and forced transfers. The EU calls on Israel to halt continued settlement
expansion and demolitions in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem,
especially in sensitive areas, such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and E-1, which
seriously threaten the two-State solution.
The violence and loss of human lives in the occupied Palestinian territory and
Israel remain of deep concern for the EU. The Palestinian population continues to
face repeated human rights violations and abuses. The EU recalls the importance of
unhindered work of civil society organizations, both in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The worsening humanitarian and human rights situation in the Gaza Strip
remains of grave concern, and the EU calls for an end to the closure and a full
opening of the crossing points, while addressing Israel’s security concerns, and
unimpeded access for humanitarian actors.
The EU firmly condemns the increased launching of rockets and incendiary
balloons and other attacks from the Gaza Strip targeting civilians in Israel, as well
as terrorist attacks, and any other form of violence, including a continued upward
trend of settler-related incidents, and incitement on all sides. While recalling Israel’s
right to defend its legitimate security interests, the EU expects the Israeli authorities
to fully meet their obligations under international human rights and international
humanitarian law, not least in these difficult times of the coronavirus pandemic,
including with regard to Palestinian detainees in Israeli prisons.
The Palestinian Legislative Council was dissolved in December 2018. Strong,
inclusive, accountable and functioning democratic Palestinian institutions based on
62/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

respect for the rule of law and human rights are vital for the two-State solution. In
that context, taking note of the recent announcement regarding elections, a date
should be set very soon for elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and in the Gaza Strip. The EU calls upon all Palestinian factions to unequivocally
commit to democratic principles prior to the elections.
The EU reiterates its deep and genuine appreciation for the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and for its dedicated staff, who are working in an extremely difficult and challenging
context. UNRWA is an essential provider of vital services to millions of Palestinian
refugees and a stabilizing force in the region. Until a just, fair, agreed and realistic
solution to the Palestinian refugee issue in accordance with international law is
found, UNRWA remains crucial for providing the necessary protection and essential
services to Palestinian refugees, and we will continue to support it in all its fields of
operation, including in East Jerusalem. The EU welcomes the additional financial
support from other and new donors and calls upon all partners to increase their
contributions to UNRWA.
The EU recalls that a lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions; the Madrid principles, including
land for peace; the road map; the agreements previously reached by the parties and
the Arab Peace Initiative, with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace and
security and mutual recognition. The EU reiterates its fundamental commitment to
the security of Israel, including with regard to the current and emerging threats in
the region.
The EU strongly opposes all actions that undermine the viability of the twoState solution and urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a
genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild trust and create a
path back to meaningful negotiations.
Allow me to turn to the situation in Syria.
The Syrian conflict in now in its tenth year and is still marked by persistent
violations and abuses of international law, including abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law, by all parties, particularly by the Syrian regime and
its allies. The crisis continues to have profound repercussions on the overall stability
of the entire region. The human devastation of the country endures. The strain of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic adds to the gravity of the situation.
In the north-west of Syria, the situation remains fragile. The EU reiterates its
call on all parties to uphold the present ceasefire so as to guarantee the protection of
civilians on the ground and from air strikes.
The EU continues to call upon the Syrian regime and its allies to fully
respect international humanitarian law and in particular to permanently cease
indiscriminate air strikes against and the shelling of civilians. The EU also notes
with concern the ongoing insecurity in the north-east of Syria and reiterates its call
for the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
The EU insists further that the Syrian regime must fully cooperate with
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), including its
investigations of the use of chemical weapons in the conflict, and deplores the lack
of cooperation of the Syrian regime, as shown by the report of the OPCW’s Director
General released on 14 October following the July 2020 Executive Council decision.
As set out in that decision, it will now be the duty of the Conference of the States
Parties to decide on a further course of action, and we call on all States parties
20-1437863/104

S/2020/1055

to fulfil their responsibility and uphold the credibility of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Respect for international humanitarian law must be ensured at all times
and in all circumstances. We reiterate that the use of chemical weapons is a violation
of international law and unacceptable under any circumstances, and that impunity
for the use of chemical weapons must not and will not be tolerated.
While the EU welcomed the decision by the Security Council on 10 July to
extend the authorization for cross-border humanitarian assistance to people in need
in Syria for a further 12 months, the authorization of only one crossing point, in the
north-west, is disappointing. The EU continues to demand that all parties in conflict,
in particular the Syrian regime, allow safe, unimpeded and sustained access for the
humanitarian convoys to the Syrian population in need in all parts of the country.
Turkey is a key partner of the European Union and a critically important
actor in the Syrian crisis and the region. Turkey’s security concerns in north-east
Syria should be addressed through political and diplomatic means, not with military
action, and in accordance with international humanitarian law.
The EU remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Syrian State and recalls that any sustainable solution to the conflict requires
a genuine political transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the United
Nations-led Geneva process.
All those responsible for breaches of international law and human rights law,
some of which may constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity, must be held
accountable. The EU reiterates its call to have the situation in Syria referred to the
International Criminal Court. In the absence of avenues for international justice,
the prosecution of war crimes under national jurisdiction where possible and the
recent initiative of the Netherlands to invoke Syria’s responsibility for human rights
violations represent an important contribution towards securing justice. Moreover,
we will continue to support efforts to gather evidence with a view to future legal
action, including by the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic
since March 2011. The EU further welcomes the report of the Commission of Inquiry
and expresses its concern about the report’s findings
The EU fully supports the efforts of United Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen
and has welcomed the establishment of the Syrian-led Constitutional Committee
under United Nations auspices. A third round of talks took place at the end of August
this year, despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The EU urges
the Syrian regime to return to the negotiating table as soon as circumstances allow a
fourth round to be held and to engage in the Committee’s work in good faith and with
the aim of making progress. The EU reiterates that all elements of resolution 2254
(2015) must be implemented, including the issue of detainees and missing persons
and the establishment of a safe and neutral environment in order for free and fair
elections to be held under United Nations supervision.
Regarding the situation of refugees and of internally displaced persons, the
EU continues to voice strong concern about reports of social and demographic
engineering in all areas throughout Syria and mass waves of displacement, inter alia,
in parts of the north-west and north-east. The EU insists that their return to their
places of origin can be encouraged only if it can take place in a safe, voluntary and
dignified manner, in line with the parameters defined by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and in accordance with international law.
That was also agreed by all participants in the fourth Brussels Conference on Syria and
64/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

the region at the end of June. The underlying causes of the refugee and displacement
crisis must be addressed through the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The EU will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when a
comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition, in the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process, is firmly under way.

20-1437865/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I thank the President of the Security Council for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
It is an unfortunate reality that the interlinked and mutually reinforcing
challenges faced by the people of the Middle East have not yet been resolved.
Political instability, long-festering conflicts, sectarian divides, the issue of refugees
and terrorism continue to plague the region. The coronavirus disease pandemic has
only exacerbated the threats posed by those challenges.
India wishes to highlight the fact that Palestinian aspirations to a sovereign
and independent State are yet to be fulfilled. India has been unwavering in its
commitment to the Palestinian cause and remains supportive of a peaceful, negotiated
resolution of the Palestinian issue.
India has supported the two-State solution as a just and acceptable solution to
the conflict. The establishment of a Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, within mutually agreed borders, should be achieved through
negotiations directly by the two parties. Any stalemate could strengthen the hands
of extremists and shut the door to cooperation, thereby jeopardizing the security,
stability and prosperity of the peoples on both sides and the region. Accordingly,
India urges Israel and Palestine to resume direct negotiations at the earliest. The
international community is called upon to take concrete steps towards resuming and
facilitating those negotiations quickly.
India has always welcomed and has actively participated in various
international initiatives on the Middle East peace Process. India also appreciates the
efforts made by the Secretary-General’s Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov,
the Middle East Quartet and other countries in the region to kickstart the stalled
negotiations. In that regard, India supports President Mahmoud Abbas’s call for an
international conference organized by the Secretary-General to engage all concerned
parties in a meaningful peace process.
India appreciates the agreement between Fatah and Hamas for the holding
of parliamentary and presidential elections and also elections for the Palestinian
National Council, which will help fulfil the democratic aspirations of the Palestinian
people. Similarly, the truce between Israel and Hamas has eased the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. India hopes that the temporary truce will be converted into a
permanent ceasefire, which can save precious human lives on both sides and create
a conducive environment for talks.
We welcome the agreements for the normalization of relations between Israel
and the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. India has always supported peace and
stability in West Asia, which is our extended neighbourhood.
The decade-long armed conflict in Syria has claimed more than 400,000 lives,
displaced 6.2 million people internally and compelled another 6.3 million people to
seek shelter in neighbouring countries. Some 2.5 million children have been deprived
of schooling, and 50 per cent of the infrastructure has been destroyed. Surging
inflation, a near-halt in economic activities and severe sanctions have accentuated
the humanitarian crisis. While we are heartened to see the return of normalcy to
major parts of the country, we are also reminded of the enormous resources that
would be required to provide urgent humanitarian aid, rebuild the infrastructure,
enable the return of the refugees and restore a normal and dignified life to all Syrians.
India is not only contributing to the return of normalcy and the rebuilding of Syria
66/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

but has also consistently called for a comprehensive and peaceful resolution of the
Syrian conflict through a Syrian-led dialogue, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Syria. In that context, we remain supportive of both the
Geneva and Astana processes.
India remains concerned about the security and humanitarian situation in
Yemen. The recent exchange by the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah of prisoners
who had been detained in connection with the conflict is a welcome development.
India hopes that the parties will take more confidence-building measures to provide
the necessary impetus for the full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement.
India also encourages all parties to engage constructively with the United Nations
Special Envoy, Martin Griffiths, for the early finalization of the joint declaration,
paving the way for a peaceful political transition in Yemen. India also hopes for peace
and stability in Iraq, with full respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In the aftermath of the 4 August blast that brought destruction to vast swathes
of Beirut and inflicted a heavy loss of life, India stood in solidarity with Lebanon.
We sent more than 58 metric tonnes of emergency humanitarian aid to Beirut. We
look forward to the swift formation of a new Government that can offer political
stability and also tackle the grave socioeconomic challenges being faced by the
people of Lebanon.
The commencement of discussions on the disputed border between Israel
and Lebanon is a significant development. I am hopeful that this will provide an
opportunity to resolve the longstanding issue between the two countries.
India has invested much in the peace and stability of the region by deploying
its personnel as part of United Nations peacekeeping forces, through humanitarian
assistance, development cooperation and capacity-building, and will continue its
contribution towards peacebuilding in the Middle East. India calls on the concerned
parties to completely stop support to terrorist forces such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and others. India also urges all parties in the region to work
constructively and in good faith to promote peace, stability and development for the
benefit of all people in the Middle East.

20-1437867/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
Seventy-five years ago, the United Nations officially came into being based on
such inherent values as justice, equality, the dignity and worth of the human person
and the rule of law, as well as essential principles such as the prohibition of the
threat or use of force, along with noble objectives such as international cooperation
in solving international problems and employing international machinery for the
advancement of all peoples.
During the past 75 years, many nations have benefited from these principles.
Nevertheless, unfortunately, the Palestinians have been deprived of such lofty goals
despite the fact that the Palestinian question, as the world’s longest-lasting crisis,
has been at the top of the agendas of the General Assembly and the Security Council
since the creation of the United Nations.
As a result, during the past 75 years, the Security Council has been unable to
end the decades-long occupation of Palestine, protect the very basic rights of millions
of oppressed Palestinians at home and abroad or confront an occupying regime that
has committed all four core international crimes, not once but several times.
As is crystal-clear, the main reason behind the Council’s failure to fulfil
its duties with respect to the question of Palestine is the policies and practices of
the United States, which, through violations of the peremptory norms and basic
principles of international law, disregarding all standards of international conduct
and contravening all principles of humanity and morality, as well as abusing its status
as a permanent member of the Council, continues to completely, systematically and
unreservedly shield the Israeli regime.
The decades-long inaction by the Security Council has helped the Israeli
regime continue all its unlawful acts and inhumane practices with total impunity.
Today, the suffering of the Palestinian people has become manifold as a result
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as the intensification of
oppressive measures by the Israeli regime, including its continued brazen insistence
on further advancing its unlawful expansionist policies, a recent example of which
was its decision to construct nearly 5,000 housing units in the West Bank.
The international community has a serious responsibility to do everything in
its power to address this crisis and prevent its negative consequences for regional
and international peace and security from further deteriorating.
As the body responsible for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Security Council has a special responsibility in this regard. To prevent
the persistent erosion of trust and confidence in the Security Council, it must act
decisively in resolving the question of Palestine, in accordance with the principles of
justice and international law.
The international community must also compel the United States to put an
end to its irresponsible policy of unreservedly supporting the unlawful acts of
the Israeli regime and its complete and systematic shielding of Israel against the
Security Council’s criticism thus emboldening that regime to continue committing
more crimes.
The Israeli regime must also be compelled to put an end to its continued
construction and expansion of settlements as well as the sustained inhumane blockade
of the Gaza Strip. The latter is more urgent given the outbreak of the COVID-19
68/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

pandemic and the Palestinians’ dire need of medicine and medical equipment to treat
the patients and to prevent further spread of the virus.
Furthermore, the Israeli regime must be compelled to end the occupation of all
the Palestinian territories, of the occupied Syrian Golan and of parts of Lebanon, and
to stop all its destabilizing activities in the region, including the systematic violation
of the sovereignty of Syria and Lebanon.
I would like to reiterate that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to support
the just cause of the Palestinian people and the full realization of all their inalienable
rights, including their inherent right to self-determination and to establish an
independent Palestinian State encompassing the entirety of Palestine, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
In recent years, it has been the standard practice of the Israeli regime to
abuse Security Council meetings to accuse others and play the victim, seeking to
distract attention from its oppressive practices and crimes against Palestinians and
its destabilizing policies in the region. Likewise, the United States, by accusing
others, attempts to distract attention from its irresponsible policies and military
adventurism in the region. Such deceptive measures must not distract the attention
of the Council from the reality that the Israeli regime, as the aggressor and occupier,
is the main source of insecurity and instability in the Middle East and beyond and,
with the unequivocal support of the United States, continues to commit all its crimes
and brutalities.

20-1437869/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
I want to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his frank update. Let me
also take this opportunity to pay tribute to his Deputy, Jamie McGoldrick, an Irish
citizen, who retired last month. Jamie has spent a distinguished career in the service
of the United Nations and we wish him well.
Today, our thoughts and prayers are also with Secretary General Saeb Erekat
as he battles the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Ireland and its European Union (EU) partners share a firm commitment to
a negotiated two-State solution that ends the occupation that began in 1967, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, on the basis of international law, including
relevant Security Council resolutions. We believe that the Security Council should
spare no effort to achieve that goal. Ireland is committed to supporting all constructive
efforts. Confidence-building measures that can build trust are vital. The engagement
of the parties themselves and that of international partners are critical to enabling a
route to inclusive engagement, including through the Quartet mechanism.
Ireland welcomes the efforts towards strengthening Palestinian unity. We also
welcome President Abbas’s announcement about Palestinian elections, which will
allow a new generation to engage in the democratic process. Elections are a vital
connection between government and its citizens and are critical to uniting Gaza
and the West Bank under a single national authority. We also await with interest
the follow-up to President’s Abbas’s remarks during the General Assembly general
debate regarding an international peace conference.
Ireland also welcomes the agreements of Israel with the United Arab Emirates
and with Bahrain. Ireland believes, however, that the suspension of Israeli annexation
plans over the West Bank should be made permanent.
Ireland reaffirms its long-stated position that all settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory is illegal under international law. Ireland’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs condemned the latest announcement of significant further settlement
expansion of close to 5,000 new housing units in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. The construction of settlements in the Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and
E1 areas undermines the viability and territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian
State. Continued settlement activity is not only illegal but corrosive to trust between
Palestinians and Israelis.
We urge the Israeli Government to reverse its actions in relation to these
settlement plans and halt all settlement construction. We are also extremely
concerned at the acceleration in demolition or confiscation of Palestinian-owned
structures in the West Bank in recent months, notwithstanding the severe impact of
COVID-19. We call on Israel to halt demolitions and to allow for legal construction
for Palestinian residents.
Ireland is a proud supporter of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), whose programmes deliver essential
services to Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory and elsewhere in the
region. I call on others in the region and elsewhere to step up and fund UNRWA,
whose work needs support now more than ever, facing as it does a shortfall of $130
million. Ireland is particularly concerned about the situation in the Gaza Strip,
where 80 per cent of the population depends on humanitarian assistance. The rise
in COVID-19 cases has affected children in Gaza in need of access to life-saving
medical treatment. Once again, Ireland calls on Israel to lift the illegal blockade
against Gaza.
70/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Ireland stands with the Palestinian and Israeli people as they, too, battle the
dreadful virus and the havoc it has wreaked on their lives. I want to pay tribute to the
health-care professionals and other front-line workers, including UNRWA and other
United Nations agency staff.
Turning to the situation in Syria, where the conflict continues to cause terrible
suffering, the only way to bring lasting peace for the Syrian people is through a
sustainable, Syrian-owned political process. Ireland and the EU fully supports United
Nations Special Envoy Pedersen in his efforts and urges the parties to engage fully
with him. In particular, the Syrian authorities should engage positively in a further
meeting of the Constitutional Committee. A sustained peace in Syria will require
respect for human rights and strong human-rights safeguards. Those responsible
for violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law
must be held accountable for their actions.
The impact of COVID-19 and worsening economic conditions have made the
people of Syria even more vulnerable. We must do all that we can to support the
work of humanitarian organizations in reaching those in need, and remain gravely
concerned about the major challenges facing United Nations agencies and nongovernmental organizations with regard to humanitarian access to Syria.

20-1437871/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
There have been notable developments since the last open debate in July
(S/2020/736), in particular the normalization of relations between Israel and
the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain as well as the Sudan. The suspension of the
application of sovereignty over the West Bank by Israel is also a positive gesture.
Japan appreciates the mediation efforts of the United States and hopes these events
will lead to an easing of tensions and to stability in the region.
Despite such developments, however, the situation on the ground remains
worrisome. The Government of Israel has recently approved plans for the construction
of about 5,000 housing units in settlements in the West Bank. Japan deeply deplores
the continued settlement activities of the Government of Israel, despite repeated
calls from the international community, including Japan, to freeze such activities,
which are in violation of international law. Such action runs counter to the efforts to
provide momentum towards reducing tensions in the region, including through the
agreements to normalize bilateral relations.
The Middle East peace issue should be resolved only through negotiations
among the parties concerned, and not through violence or unilateral actions. I
wish to reaffirm Japan’s commitment to supporting a two-State solution based on
relevant Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed parameters. Japan
will continue to work on building confidence among the parties with a view to the
resumption of dialogue, the first step towards a two-State solution.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is also imperative for realizing a two-State
solution. Japan welcomes the announcement by President Abbas at the general debate
last month (see A/75/PV.10) of his intention to hold elections, which should provide
a unique opportunity for reconciliation and solidarity among the Palestinian people
through the democratic process.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is causing a human-security
crisis, threatening people’s survival, livelihoods and dignity around the world,
including in the Middle East. As always, the most vulnerable people are hit hardest.
The increasing number of infections among Palestine refugees is particularly
alarming, given their living conditions in overcrowded camps and the limited health
services available. Japan commends the efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in this regard and
expresses its utmost respect for the Agency’s front-line workers operating under
challenging circumstances.
In addition to its contribution of about $1.5 million to UNRWA earlier this
year in response to the COVID-19 flash appeal, Japan has recently decided to provide
approximately $4.1 million of food assistance through UNRWA. This brings Japan’s
total contribution to UNRWA in 2020 to approximately $30 million.
The pandemic calls for short-term humanitarian assistance, as well as mediumto long-term social and economic support. Japan will continue providing necessary
assistance to Palestine refugees through UNRWA, with a view to protecting and
empowering them and ensuring human security. In this respect, Japan expects
UNRWA to continue its efforts to improve and strengthen its management, which is
essential for delivering effectively to people in need.
Lastly, we should not forget the importance of improving the overall quality
of life in Palestine, even amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Japan has recently decided
to provide approximately $34 million of assistance, which includes food assistance
72/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

through the World Food Programme and aid for the construction of schools and
improvement of refugee camps. Japan reiterates its continued commitment to the
realization of a life of dignity and hope for the Palestinian people.

20-1437873/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
I have the honour to congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to thank you for judiciously guiding its work. I
would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Nickolay Mladenov, for his valuable briefing.
The quarterly meetings of the Security Council concerning the Palestinian
question have continued, and so does the suffering of the Palestinian people under
occupation. Since the last meeting, before our very eyes, unilateral Israeli steps to
expand settlements have gathered pace, undermining the prospects of a two-State
solution, increasing the pressure on the Palestinian people and further curtailing
its rights.
The international community should embark on an effective endeavour to end
the occupation, bring an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people and achieve a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace on the basis of the two-State solution through
direct and genuine negotiations with a view to the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with international law, the internationally recognized resolutions, the
agreed terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative.
There is an urgent need for the international community to take a stand and
press Israel to refrain from annexing occupied Palestinian territory and declare a
permanent end to such annexation, which contravenes international law and the
resolutions of the United Nations, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016)
and undermines the prospects of peace and a two-State solution.
Israel must put a stop to its illegal unilateral measures, including
settlement activities, which violate international law and the internationally
recognized resolutions.
Jordan condemns the ongoing Israeli unilateral measures including the threat
of annexation of Palestinian territory, the construction and expansion of illegal
settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the confiscation of property and
demolition of homes, and breaches of the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem.
Those provocative actions violate international law and are pulling the region
towards greater tension and conflict.
We also condemn the Israeli Government’s decision to build 4,900 new
settlement units in the occupied West Bank, in violation of international law, and to
persist with its illegal steps that undermine the two-State solution and the prospects
of a comprehensive peace. We call for a clear international stance rejecting those
steps and pressing for their cessation, for the sake of peace and international law.
A just and lasting peace based on the two-State solution, in accordance with
the internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, would
do justice to all the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. It is a Jordanian,
Palestinian and Arab strategic choice. Jordan will keep working with Arab States
and their partners in the international community in order to fulfil that goal. Mindful
of the Hashemite dynasty’s duty of custodianship, it will also continue its efforts to
protect the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem and to preserve the city’s
legal and historic status.

74/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) must continue to provide its services to Palestine refugees
pending a solution to the Palestinian question that would uphold their right of return
and compensation in accordance with the internationally recognized resolutions,
particularly General Assembly resolution 194 (III), in the context of a comprehensive
solution to the conflict on the basis of a two-State solution bringing an end to the
occupation that began in 1967. Jordan will continue to cooperate with its partners
in the international community and to make every possible effort to garner
international political and financial support for UNRWA, enabling it to continue
fulfilling its functions, in accordance with its United Nations mandate, for 5.5 million
Palestine refugees.
In the middle of this month, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jordan and
Sweden hosted the third ministerial strategic dialogue to garner support for UNRWA,
discuss joint efforts in that regard, and find practical ways and means to confront
the financial challenges facing the Agency. We urge all States to comply with their
commitments as soon as possible, and to increase them if possible, in order to ensure
that UNRWA can continue to provide its services and meet urgent needs arising
from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
In coordination with its partners in the international community, Jordan will
continue to make every possible effort to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace and to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Such a solution is a condition
for the realization of security, stability, welfare and prosperity for peoples that aspire
to better living conditions and a brighter future. The solution before us is clear: a
two-state solution leading to the establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
alongside Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital. This is the only way to achieve a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace acceptable to the peoples of the region.

20-1437875/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Russia
on successfully steering the work of the Security Council in October 2020. We
wish it every success in the remaining meetings of the month. We also thank Mr.
Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
valuable briefing.
Today’s quarterly open meeting on the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, comes at a time when the international community is continuing its fight
against the novel coronavirus, which has spread all around the planet and poses an
imminent threat to the survival of humanity as a whole.
Regrettably, in view of that direct existential threat, Israel, the occupying
Power, has persisted with its aggressive policies towards the Palestinian people,
and continues to give us periodic reminders that it has not renounced its plans to
annex more of the West Bank, and that the plans have merely been temporarily
suspended. Such policies show yet again that Israel seeks to entrench the occupation
by extending its illegal activities and policies through the expansion, construction
and establishment of thousands of settlement units and the annexation of land, in an
open violation of resolution 2334 (2016). Recent United Nations reports show that
settlement activities in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have escalated
since the Israeli Government gave the green light for the construction of thousands
of new illegal settlement units.
We are also concerned that, concomitantly with the Israeli authorities
authorizing illegal settlement construction, Israeli settlers committed acts of violence
against defenceless Palestinian civilians and destroyed Palestinian buildings and
property in order to make space for settlements. Those actions will help eliminate
the Palestinians’ prospects of establishing an independent, contiguous, viable,
lasting and sovereign Palestinian State.
In their reports and on numerous occasions, the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights have reported on the
prevailing climate of impunity for settlers and those taking over Palestinian land
and displacing Palestinian families from their homes. In a recent report of the
Secretary-General on Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, it is
stated that the Israeli Ministry of Justice has conducted dozens of investigations
without convicting a single settler. Such practices require us, more than ever before,
to leverage international political and legal mechanisms to hold Israel accountable
for the ongoing and constant violations of the rights of the Palestinian people, rights
that are guaranteed under international law.
Despite the current exceptional circumstances, Kuwait and the Arab States
have worked to confront Israel’s attempts to take advantage of the world’s concern
with the coronavirus and to ignore the humanitarian and global opinion that the
aggression, war and blockade should come to an end during these challenging
humanitarian conditions. When it met on 9 September, the Council of the League
of Arab States at the ministerial level stressed the centrality of the Palestinian
cause to the Arab homeland and the Arab character of occupied East Jerusalem.
It reiterated that Arab States are committed to peace as a strategic choice, and to
reaching a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict consistent with international law, the
internationally recognized resolutions and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, enabling
the Palestinian people to exercise its full, legitimate political rights and establish its
independent State on its own territory, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
76/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States
to the United Nations, Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Security
Council this month and on all your ongoing efforts to support international peace
and security, particularly in the Middle East region. I thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov, for his outstanding briefings on the
developing situation in the Arab region and, in particular, the response of the United
Nations to the Palestinian question.
The Palestinian question has always been and will remain the central issue and
fulcrum of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Notwithstanding the proliferation of opinions
regarding the best way to reach a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
the League of Arab States and its States members remain convinced that stability
in the Middle East region depends on finding a just solution to the Palestinian
question on the basis of international law, in accordance with the agreed terms of
reference and, in particular, land for peace, the two-State solution, the Madrid and
Oslo understandings, the Arab Peace Initiative and the numerous resolutions of the
Security Council. The goal is clear — the establishment of a Palestinian State on the
borders of 4 July 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, through direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine with support from the Quartet.
The League has therefore adopted no shortage of resolutions at the ministerial
and summit levels addressing the Palestinian question in all its main aspects,
including the refugee issue, which is a major concern for the League and its States
members. The League and its States members believe in the mandate of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
support any action to ensure that it is effectively fulfilled. The League is strongly
convinced that any attempt to thwart or call into question the Agency’s mandate
would strike at one of the most important of the five main negotiating issues for a
final settlement to the Palestinian question. Although Israel is the party that caused
the Palestine refugee crisis, and although the international community bears primary
responsibility for engaging with Israel to ensure that Palestine refugees can enjoy
all their rights in accordance with international instruments and standards, the Arab
side has always been proactive in filling gaps in the Agency’s funding in order to
shore up its material and field capacities. It has done so because of the bonds of
solidarity among the Arab peoples and Governments, bonds that reach their fullest
expression in the League of Arab States.
Similarly, the League supports all efforts to unite Palestinians. It has backed
efforts to achieve intra-Palestinian reconciliation. It is convinced that reaching
an agreement between Fatah and Hamas, and holding legislative and presidential
elections, would strengthen the unity of the Palestinian people and make it better
able to negotiate, under united Palestinian leadership, towards the goals to which
we aspire.
The League stands ready to support the Palestinian vision that has been
articulated by President Mahmoud Abbas before the Security Council. President
Abbas has warned against rushing into any initiatives that the State of Palestine has
had no part in formulating or negotiating. He has insisted that the conflict must be
solved by peaceful means, acting through the United Nations and with the effective
involvement of the Quartet. He has also called repeatedly for an international peace
conference, first in February 2018, when Washington decided unilaterally to move
20-1437877/104

S/2020/1055

the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem and recognize Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel, and secondly at the emergency Security Council meeting of
February 2020 (S/PV.8717), after President Trump had announced his deal of the
century, known as “Peace to prosperity”, which did not meet any of the terms for
a final settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict and was rejected by all peace-loving
international forces.
The League supports the initiative presented by President Abbas in his
statement before the General Assembly on the occasion of its seventy-fifth
anniversary, namely, that the Secretary-General should start preparing to convene
an international conference to launch genuine negotiations between the State of
Palestine and the State of Israel, in accordance exclusively with the principles and
terms of reference agreed under international law. The Security Council would
no doubt bear the greatest share of responsibility for effectively preparing for
the conference and ensuring that it achieves the desired results, in coordination
with the Secretary-General, the League of Arab States and the other regional and
international stakeholders.
Mindful of the need to break the current deadlock in the peace process, the
League of Arab States commends all the efforts made by the main regional and
international stakeholders, including the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the European Union. Such efforts include the international
and regional endeavours to bring together and unify international forces to support
the Palestinian negotiator in preparation for a new round of negotiations with the
participation of the Palestinian Authority. The most recent such effort was the
meeting held in Jordan, which brought together the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, France, Egypt and Jordan, and the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, culminating in a statement supporting
international law. The League emphasizes the importance of the proposed conference.
It calls on the Quarter and international and regional supporting parties to make
every endeavour to play a constructive role in bringing the conflict out of its current
dire straits and open up prospects for a genuine peace and the just settlement to
which we aspire. The League has every confidence that the Secretary-General of
the United Nations has the capacity and wisdom to guide international efforts to
meet Palestinian and Arab aspirations, and indeed the aspirations of the region and
the world.
Israel has persisted in its constant efforts to fulfil its settlement schemes
on occupied Palestinian and Arab territory. It has taken a series of muted steps
towards enacting its plan for stealth annexation. Most recently, it built 2,600
settlement units in Jerusalem and the West Bank, and cut off Area C in preparation
for the full annexation of the Jordan valley. It has continued to hamper efforts to
reach a settlement by attempting to redefine such core issues as Jerusalem, the
refugees and the borders. It has also sought to effectively entrench its policies
of racial discrimination, particularly by enacting a new nation-State law turning
Arab inhabitants of Israel into second-class citizens. It has sought to impose a fait
accompli leading to a one-State solution in lieu of the two-State solution, which
is now in grave peril, especially since Israel violated its own stated commitment,
which was a fundamental component of its recent agreement with the United Arab
Emirates, that it would fully freeze settlement activities. The Secretary-General
of the League has forcefully denounced that course of action and expressed the
League’s fears regarding the repercussions for the future of the negotiations towards
an independent, geographically contiguous State of Palestine.
Pending genuine negotiations in the peace conference for which President
Abbas has called, the League emphasizes that the Human Rights Council and
78/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights must, in
accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 43/31, press Israel to confront the
catastrophic humanitarian repercussions of the annexation and the indiscriminate
Israeli settlement activities against the Palestinian people, including racial
discrimination. If Israel persists with its settlement policies and its illegal practices
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, action must be taken, further to the reports
compiled by international committees of inquiry, to lay the groundwork for every
possible measure to hold Israel legally accountable for all the well-documented
violations and crimes against the Palestinian people committed by its leaders and
senior officials.

20-1437879/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
I would like to start by congratulating the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month, and thanking the Niger for its successful
presidency last month.
I would also like to wish all participants a happy United Nations Day.
On this seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations,
the situation in the Middle East is fraught with conflict, challenges and a lack of
a horizon for comprehensive and durable peace in the region. The principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations are challenged in every area of peace
and security, there is no path for a sustainable future for its young populations, and
the pandemic is stealing what progress was made over the last few decades in most
areas, especially in education, poverty reduction, rights and equality.
Some countries are doing better than the others, but the trajectory for the
majority is alarming. My country, Lebanon, has been through an annus horribilis in
every sense of the word since last October.
The economic and financial crisis that wrecked the lives of the people and
robbed them of their savings and financial security was accompanied by a pandemic,
accompanied by a catastrophic explosion that destroyed the port of Beirut and a large
part of the city. It also caused the death of 200 people and injured thousands. The
explosion destroyed the heart of the city of Beirut and its business district, making
the recovery more difficult. It also shattered the cultural and art districts, adding to
the darkness that has overshadowed the lives of people and deprived them of even
the pleasure of finding refuge in their cultural heritage.
A sense of despair descended on the country and population, but the quick
response of the United Nations and the international community was overwhelming
and heartening. Support, sympathy and aid poured into the country, telling the
Lebanese that they are not alone, making a difference and encouraging the Lebanese
to stand up again and start the long journey of recovery. In this journey, Lebanon
needs its friends and the international community today more than ever as it embarks
on the reconstruction and rehabilitation phase of its recovery to build back better.
We thank France and the United Nations for swiftly stepping in to help
Lebanon by holding an international conference on 9 August to help Lebanon in
response to the explosion and the humanitarian crisis. We also thank the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme for organizing briefings for member States to help with the response
to the situation in Lebanon. These meetings are invaluable in garnering support
and much needed assistance to help Lebanon mitigate the effects of the explosion
in different areas. Sectors in dire need for assistance are education and health. The
impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic is heavily concentrated in the education
sector, where the deficit in technology penetration and Internet is threatening to
produce a lost generation if students cannot go to school and have no access to
virtual learning.
Health is also a major challenge, with the sector facing problems of capacity
and shortages of medicine and of medical equipment. All of these challenges are
taking place in the midst of a political vacuum, in the absence of a new Government.
The Lebanese people are seeking a glimmer of hope in the formation of a
new Government and a new way of doing business in that Government. They hope
80/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

that, after a period of political gridlock, the country will be back charting a path
of economic, financial and political rehabilitation. A new Prime Minister, Mr.
Saad Hariri, has been designated to form this new Government and, if this hope
materializes with the formation of a new Government, Lebanon can start again on
the road to finding solutions for its problems, and enact the reforms required by the
international community, which will allow international support to flow again to
the country.
There is also movement on another front in Lebanon. The Speaker of the
Lebanese Parliament announced on 1 October that a framework agreement was
reached to start indirect technical negotiations, under the auspices of the United
Nations and with the mediation of the United States, to reach an agreement over the
disputed land and maritime border between Lebanon and Israel.
Once such an agreement on the delineation of the maritime and border
is reached, the Speaker said it will be deposited with the United Nations, in
accordance with international rules and practices. The framework agreement will
be based on the Israel-Lebanon ceasefire understanding, of April 1996, and on
resolution 1701 (2006).
The first meeting between the Lebanese and the Israelis, under the auspices of
the United Nations and in the presence representatives of the United States, was held
on 14 October at Naqoura, and other meetings are expected to follow before the end
of the month and in the coming months.
A day before the start of the discussions, President Michel Aoun gave his
instructions to the members of the Lebanese delegation, stressing that “these
discussions are technical and are limited to the demarcation of the maritime borders”
and aim to “defend internationally recognized Lebanese rights”. Lebanon hopes that
a border agreement will be reached soon that will allow Lebanon to recover its land
and territorial waters, benefit from its natural resources, extend its sovereignty over
all its land and water and help its economy.
Last August, the Security Council adopted resolution 2539 (2020), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) until 31
August 2021. By renewing the mandate of UNIFIL, the Security Council and its
members voiced their strong and unified message of support to UNIFIL, preserving
its badly needed strong capacity to preserve peace and security along the Blue Line.
After the port explosion and in line with UNIFIL’s mission mandate spelled
out in resolution 2539 (2020), which authorizes it to take “temporary and special
measures to provide support to Lebanon and its people”, UNIFIL extended a helping
hand to Lebanon in Beirut. At the request of the Government of Lebanon and in
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, UNIFIL, on 27 September, deployed
a multinational force detachment to Beirut in order to assist the Lebanese authorities
with their efforts to deal with the aftermath of the explosion.
Lebanon is extremely thankful to UNIFIL’s leadership and staff for their
relentless dedication, and commends the strong and steady cooperation between
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Government. Let me also express my country’s genuine
gratitude to troop-contributing countries, for their longstanding support and
unwavering commitment especially through these challenging times Lebanon is
going through.
Furthermore, Lebanon salutes the crew of the Bangladeshi ship who were
badly hit by the explosion at the port, and the rest of the affected UNIFIL personnel
for their courage and sacrifice.

20-1437881/104

S/2020/1055

Lebanon reiterates its full commitment to the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) in its entirety and calls on this organ to do everything in its power to
make sure that Israel does the same and stops its daily violations by land, sea and air
of Lebanese sovereignty.
Palestinians have been suffering a strangling blockade and unliveable
conditions in Gaza, and experiencing hardships and restrictions on their freedom
of movement in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. This is coupled with the
continued expansion of Israeli settlements and rise in settler violence, excessive
use of force by Israeli security forces and increasing house demolitions by Israeli
authorities, as documented by relevant Secretary Council reports.
The Israeli plans for annexation of parts of the West Bank were supposedly
suspended last August. They were not cancelled, just put on hold, and now we are
witnessing unprecedented and record settlement activity by the Israeli authorities.
Nearly 5,000 new settlement units are reported as being approved by the Israel High
Planning Council in mid-October. There are reports that 12,159 settlement units
have been approved so far in 2020. Peace Now reports that this is the highest total of
settlement units advances in any year since it began tracking in 2012.
These Israeli actions are in contravention of international law, the Geneva
Conventions and Security Council resolutions on this matter. But, most importantly,
they end any hope for an equitable settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and
any chance for peace.
Any solution to the Palestinian question must be just and comprehensive,
based on international legality and rooted in relevant United Nations resolutions
especially, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 2334 (2016). It
must also be based on the formula of land-for-peace and the two-State solution,
including a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital. The Arab Peace
Initiative remains a credible way forward for such a peace. Ignoring the rights and
national aspirations of the Palestinian people will not lead to real peace.

82/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this important open debate. Malaysia wishes
to align itself with the statements delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and
of the United Arab Emirates, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (annex 19)
and of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 48), respectively.
We recently commemorated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding
of the United Nations, in September this year. Two days ago, on 24 October, we
celebrated United Nations Day. These two historic occasions should serve as strong
reminders to Member States to act on their commitments under the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as our shared values and ideals of freedom, accountability,
and prosperity for everyone, including for our Palestinian brothers and sisters.
Malaysia’s position on the question of Palestine remains clear. We will
continue to advocate the resolution of the question of Palestine on the basis of an
international framework, and against annexation and in support of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination. We will continue to support the realization
of the State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. For there to be lasting peace in the Middle East, the established international
consensus, in unison with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant resolutions, must be respected and complied by the occupying Power.
First, Israel must end its occupation of Palestinian lands and withdraw its troops
from the occupied Palestinian territory and surrounding Arab States. Secondly, Israel
must cease all of its illegal settlement activities, as demanded by resolution 2334
(2016). The acquisition of any territory by war or force is inadmissible and illegal.
Malaysia also would like to recall that, on 16 June 2020, the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since
1967 and 47 other independent experts of the United Nations human rights system
issued a statement expressing that the annexation of the occupied territory was a
serious violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, and contrary to fundamental rules affirmed by the Security Council
and General Assembly.
Thirdly, Israel must allow Palestinian refugees their right to return to their
land and property.
Fourthly, Israel must restore the original status of Jerusalem.
Last but certainly not least, Israel must restore its credibility and return to
the negotiating table with Palestine. Malaysia believes that the only viable way
forward is a negotiated two-State solution. In this context, Malaysia supports the
international community’s call, including by the Secretary-General, for the Middle
East Quartet to find a mutually agreeable path for the parties to re-engage towards a
negotiated, peaceful settlement.
These are not new preconditions but rather a reflection of years of diplomatic
effort and the consensus reached over decades of negotiations. These are certainly
not narratives of the Palestine alone, but a genuine, worldwide call to address the
root causes of the conflict and put an end to the longest occupation in the history of
the world. Israel can no longer be in denial and must act responsibly.
In this regard, Malaysia calls on the Council to act urgently to ensure the full
implementation of all applicable Council resolutions and defend the rules-based order
so as to ensure the maintenance of regional and international peace and security.
20-1437883/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Russia for its successful presidency
of the Security Council this month. We appreciate your efforts, Sir, and those of your
predecessor.
I would like also to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.
The Kingdom of Morocco is deeply concerned about the situation of the
Palestinian people. The coronavirus disease pandemic and its repercussions
exacerbate the economic, humanitarian, and social crises in the region.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, as the Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, stands with the Palestinian people in their
quest to achieve their legitimate right to establish an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and reaffirms the importance of ending settlement activity.
The Palestinian people are suffering under the Israeli occupation of their
territory, daily violations of their legitimate rights, and activities on their land that
flout internationally recognized resolutions and international humanitarian law.
The Kingdom of Morocco expresses its concern at the advancement of nearly
5,000 housing units by Israel in the West Bank. Settlement activities are a violation
of international law and one of the major hindrances to peace. They threaten the
possibility of reaching a viable two-State solution.
Morocco rejects any unilateral steps that would undermine the legal and
historical status of Jerusalem, Al-Quds Al-Sharif, as a holy city, and attaches great
importance to its spiritual significance, as well as its special vocation as a city of
peace. I wish to recall the Al-Quds Call, signed by His Majesty King Mohammed
VI and His Holiness Pope Francis, during His Holiness’s visit to Morocco in March
2019, aimed at promoting and enhancing the specific multi-faith character of the
holy city, its spiritual dimension and its special identity.
My country reiterates its strong support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its mandate.
UNRWA plays a vital role in supporting the education, health and social services of
millions of Palestinian refugees in the West Bank and continues to do so, especially
under the challenging circumstances of the coronavirus disease pandemic. For its
part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive branch in the field
of the Al-Quds Committee, continues to support the city’s people through a range
of key projects concerning, in particular, cultural and urban heritage conservation,
social assistance and the preservation of the Palestinian national archives.
In conclusion, the international community should step up its efforts to bring
the Palestinians and Israelis back to the negotiating table to achieve a two-State
solution within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
State of Palestine.

84/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Namibia to the
United Nations, Neville Gertze
I congratulate you, Sir, on the Russian Federation’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of October 2020 and thank you for
organizing this open debate on this issue of great importance to Namibia.
I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process for his briefing on the situation in the region.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
distinguished Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
I would like to begin my statement by expressing my concern at the rising rate
of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) infection in the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel. This pandemic has shattered the lives of many around the world and
impacted the most vulnerable. Chief among them is the Palestinian population in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. I wish to remind Council members that Gaza
has one of the highest population densities in the world, a weak health-care system
and lingering humanitarian and economic crises. This represents an auspicious
environment for COVID-19 to spread and cause more heartache and destruction to
the people of Gaza.
The financial crisis currently affecting the Palestinian Authority further
compounds its ability to respond to COVID-19 in the Palestinian territories, as
service provisions have been direly impacted.
In this regard, Namibia welcomes the United Nations engagement with all
sides to ensure the unimpeded provision of humanitarian assistance. I would also
like to take this opportunity to reiterate Namibia’s support for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as the needs
and demands for the services provided by the Agency to the 5.6 million Palestine
refugees drastically increase because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In his 29 September address to the Security Council (see S/PV.8762), in
which he presented the fifteenth report on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016), the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General noted that no concrete steps
had been taken during the reporting period to implement the provisions of this
resolution. This follows a similar pattern since the adoption of the resolution in
December 2016.
Mr. Mladenov underscored that no steps had been taken to “immediately
and completely cease all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem” (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 2). I wish to highlight the
decision taken on 14 and 15 October by Israeli authorities to advance nearly 5,000
housing units, most of which are in outlying locations deep inside the occupied
West Bank. I take this opportunity to reiterate that settlements are illegal under
international law and represent an obstacle to peace and to the two-State solution.
Furthermore, demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned structures
by Israeli authorities continued across the occupied West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem, and have reached the highest demolition rate in the past four years. These
actions also represent an obstacle to peace.
Since my last statement to the Security Council under this agenda item in
July (S/2020/736, annex 39), the normalization of relations of Israel with both the
20-1437885/104

S/2020/1055

United Arab Emirates and Bahrain has been announced. Parties have underscored
that the signing of these Abraham accords would provide a new impetus for peace
in the region. The advancement of new settlements and the highest demolition rate
in four years does not represent a new impetus for peace for the Palestinian people.
Furthermore, the suspension of annexation plans included in the Accords does not
bring any respite or peace to the Palestinian people.
I wish to draw attention to the call made by President Abbas during his address
to the General Assembly, on the occasion of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session (see A/75/PV.10), to hold an international
conference at the start of 2021. Namibia expressed support for this proposal.
As the international community celebrates the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, the support for the Palestinian
cause remains steadfast, as demonstrated by the countless expressions of support
during the general debate of the high-level week held in September. Nevertheless,
we continue to fail the Palestinian people. This is notably demonstrated in the
lack of implementation of the historic Security Council resolution 2334 (2016),
adopted almost four years ago. That resolution provided Palestinians with hope and
expectations for a solution to be found to this drawn-out conflict.
However, since its adoption, the humanitarian, social and political situation
has only worsened and tensions have risen drastically, now compounded by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Actions taken have severely undermined the process of
reaching a mutually acceptable, just and lasting solution. The people of Palestine have
the fundamental right to self-determination and independence, with East Jerusalem
as their capital. We must achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between
the Israelis and the Palestinians, with the establishment of two States, coexisting in
an atmosphere of peace and security.

86/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
As we convene for this debate, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
continues to severely affect the lives of Israelis and Palestinians alike. Authorities on
both sides have implemented extensive measures to contain the virus and save lives,
at a high economic cost.
When we addressed the Council six months ago (see S/2020/341), we
commended the parties for their cooperation in responding to the pandemic. However,
we note with regret that the space for dialogue and cooperation between Israelis and
Palestinians has deteriorated since then.
Norway has repeatedly warned against the Israeli annexation of parts of
the West Bank. We call on Israel to make the current suspension of those plans
permanent. Such a step could create a more conducive environment for cooperation
and negotiations.
The unprecedented strain placed by the pandemic on the already fragile
Palestinian economy and on the Palestinian Authority’s ability to operate must be
properly addressed. In that regard, Norway regrets that the question of the transfer
of clearance revenues from Israel to the Palestinian Authority remains unresolved.
With the Palestinian economy on the brink of insolvency, we strongly urge the
parties to stabilize the Palestinian Authority’s budget by agreeing on fixed, regular
and predictable transfers of revenues. The parties must also settle other outstanding
fiscal questions in order to strengthen the Palestinian economy.
Ordinary people, in particular the most vulnerable, will be the ones bearing
the brunt of the problems as long as this issue remains unresolved. Preserving the
fiscal viability of the Palestinian Authority is also fundamental to the prospects for
a two-State solution.
During this time of crisis, we urge the Palestinian Authority to continue the
delivery of basic services to the Palestinian population, and, to the extent possible, to
ensure salary payments to public employees in the West Bank and Gaza.
As chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), Norway will do its utmost to
mobilize resources to Palestinians in need and to address immediate public-health
issues. This work is already ongoing. We plan for the next meeting of the AHLC
to take place in February 2021 and will coordinate the timing with the parties and
major donors.
The pandemic has exacerbated the already dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza. We recognize the ongoing efforts made by the actors involved to facilitate
the transfer of medical supplies into Gaza. However, this is far from enough. We
call on Israel to do more to fulfil its obligations, including by easing the closure and
improving access and movement of goods. Norway also encourages the Palestinian
Authority to continue to carry out its responsibility of supporting Gaza’s health-care
system. In addition, international support to alleviate the impact of the pandemic
will need to also address the critical public-health situation in Jerusalem and the
West Bank.
The current crisis again underscores the critical role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
supports the basic needs of millions of Palestinian refugees in the region. UNRWA
continues to do so in the face of the most severe financial crisis in its history. The
20-1437887/104

S/2020/1055

organization’s schools, clinics and other facilities across the region are essential
to avoid further instability. Norway calls on donors to increase their funding
to UNRWA.
Norway remains hopeful that the normalization of Israel’s bilateral relations
with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain will increase the space for dialogue and
cooperation between Israel and the Arab world. That development demonstrates that
peaceful coexistence between the countries of the Middle East is possible and offers
new opportunities for diplomatic and economic cooperation. It is positive if this can
contribute to increased political stability in the region, and we hope that increased
contact across the Middle East will support the efforts to secure a peaceful and just
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We encourage Israel, the United Arab
Emirates and Bahrain — alongside other countries in the region — to seize the
momentum generated by their historic steps towards that end.
Still, the normalization agreements do not resolve outstanding questions in
the conflict. Norway is deeply concerned about the continued Israeli settlement
activities in the West Bank, which constitute a violation of international law. Despite
the COVID-19 pandemic, over recent months there has been a spike in the demolition
or confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures and homes in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. We call on Israel to halt such activities. We also call on all dutybearers to respect and protect the fundamental human rights of the people within
their areas of authority and to end impunity.
Let me conclude by repeating Norway’s call on the parties to commit to a
meaningful dialogue on the basis of existing agreements and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
We encourage all supporters of the two-State solution to help bring the parties
back to a path towards a lasting settlement, including talks on the final-status issues
of borders, security, refugees and Jerusalem. As Norway has underlined repeatedly in
these debates, there continues to be strong international consensus that a sustainable
peace between Israelis and Palestinians can be achieved only through a negotiated
and viable two-State solution.
Norway is honoured that on 1 January 2021, it will join the Council as an
elected member. We are committed to using every opportunity around this table to
advance the prospects for a sustainable peace between Israelis and Palestinians.

88/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Peru welcomes the holding of this quarterly open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his comprehensive briefing.
Peru is following with deep concern the progressive deterioration of the
political and humanitarian conditions that underlie the question of Palestine. The
inflexibility of positions, the absence of dialogue between the parties and the ongoing
violence have led to an impasse in the peace process.
We cannot but deplore the continuing fatalities among the civilian population
and the pronounced deterioration in security conditions for millions of Palestinians
and Israelis. The parties must cease all acts of violence and investigate and punish
all violations of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Peru, guided by its commitment to multilateralism, international law and
the peaceful resolution of disputes, supports the solution involving two States with
internationally recognized and secure borders, to be negotiated directly between
Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the 1967 borders. Such negotiations must also
determine the final status of Jerusalem.
We recognize Israel’s right to preserve its own security and existence through
the exercise of legitimate self-defence, provided that it takes place in accordance
with the principles of distinction, proportionality and precautions. The human rights
of Palestinian citizens, including those of minors, cannot be ignored.
To that end, we deem it urgent to put an end to the increased practices of
settlement-building, the demolition of buildings and evictions in the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967, in line with resolution 2334 (2016). Such practices
are contrary to international law. They seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity
of the Palestinian State and undermine the possibility of reaching a solution based
on the existence of two States.
We also emphasize the urgent need to continue meeting the basic needs of the
people of Gaza, as poverty and marginalization create fertile ground for those who
would promote violence and terrorism.
We encourage the continued provision of the crucial support that the United
Nations and its agencies have been providing to face the serious socioeconomic
consequences resulting from the blockade to which the population is subjected,
which has been exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus disease. We also look
forward to a more fluid cooperation between Israel and Palestine to provide an
effective response to the pandemic.
We also consider it vital to redouble our efforts with a view to advancing the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, as it would ease the humanitarian situation
and provide an impetus for the resumption of dialogue with Israel. We welcome the
rapprochements registered last September, and we hope that they will lead to the
holding of presidential and legislative elections.
We deem it essential that the Council be capable of reaching a minimum
consensus and expressing its views when the situation on the ground so warrants,
demanding that the parties comply strictly with their obligations under international
law, international humanitarian law and human rights. This must necessarily be
accompanied by concrete examples of restraint and commitment to peace on the
20-1437889/104

S/2020/1055

part of the leaders of both parties. Hate speech, incitement to violence, resort to
terrorism, laws that promote discrimination, and anti-Semitism must definitely be
put aside.
We welcome the willingness shown by various countries to utilize their good
offices, particularly those that have historically participated in this process. We
highlight the central role that the Quartet is called upon to play and the relevance of
the Arab Peace Initiative.
We would like to conclude by expressing our full support for Mr. Mladenov
in his efforts to prevent any further escalation and promote dialogue between the
parties, and also by reaffirming our commitment to finding a solution to the question
of Palestine, which will contribute to the achievement of a sustainable peace
in the region.

90/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I wish to commend the Russian Federation for its presidency
of the Security Council this month and its Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Sergey Vasilievich Vershinin, for chairing this important meeting. We thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his comprehensive briefing and his constant work on the issue.
For the second consecutive time, Member States’ participation in this open
meeting is limited to written statements owing to measures taken to prevent the
spread of the novel coronavirus. That situation calls to mind the anxiety arising from
the global health crisis that has spread all over the world, including the Middle East
region, where its effects have been exacerbated by the ongoing conflicts and crises,
which have caused difficult humanitarian situations and economic challenges. The
threat, which affects everyone, should be an additional incentive to bring an end to
the conflict and tension in the region.
This quarterly meeting provides an opportunity for Member States to
emphasize constantly, with one voice, the central importance of the Palestinian issue,
which has wide-ranging implications for security and stability, not to mention being
a question of inalienable rights. The international community has a responsibility to
uphold those rights and achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement.
We are convinced that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace and a settlement
to all aspects of the Palestinian question must be achieved in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations. There can be no substitute
for a peaceful, consensus-based settlement reached through earnest negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides on the basis of the agreed terms of
reference, the internationally recognized resolutions, the principle of land for peace
and the Arab Peace Initiative, leading to a two-State solution and the establishment
of an independent, viable State of Palestine on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side with Israel in security and peace. That outcome
means an end to the occupation of Arab territories, to settlement activities and to
any endeavour to illegally annex those territories. It means upholding the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and finding a just solution to the issue of refugees.
It means bringing an end to measures that affect the character, legal status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem, and bringing an end to the stranglehold on
Gaza and to all other practices of the occupying Power that contravene international
law and the resolutions of the United Nations. Any arrangements that are not based
on those terms of reference will not achieve the peace to which we aspire.
Qatar has a policy of working to mitigate humanitarian crises and economic
hardship, and it is committed to creating conditions conducive to peace. Accordingly,
in coordination with international partners, it has continued to provide humanitarian
and development support to its Palestinian brethren, including in the Gaza Strip.
His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir, of the State of Qatar,
has provided financial assistance amounting to $150,000,000 to help prevent the
spread of the novel coronavirus and tackle its effects in the Gaza Strip. Those efforts
complement humanitarian and development support for Palestinians in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. In addition, Qatar has increased its contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

20-1437891/104

S/2020/1055

Unfortunately, the Palestinian question is not the only issue in our region
that needs to be solved. There are other issues with repercussions for regional and
international peace and security and for the peoples of the region. and that urgently
require a solution. The crisis in Syria has caused considerable suffering to the Syrian
people, suffering that worsens with every passing day in which the crisis is not
brought to an end. The Constitutional Committee, if a true commitment is made
to ensuring its success, is one step in the right direction. Through a meaningful
political process under the aegis of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, it can lead to a solution conducive to a political transition in accordance
with the Geneva communiqué, and to the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015)
in all its aspects, with a view to meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people and protecting the unity, sovereignty and independence of Syria. As has been
shown, any military solution will only lead to more atrocities and more humanitarian
disasters. The country has seen enough war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Justice must be done and those responsible, whatever side they belong to, must be
held accountable.
The people of Yemen also aspires to and deserves peace, security and stability;
an end to the violence and crisis that have lasted for several years; and the protection
of the unity and territorial integrity of Yemen. The Yemeni people is still beset
with hardship and suffering. It is essential to provide basic necessities and facilitate
access to humanitarian assistance for all Yemenis. Efforts must be made to end
the crisis through negotiation among Yemenis, in accordance with the outcomes
of the national dialogue and the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council, and to
comply with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, particularly resolution
2216 (2015). We therefore support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral For Yemen to press for a solution through dialogue.
Turning to the crisis in Libya, we welcome the ceasefire agreement and the
resumption of the political process in accordance with the Libyan Political Agreement
and its outcomes with a view to reaching a comprehensive political settlement that
would preserve the unity, sovereignty and independence of Libya and put an end to the
crisis and the resulting violations, suffering and difficult economic circumstances.
A military campaign was launched in order to undermine the legitimate Government
established under the Libyan Political Agreement, which is recognized by the
international community; but the result was merely to complicate the situation and
commit war crimes and grave violations of international humanitarian law. What the
Libyan people needs now is respect for its determination to find a peaceful solution,
end the violence and reach national consensus.
Faced with all those crises, our region urgently needs de-escalation and
solutions through dialogue consistent with the principles for the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Qatar has taken that approach as a matter of principle in confronting the
Gulf crisis that was unjustifiably imposed on it three years ago with the introduction
of an unfair blockade and illegal unilateral measures that have complicated the
situation in the region and affected stability and security.
Since the outset of the crisis, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad AlThani, Emir of the State of Qatar, has called for a solution through dialogue based on
neighbourly relations, respect for the sovereignty, independence and unity of States,
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States. He has encouraged mediation
brokered by friendly neighbouring States, in particular by the late Sheikh Sabah AlAhmad Al-Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait.
Qatar has stood by its principles, which are grounded in respect for
international law, and has successfully petitioned the international legal system, first
and foremost the International Court of Justice, to confront those measures, which
92/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

are a violation of the Charter of the United Nations, international law, international
agreements and covenants, and human rights.
Lastly, Qatar will remain committed to its principled stance in favour of peace
and stability in the region, de-escalation and the peaceful resolution of conflicts for
the benefit of the peoples and States of the region.

20-1437893/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Abdallah Y. Al-Mouallimi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, commend the Russian presidency of the Security
Council, and express my country’s appreciation for your constructive work in the
Security Council.
In view of today’s discussion concerning the situation in the Middle East,
it is worth pointing out that the most significant causes of instability and ongoing
conflict in the region are the Israeli occupation of Arab territories and the denial
of the rights of the Palestinian people, alongside the aggressive and expansionist
policies enacted by the forces of regional chaos, which have founded and deployed
armed extrajudicial militias, intervened in the internal affairs of States and fomented
sectarian strife.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has consistently supported the Palestinian
people as it seeks to exercise its rights. The centrality of the Palestinian question is a
key point of Saudi Arabian policy, as is the right of the State of Palestine to exercise
sovereignty over all the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. At the same time, Saudi Arabia is committed to peace as a strategic
choice and to reaching a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with
the internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which my
country proposed in 2002.
My country condemns the ongoing Israeli violations and categorically rejects
all the futile and illegal Israeli policies, practices and plans aimed at expanding
settlements, entrenching racial discrimination and erasing the national identity of
the Palestinian people, including, most recently, the decision taken by Israel to build
some 5,000 new settlement units in the West Bank.
The Security Council must urgently fulfil its responsibility by bringing a stop
to the ongoing Israeli acts of aggression and ensuring that the relevant international
resolutions are implemented, including by ending the Israeli occupation of all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan and Lebanese territory.
The Houthi coup militias continue to demonstrate their extremist designs
on the Yemeni people, which is in the sixth consecutive year of a disastrous war.
The evidence is clear. The coup militias have continued to ramp up their military
campaign, using missiles and drones to target my country, and they have rejected
every ceasefire initiative. They have also used the oil tanker FSO SAFER as a
bargaining chip with which to extort the international community, ignoring the threat
which the tanker poses to the marine environment and international commercial
navigation lines.
Saudi Arabia supports the efforts of the United Nations to find a comprehensive
political solution in Yemen, in accordance with resolution 2216 (2015), the Initiative
of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference. It urges the Security Council to assume its responsibility by ensuring
that its resolutions on Yemen are implemented, and by working to bring an end to
the destructive interference of Iran in Yemeni affairs. Iran has provided military and
material support to the Houthi militias in order to foment conflict and advance its
expansionist project in the region. Iranian officials have boasted of their support for

94/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

the Houthi militias. Most recently, Iran sent an ambassador to the militia, which is
not recognized.
Our experience with the Iranian regime has taught us that piecemeal solutions
and appeasement will not put a stop to its threats to international peace and security.
My country has tried to make peace with Iran. Over the decades, it has engaged
with Iran in a spirit of goodwill and openness. It has hosted Iranian leaders on
several occasions in order to search for solutions that would make it possible to
foster neighbourly relations and mutual respect. Time and again, the world has seen
the regime reject those endeavours and persist with its policies of sabotage and its
acts of destruction in order to undermine the security and stability of regional States.
The end goal cannot be dialogue for its own sake; it can only be dialogue for
the sake of effective solutions. That can happen only if Iran takes measures to instil
confidence in its intentions and actions; if it undertakes to respect international
laws and instruments and the resolutions of the Security Council; if it refrains from
intervening in the internal affairs of neighbouring States; and if it stops supporting
armed groups and militias.

20-1437895/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
[Original: Arabic]
The threat posed by the Israeli occupation to the security and stability of the
Middle East region, and to international peace and security as a whole, bespeaks
the decades-long failure of the Security Council to assume its responsibility by
maintaining international peace and security and addressing the causes of tension
and conflict in the region and beyond. Since 1967, Israel has occupied large and
cherished swathes of the territory of Arab States in Palestine, Lebanon and my own
country, the Syrian Arab Republic. The inhabitants of the occupied Syrian Golan
continue to languish under the occupation, whose criminal, repressive practices show
flagrant contempt for the Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international
law and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Those of our people who have been compelled by the Zionist occupation forces to
leave their land and sources of livelihood continue to look forward to the day when
they will return to their land, homes and property.
The Israeli occupation would not be able to keep defying the international
community and the resolutions of the United Nations were it not backed by several
Western Governments that have granted immunity to the Israeli occupation and
its representatives and prevented their being held accountable or punished for war
crimes, crimes against humanity or grave human rights violations. The United States
has a history of using the veto to stymie any draft resolution aimed at putting a
stop to the crimes and acts of aggression of the Israeli occupation. That history
highlights the double standards espoused by successive American administrations.
It also demonstrates their blind bias in favour of the occupation — a bias that has
reached an unprecedented degree with the current American administration, which
has taken provocative and illegal unilateral measures in an attempt to change the
political and legal situation of the occupied Arab territories, firstly by declaring
occupied Jerusalem to be the capital of Israel, then by announcing its so-called
recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan, which paved the
way for attempts by the occupation authorities to annex parts of the West Bank.
The Syrian Arab Republic, along with the overwhelming majority of Member
States, strongly condemns the decisions taken by America and its supporters and
considers them to be a merely unilateral act performed by a party that has neither
the standing nor the political, legal or moral capacity to decide the fate of the peoples
of the world or to dispose of lands that are an integral part of the territories of the
Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine.
Syria reiterates its support for the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, the establishment of an independent State over all of its national
territory, with Jerusalem as its capital, and the right of refugees to return to their
homes in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Any decisions,
measures or deals that are inconsistent with the relevant United Nations resolutions
or fail to safeguard the established rights of the Palestinians are not remotely viable
and should be rejected in form and substance. My country insists once again that
Palestine must be allowed to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
One might well wonder for how long the Security Council will remain silent
while Israel persists with its systematic and grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in the Syrian Golan, which has been occupied since
1967. Such violations include settlement activities, racial discrimination, arbitrary
96/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

detention, torture and the theft of the Golan’s natural resources. In recent years,
the Israeli occupation authorities have also been supporting terrorists and have
repeatedly attacked Syrian territory.
My country has diligently informed the Security Council and the Secretariat
of the occupation authorities’ repeated violations and acts of aggression in the Golan.
For instance, the occupation authorities have forced the population of the occupied
Syrian Golan to register their land in the Israeli real estate register. They have stolen
land owned by the inhabitants of the occupied Syrian Golan in order to develop a
wind farm to generate electricity. They have also endeavoured to Judaize the Golan,
doubled the number of settlers and imposed artificial local councils. Those alarming
developments have not been mentioned in any of the briefings given by the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic therefore once again expresses
its strong objection to the continuation of Mr. Mladenov’s current approach in those
briefings and his deliberate failure to mention the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, developments related to the continuing aggressive and criminal practices
of the Israeli occupation authorities, or recent decisions of the United States
Administration that flagrantly violate international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly on the
Syrian Arab Golan and the other occupied Arab territories, particularly resolution
497 (1981), which was adopted unanimously and states that the decision of the
occupation authorities to impose their jurisdiction on the Golan is null and void and
has no legal effect whatsoever.
It would be a serious mistake to think that the difficult situation in my country,
Syria, will change the fact that the Golan is, always has been and will continue to
be Syrian territory. We will keep up the struggle until it has been fully recovered up
to the border of 4 June 1967. That right cannot be waived or bargained away, and it
will never lapse.
Lastly, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that, in order
to ensure stability in the Middle East and preserve the credibility of the United
Nations, measures must be taken to implement all international resolutions aimed at
ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan,
and compelling Israel to withdraw to the line of 4 June 1967, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including, in particular, Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016).

20-1437897/104

S/2020/1055

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to imperil the prospects for peace
and stability in the Middle East. At a time when we need a spirit of reconciliation and
political determination, oppression by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories
continues unabated.
As documented in numerous United Nations reports, the demolition of
Palestinian houses, regular attacks by settlers and movement restrictions remain
as daily practices. Those egregious practices undermine the two-State solution
and the established parameters for a just and durable peace. The use of excessive
and disproportionate force against civilians, arbitrary arrests and the impunity
with which Israeli forces operate also constitute a serious threat to the rules-based
international order.
Attempts to erode the status of Jerusalem, the inhumane blockade in Gaza
and the illegal settlements have all been part of a recurring pattern that severely
curtails the fundamental rights and freedoms of Palestinians. The people of Palestine
live in a permanent state of emergency. Decades of occupation and blockade have
severely weakened the Palestinian economy, as well as its critical infrastructure and
health system. The tragedy of Palestinians has been compounded by the outbreak
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has had devastating
socioeconomic repercussions in addition to its public-health implications.
The situation in Gaza remains particularly fragile. The illegal Israeli blockade
of the Gaza Strip has entered its thirteenth year. As Special Rapporteur Lynk stated,
“We are no longer on the edge of a humanitarian crisis, but in the middle
of one…there is no comparable situation in the world where a substantial
population has endured such a permanent lockdown.”
The recurrent electricity and fuel shortages have severely undermined
the delivery of essential health care and water and sanitation services. Chronic
shortages of medical supplies and hospital beds, combined with population density
and the dilapidated infrastructure, have significantly increased the risk of a major
COVID-19 outbreak.
We welcome and support the health measures that the Palestinian Government
has implemented against the spread of the virus. Despite facing the worst financial
crisis in its history, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees (UNRWA) remains on the front lines in providing vital educational,
health, relief and social services, as well as emergency assistance. We call upon
the international community to step up its support to UNRWA, which provides a
lifeline for millions of Palestinians. Until a just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestine conflict has been reached, the work of UNRWA will remain absolutely
indispensable. It is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency.
Today the most immediate and pressing challenge facing the Palestinians is the
Israeli Government’s illegal plans for the annexation of the West Bank. Annexation
would be a grave violation of international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as of the United Nations Charter and the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949. It would exacerbate the grievances and suffering of Palestinians at
the hands of the occupying Power.
The Palestinian land and the people of Palestine should not be sacrificed for
the sake of Israel’s brazen policies of violence and occupation. An overwhelming
98/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

majority of the international community objected to Israel’s plans. The Human Rights
Council condemned the annexation plans and called for the High Commissioner for
Human Rights to compile a report on the impact of a possible annexation. We look
forward to that report and call the Security Council to also shoulder its fair share of
responsibilities and take urgent action to counteract the threat of annexation.
Some claim that recent developments bode well for the settlement of the
conflict and that the threat of annexation has been thwarted. Facts on the ground
show otherwise.
As pointed out in the latest report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People (A/75/35), the agreements recently
signed neither bound Israel to negotiations with the Palestinians, guided by the
internationally agreed parameters, nor included the Palestinian people. Any initiative
aimed at a just solution to the question of Palestine must consider the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people, engage Palestinian leadership and be based on
the two-State solution, according to international law, United Nations resolutions
and agreement between the parties. The recent normalization agreements, which
failed to meet any of those criteria, can in no way bring us closer to a two-State
solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Contrary to the announcements made, the expansion of illegal settlements in
the Palestinian territories has not halted. Those new settlements will be the building
blocks of future annexation plans. That is to say, Israel is physically continuing to
implement its annexation plans. The latest example of Israel’s steps as the occupying
Power, in complete disregard of international law and United Nations resolutions,
is the approval of more than 5,000 additional illegal settlements in the West Bank.
If the international community is sincere about finding a just solution to the
conflict on the basis of internationally recognized parameters, then it is incumbent
upon the international community to stop Israel from further expanding those
illegal settlements.
The measures taken by Israel to consolidate its unlawful annexation of
Jerusalem and its surroundings threaten the legal status of the city as well as its
demographic composition and its historically multicultural and multireligious
character. The international community should refrain from taking any steps that
would be tantamount to condoning these illegal actions. Therefore, the intention of
certain Member States to relocate embassies to Jerusalem or open them there is a
source of grave concern. The status of Jerusalem is a fundamental issue that remains
at the heart of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The final status of Jerusalem will be
part and parcel of the comprehensive solution of the conflict.
In order to reach a negotiated two-State solution, achieving intra-Palestinian
reconciliation is an urgent necessity. We are pleased with the outcome of the unity
talks between Fatah and Hamas. We hope that this process will lead to the successful
conduct of elections. We urge the Middle East Quartet and the international
community to redouble efforts to restart the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. In that
regard, we welcome and support the call of President Abbas to the Secretary-General
to convene an international conference to launch a genuine peace process.
It is high time for us, the Member States, to act on our collective commitment
to the ideals and shared values of democracy, accountability and prosperity for
everyone. The international community must redouble its efforts to achieve a
negotiated two-State solution based on the 1967 borders and the establishment of
an independent, sovereign and contiguous State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

20-1437899/104

S/2020/1055

The people of Palestine deserve to live in freedom, side by side with Israel, in
peace and security. That can be realized only with the open and strong support of the
international community.
I would like to highlight a couple of points on Syria. We continue our efforts
to accelerate the political process and ensure the implementation of all the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015). We actively support Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to
convene the Constitutional Committee regularly and set the agenda for consecutive
meetings. The fourth round of the Committee should be held without further delay
and focus on the substance. The constructive efforts of the opposition and the Special
Envoy in that regard should be reciprocated.
Turkey remains fully committed to stabilizing the situation on the ground and
ensuring a lasting ceasefire in Idlib. The regime has been exploiting the 5 March
ceasefire as an opportunity to regroup. The regime’s military build-up around the
Idlib de-escalation area and ceasefire violations aim at disrupting the calm on the
ground and derailing the political process. Turkey will continue to take all necessary
measures to protect civilians. The Security Council should also raise its voice and
not allow the regime to undermine the ceasefire in Idlib.
Turkey’s resolve to fight terrorism in Syria is firm. We will not allow terrorist
organizations to find safe haven in our neighbourhood to launch cross-border attacks
on our territory. The terrorist organization Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s
Protection Units (PKK/YPG) also threatens the stability and unity of Syria with
its increasingly brazen actions. This is a terrorist organization that has the blood
of both Turkish and Syrian civilians on its hands. Since October 2019, PKK/YPG
has carried out more than 250 terrorist attacks targeting civilians in areas where
Turkey conducted operations to establish stability and calm. Those attacks resulted
in hundreds of civilian casualties. The international community must demonstrate
a united front against terrorism by unequivocally condemning the PKK/YPG’s
terrorist attacks, without hesitation.
In addition to targeting civilians, PKK/YPG seeks to consolidate its power
throughout north-eastern Syria through oppression and economic incentives. This
is a terrorist organization that usurps the natural resources of Syria; promulgates
so-called legislation to provide a legal cover for the confiscation of private property;
denies education to other communities, including Christians; and recruits children
and denies them their right to education and freedom. Furthermore, the PKK/YPG
tries to create faits accomplis on the ground, in blatant violation of principles of the
territorial integrity and unity of Syria, as enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015).

100/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic and English]
At the outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation for having convened
this important debate. I would also like to thank Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.
The United Arab Emirates believes that de-escalation, communication
channels and diplomacy are the core pillars of the process of addressing any past
and current tensions as well as of avoiding any future challenges in the Middle East.
We must rethink our past approaches in order to move past previous stalemates and
create a stable, peaceful and prosperous Middle East.
Despite the current conflicts plaguing the region from Yemen to Syria, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, remains the core conflict at the heart of our region.
In this context, the United Arab Emirates signed a peace accord with Israel on 15
September, under the auspices of the United States. This historic decision responds
to repeated calls from the international community, including many countries
represented in this debate today, to maintain the viability of the two-State solution
by halting annexation. We are grateful to and encouraged by both Secretary-General
António Guterres and Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
Nickolay Mladenov for welcoming the agreement.
The United Arab Emirates firmly believes that this agreement, together with
the declaration of peace, cooperation, and constructive diplomatic and friendly
relations concluded by Bahrain and Israel, presents an opportunity for the region
to move in the direction of stability and prosperity. To build upon these positive
developments in the region, the United Arab Emirates believes that the following
steps are necessary.
First, the Council must use the opportunity created by the accord to break
the deadlock in the peace process and restore direct talks between the parties. The
United Arab Emirates has repeatedly expressed its grave concerns about plans to
annex Palestinian lands. We reiterate here that the United Arab Emirates has been,
remains and will always be committed to the two-State solution and the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. In this context, the
United Arab Emirates supports any initiative aimed at a peaceful resolution based
on the aforementioned references.
Secondly, we urge the international community to be steadfast in its support of
the Palestinian people, especially during the current coronavirus disease pandemic.
Since the United Arab Emirates’ founding, almost 50 years ago, the United Arab
Emirates has been committed to supporting the Palestinian people, including
during the pandemic, and between 2013 and 2020 we have contributed more than
$837 million in aid to the Palestinian people and to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). During the United
Arab Emirates’ current chairmanship of the UNRWA Advisory Commission, we
have sought to establish a thematic engagement approach to providing assistance set
out in the United Arab Emirates’ aid strategy and align it with UNRWA’s mandate
and medium-term strategy 2016-2021, focusing on four areas, which include the
digitalization of education, women’s and girls’ empowerment, youth empowerment
and environment sustainability.
20-14378101/104

S/2020/1055

Thirdly, we should encourage any positive steps that promote peaceful
coexistence and interfaith dialogue, particularly between our youth in the region. We
must build bridges that support mutual understanding and tolerance and therefore
open new avenues to peace. We must include the region’s youth in these efforts and
empower them to build a future that is secure for the region.
Finally, the Council must be united in addressing any behaviour that
destabilizes the region and undermines peace efforts. In this regard, it is critical that
the Council take concrete action to address those State actors that seek to sow discord
in the region by supporting terrorist and extremist groups and that interfere in the
internal affairs of Arab States, in violation of international law and the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates affirms that it will continue to
work with its partners in the region and around the world to address some of the
most critical challenges of our time. As an elected member of the Security Council
for 2022-2023, the United Arab Emirates will continue to be a forward-thinking
proponent of peace and will maintain its call for unity.

102/104

20-14378

S/2020/1055

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation
I have the honour to submit this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the
OIC group.
Our deliberations today are taking place at a critical time, characterized by
distressing humanitarian and health challenges in the occupied Palestinian territory
as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Additionally, the current
political stalemate constitutes an obstacle hampering the achievement of a just and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and continues to obstruct the
realization of Palestinian rights, including to self-determination.
In particular, the OIC group is concerned about the continued Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
The recent approval by the Israeli authorities of the construction of more than 5,000
new settlement units is a blatant violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016). Additionally,
settlement activities further entrench the occupation, undermine the territorial
integrity and contiguity of the Palestinian State and jeopardize the viability of the
two-State solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders. Settlement activities must be
completely and immediately halted.
The OIC group also remains seriously concerned about the situation in East
Jerusalem. We reaffirm that East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territory. All illegal measures and decisions aimed at altering its
demography and historical, legal, and political status are null and void under
international law and United Nations resolutions, particularly resolutions 476
(1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), and must accordingly be rejected by the
international community.
Another major concern is the deterioration of the social and economic
conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory, which is further exacerbated by
the COVID-19 pandemic and the occupation. During the last monthly meeting
on the situation in the Middle East (see S/PV.8762), Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov warned that “the health emergency
is rapidly becoming a socioeconomic crisis” in the occupied Palestinian territory.
He noted that the shocking 50 per cent unemployment rate in the Gaza Strip, where
the humanitarian crisis is dire and conditions are deemed unliveable. Meanwhile,
UNRWA is currently facing a funding gap of $200 million, which risks the suspension
of some of the agency’s essential services.
In light of the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, the OIC
group calls on the international community to pursue the following priorities.
First, the Council should take the necessary measures to put an end to settlement
activities and maintain the historical status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem. Israel
must stop all its illegal actions, including wall and settlement construction, land
confiscation, the demolition of homes and properties and the forced displacement of
Palestinian civilians.
Secondly, the international community must intensify its efforts to break the
deadlock in the political process. We encourage launching a credible, time-bound
and multilaterally sponsored political process to realize the vision of the two-State
20-14378103/104

S/2020/1055

solution, based on the 4 June 1967 borders, to which the OIC remains fully committed.
We encourage in this regard any steps that are aimed at preserving the prospects of
a just peace and advance its realization.
Additionally, in this regard, the OIC group supports the call of the President
of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, on the Secretary-General to take the
necessary steps, in cooperation with all members of the Security Council and the
international Quartet, to convene a multilaterally-sponsored international peace
conference, with full authority and with the participation of all concerned parties,
and to re-engage in a meaningful peace process, based on international law, the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Finally, we must provide humanitarian and financial assistance to the
Palestinian people, including Palestinian refugees. The international community
must also ensure that the occupied Palestinian territory has enough medical supplies
and equipment to confront the pandemic. We must also provide more predictable
and sufficient financial contributions to UNRWA and support its COVID-19 appeal.
In conclusion, the OIC will continue to support the Palestinian people’s efforts
to regain their legitimate rights, including to freedom and independence within their
sovereign State, based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and resolving all final status issues, including the question of refugees, based on
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

104/104

20-14378
