General Assembly-Forty-second Session

20

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -------------·------ -

Recognizing the established leadership and the essential
global directing and co-ordinating role of the World
Health Organization in AIDS prevention, control and
education, and related research and public information
and, in this context, the vital importance of the World
Health Organization Special Programme on AIDS,
l. Commends the World Health Organization for its
efforts towards global AIDS prevention and control and,
in particular, for its support for national AIDS programmes and regional activities, including the meeting of
Ministers of Asían and Pacific Governments at Sydney,
and the forthcoming World Summit of Ministers of
Health on Programmes for AIDS prevention to be held in
London;
2. Con.firms that the World Health Organization
should continue to direct and co-ordinate the urgent global battle against AIDS;
3. Commends those Governments which have initiated action to establish national programmes for the prevention and control of AIDS in line with the Global
Strategy of the World Health Organization, and urges
other Governments to take similar action;
4. Calls upon ali States, in addressing the AIDS problem, to take into account the legitimate concerns of other
countries and the interests of inter-State relations;
5. Invites the World Health Organization to facilitate
the exchange of information on and promotion of national
and international research for the prevention and control
of AIDS through the further development of Collaborating Centres ofthe World Health Organization and similar
existing mechanisms;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of ali aspects of the problem, to ensure, in close co-operation with
the Director-General of the World Health Organization
and through the appropriate existing mechanisms, a coordinated response by the United Nations system to the
AIDS pandemic, and urges ali appropriate organizations
of the United Nations system, including the specialized
agencies, bilateral and multilateral agencies and nongovernmental and voluntary organizations, in conformity
with the Global Strategy, to support the world-wide struggle against AIDS;
7. Invites the Director-General of the World Health
Organization to report to the General Assembly at its
forty-third session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on new developments in the global AIDS pandemic, and requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider the report in accordance with its mandate.
48th plenary meeting
26 October 1987

42/9.

Co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having consídered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,22
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and the practical measures taken
for their implementation,

22 A/42/419 and Add.1.

Recalling a/so, in particular, its resolution S- 13/2 of
1 June 1986 on the United Nations Programme of Action
for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions, decisions and
declarations adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its forty-sixth ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 20 to 25 July 198723
and by the Assembly ofHeads ofState and Government of
that organization at its twenty-third ordinary session, held
at Addis Ababa from 27 to 29 July 1987, 24
Considering the important statement made by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity before
the General Assembly on 6 October 1987, 25
Míndful of the need for continued and closer cooperation between the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and the Organization of African Unity,
Grave/y concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southern Africa arising from the continued domination
and oppression of the peoples of South Africa and Namibia by the minority racist régime of South Africa and
conscious of the need to provide increased assistance to
the peoples of the region and to their liberation movements in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Conscious of its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa to help them cope with the situation resulting from the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the situation of refugees in Africa and the urgent need for increased international assistance to help African countries of asylum,
Recognizing the important role that the United Nations
information system could play in disseminating information to bring about a greater awareness of the grave situation prevailing in southern Africa as well as the social and
economic problems and needs of African States and their
regional and subregional institutions,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and of his efforts to strengthen
such co-operation;
2. Notes wíth appreciation the increasing and continued participation of the Organization of African Unity
in the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
3. Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote multilateral cooperation among African States and to find solutions to
African problems of vital importance to the international
community;
4. Reaffirms that the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action for African Economic
Recovery and Development 1986-1990 is the responsibility of the international community as a whole and commends the efforts undertaken by African countries in spite
of the effects of the adverse international economic environment;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General ofthe United Nations to continue to ensure closer co-operation and co23 See A/42/699, annex l.
24 /bid., annex II.
25 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second S,•ssion,

Plenary Meetíngs, 26th meeting.

11.

ordination with the Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity in the implementation and monitoring of
the United Nations Programme of Action for African
Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990;
6. Reaffirms that ali Member States and regional and
international organizations, in particular those of the
United Nations system, should continue to give their maximum support to Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990 adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary session, held at
Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985;26
7. Requests ali Member States, United Nations bodies,
the specialized agencies and ali other competent organizations within the United Nations system, as well as nongovernmental organizations, to actívate and increase their
programme of assistance to African subregional organizations for drought and desertification control such as the
Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sahel and the Intergovernmental Authority for
Drought and Development;
8. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for those African States facing grave economic
difficulties, the front-line States and other independent
States of southern Africa to help them to withstand the effects of the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Organization of African Unity informed periodically
of the response of the international community to those
special programmes of economic assistance and to continue to co-ordinate them with ali similar programmes initiated by that organization;
IO. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for the assistance so
far rendered to African States in dealing with the emergency situation as well as with the critica) economic problems that exist on the African continent;
11. Reiterates the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation at the political,
economic, cultural and administrative levels between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in
southern Africa;
13. Urges the international community to contribute
generously to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against
Colonialism and Apartheid established by the Organization of African Unity and to the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid Fund, established by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries;2 7

26 A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Ded. l (XXI), annex.
27 A/42/422, annex III.

21

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Calls upon the competent organs ofthe United Nations and the specialized agencies to continue to ensure the
just and equitable representation of Africa at ali levels at
their respective headquarters and in their regional and
field operations;
15. Urges ali Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United Nations system, as well as non-governmental organizations
to provide material and economic assistance to African
countries of asylum to enable them to withstand the heavy
burden imposed on their limited resources and weak infrastructures by the presence in their countries of large numbers of refugees;
16. Calls upan the United Nations organs -in particular the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid and the
United Nations Council for Namibia -to continue to associate closely the Organization of African Unity with ali
their activities concerning Africa;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Secretary-General ofthe Organization of African
Unity, to reactivate the machinery for co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity through the convening of periodic meetings between the representatives of the two organizations;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite the
representative of the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity to participate in the meetings ofthe
Steering Committee created to follow up the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate facilities continue to be made available to facilitate
continued liaison and consultations on matters of common interest as well as for the provision of technical assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, as required;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African
Unity and the organizations concerned within the United
Nations system.
51 st plenary meeting
28 October 1987

42/10.

Observer status for the African Development
Bank in the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the African Development Bank for
co-operation betweeen the United Nations and the Bank,

1. Decides to invite the African Development Bank to
participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.
51 st plenary meeting
28 October 1987
