70

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Territories, 25 which contains, inter alia, public statements made by leaders of the Government of Israel.
l. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts
in performing the tasks assigned to it by the General
Assembly;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow
the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
3. Calls again upon Israel to allow the Special
Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation
by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, and other applicable international
instruments, and condemns in particular those violations which that Convention designates as "grave
breaches" thereof;
5. Condemns the following Israeli policies and
practices:
(a) The annexation of parts of the occupied territories;
( b)
The establishment of Israeli settlements therein
and the transfer of an alien population thereto;
( c) The evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories, and the denial of their right to return;
(d)
The confiscation and expropriation of Arab
property in the occupied territories and all other transactions for the acquisition of land involving the Israeli
authorities, institutions or nationals on the one hand,
and the inhabitants or institutions of the occupied territories on the other;
( e)
The destruction and demolition of Arah
houses;
(f) Mass arrests, administrative detention and illtreatment of the Arab population;
(g) The ill-treatment and torture of persons under
detention;
(h)
The pillaging of archaeological and cultur.il
property;
(i) The interference with religious freedoms and
practices as well as with family rights and customs;
(i) The illegal exploitation of the natural wealth,
resources and population of the occupied territories;
6. Reaffirms that all measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the occupied
territories, or any part thereof, including Jerusalem,
are null and void, and that Israel's policy of settling
parts of its population and new immigrants in the occupied territories constitutes a flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and of the relevant United
Nations resolutions;
7. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the
policies and practices referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6
of the present resolution;
8. Reiterates its call upon all States, in particular
those States parties to the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
25 A/32/284.

in accordance with article I of that Convention, and
upon international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize any changes carried out by Israel
in the occupied territories and to avoid actions, including those in the field of aid, which might be used by
Israel in its pursuit of the policies of annexation and
colonization or any of the other policies and practices
referred to in the present resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue
to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since I 967, to consult,
as appropriate. with the International Committee of
the Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of
the welfare and human rights of the population of the
occupied terri lories, and to report to the SecretaryGeneral as soon as possible and whenever the need
arises thereafter;
I 0. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to investigate the treatment of civilians in detention
in the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967
and to submit to the Secretary-General a special report
on that subject as soon as possible and whenever the
need arises thereafter;

Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) . To render all necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to the
occupied territories, with a view to investigating the
Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
( b) To continue to make available additional staff
'.ls may be necessary to assist the Special Committee
m the performance of its tasks;
( c)
To ensure the widest circulation of the reports
'.)f t~e Special Committee, and of information regardmg its activities and findings, by all means available
through the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat and, where necessary, to reprint those reports
of the Special Committee which are no longer available;
. (d) '!'o report to the General Assembly at its thirtytlurd se,;;;1on on the tasks entrusted to him in the present
paragraph;
11.

12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-third session the item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of th~
Occupied Territories''.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

~t2/106.

Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in
all their ai.peet!i!

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965, 205 3 A ( XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249
(S-V) of 23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967. 2451 (XXlII) of 19 December 1968, 2670
(XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972,
3~91 (XXVlll) of 7 December 1973, 3239 (XXIX)
of 29 November 1974, 3457 (XXX) of 10 December 1975 and 31/105 of 15 December 1976,

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Having examined the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations26 and the reports
submitted to the Special Committee by its Working
Group, 27
Noting the limited progress achieved during the past
year towards the completion of agreed guidelines for
conducting peace-keeping operations in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering that only through a demonstration of
political will and greater conciliation can such agre;!d
guidelines to govern future United Nations peace-keeping operations be completed,

I. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations;
2. Requests Member States to submit observations
and suggestions on peace-keeping operations in all their
aspects to the Secretary-General by 30 April 1978;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
compilation of the above-mentioned observations and
26 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 56, document A/32/394.
21 Ibid., annexes I and II.

71

suggestions and to submit it to the Special Committee
and its Working Group for their consideration;
4. Requests the Special Committee to consider ways
to expedite its work and to renew efforts and intensify
negotiations for an early completion of agreed guidelines for conducting peace-keeping operations, in conformitv with the Charter of the United Nations and
Gcncr;I Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX), before the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly;
S. A !so requests the Special Committee, bearing
in mind General Assembly resolutions 3457 (XXX)
and 31 / I 05, to accord priority to the completion of
agreed guidelines and devote attention to specific questions related to the practical implementation of peacekeeping operations;
6. Further requests the Special Committee to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects".
103rd plenary meeting
15 December 1977
