VI.

203

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Aligned Countries, held at Nicosia from 7 to 10 September 1988, 122 particularly paragraphs 15 to 18 of the Economic Part, 123
Emphasizing the special importance of the purposes and
principies proclaimed in its Declaration on the Right to
Development, 12º
Taking into account Commission on Human Rig;hts
resolutions 1988/22 and 1988/26 of 7 March 1988, 27
Reaffirming the importance of furthering the activities
of the organs of the United Nations in the field of human
rights in conformity with the principies of the Charter,
Emphasizing that Governments have the duty to ensure
respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
l. Reiterates its request that the Commission on Human Rights continue its current work on overall analysis
with a view to further promoting and strengthening human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the question of the programme and working methods of the Commission, and on the overall analysis of the alternative
approaches and ways and means for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the provisions and concepts of
General Assembly resolution 32/130 and other relevant
texts;
2. Affirms that a primary aim of international cooperation in the field of human rights is a life of freedom,
dignity and peace for all peoples and for every human being, that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are
indivisible and interrelated and that the promotion and
protection of one category of rights should never exempt
or excuse States from promoting and protecting the others;
3. Affirms its profound conviction that equal attention
and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion and protection of civil and
political rights and of economic, social and cultural rights;
4. Reaffirms that it is of paramount importance for the
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms
that Member States should assume specific obligations by
acceding to or ratifying international instruments in this
field and, consequently, that the work within the United
Nations system of setting standards in the field of human
rights and universal acceptance and implementation of the
relevant international instruments should be encouraged;
5. Reiterates once again that the international community should accord, or continue to accord, priority to
the search for solutions to mass and flagrant violations of
human rights of peoples and individuals affected by situations such as those mentioned in paragraph 1 (e) of General Assembly resolution 32/130, paying due attention
also to other situations of violations of human rights;
6. Reaffirms its responsibility for achieving international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and
expresses its concern at serious violations ofhuman rights,
in particular mass and flagrant violations of these rights,
wherever they occur;
7. Expresses concern at the present situation as regards
the achievement of the objectives and goals for the establishment of the new international economic order, and at
its adverse effects on the full realization of human rights,
in particular the right to development;

8. Reaffirms that the right to development is an inalienable human right;
9. Reaffirms also that international peace and security
are essential elements for achieving full realization of the
right to development;
10. Recognizes that ali human rights and fundamental
freedoms are indivisible and interdependent;
11. Considers that all Member States must promote international co-operation on the basis of respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each
State, including the right of every people to choose freely
its own socio-economic and political system, with a view
to solving international economic, social and
humanitarian problems;
12. Expresses concern at the disparity existing between
established norms and principies and the actual situation
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
world;
13. Urges all States to co-operate with the Commission
on Human Rights in the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
14. Reiterates the need to create, at the national and
international levels, conditions for the full promotion and
protection of the human rights of individuals and peoples;
15. Reaffirms once again that, in order to facilitate the
full enjoyment of ali human rights without diminishing
personal dignity, it is necessary to promote the rights to
education, work, health and proper nourishment through
the adoption of measures at the national level, including
those that provide for the right of workers to participate in
management, as well as the adoption ofmeasures at the international level, including the establishment of the new
international economic order;
16. Decides that the approach to future work within
the United Nations system on human rights matters
should also take into account the content of the Declaration on the Right to Development and the need for the implementation thereof;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms".
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

43/126.

Alternative approaches and ways and meaos
within the United Nations system for improving
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions relating to the right to development, especially resolution 41/133 of 4 December 1986,
Reiterating the importance of the right to development
for ali countries, in particular the developing countries,
1. Stresses that the achievement of the right to development requires a concerted international and national effort to eliminate economic deprivation, hunger and disease in ali parts of the world without discrimination, in
accordance with the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 124 the lnternational Development Strategy

122 A/43/667-S/20212, annex.

m /bid., scct. IJ.

124 Resolutions

3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

204

for the Third United Nations Development Decade 125 and
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States; 126
2. Emphasizes that, to this end, international cooperation should aim at the maintenance of stable and sustained economic growth with simultaneous action to increase concessional assistance to developing countries,
build world food security, resolve the debt burden, eliminate trade barriers, promote monetary stability and enbance scientific and technological co-operation.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/127.

Right to development

The General Assembly,
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly at
its forty-first session of the Declaration on the Right to
Development, 120
Recalling a/so its resolutions and those of the Commission on Human Rights relating to the right to development, and taking note of Commission resolution 1988/26
of7 March 1988, 27 approved by the Economic and Social
Council,
Reiterating the importance of the right to development
for ali countries, in particular the developing countries,
Mindful that, pursuant to the proclamation of the Declaration on the Right to Development, the Commission
has entered a new phase ofits deliberation on this matter,
which is directed towards the implementation and further
enhancement of the Declaration,
Having considered the report of the Working Group of
Governmental Experts on the Right to Development 127
and ali other relevant documents submitted to the General
Assembly at its forty-third session,
Aware of the interest shown by severa! Member States,
specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations
in the work of the Working Group,
1. Expresses the hope that the replies of Governments,
United Nations bodies and specialized agencies and governmental and nón-governmental organizations, submitted at the request ofthe Secretary-General based on Commission on Human Rights resolution 1988/26 to offer
their comments and views on the implementation of the
Declaration on the Right to Development, will contain
practica! proposals for further enhancement of the Declaration;
2. Endorses the agreement reached by the Commission
that future work on the question of the right to development should proceed step by step and in stages;
3. Calls upon the Working Group of Governmental
Experts on the Right to Development, at its twelfth session, to study the analytical compilation to be prepared by
the Secretary-General of all replies received in response to
Commission resolution 1988/26, if necessary together
with the individual replies themselves, and to submit to
the Commission at its forty-fifth session its final recommendations on those proposals which would best contribute to the further enhancement and implementation of the
Declaration at the individual, national and international
levels, and especially 011 the views of the SecretaryGeneral and of Governme11ts on the mea11s of establishing

an evaluation system 011 the impleme11tation and further
e11hancement of the Declaration;
4. Calls upon the Commissio11 to decide at its fortyfifth session, on the basis of its consideration of the report
of the Working Group and the views expressed by the
members of the Commission during the session, on the future course of action on the question, in particular on
practica! measures for the implementation and enhancement of the Declaration;
5. Invites the Commission to report on the question to
the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through
the Economic and Social Council;
6. Decides to consider this question at its forty-fourth
session under the ítem entitled "Alternative approaches
and ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms··.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/128.

Development of public information activities in
the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that activities to improve public knowledge
in the field of human rights are essential to the fulfilment
ofthe purposes ofthe United Nations set out in Article l,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations and
that carefully designed programmes of teaching, education and information are essential to thc achievement of
lasting respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the relevant resolutions on this subject, in particular its resolution 42/118 of 7 December 1987, and taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution
1988/74 of 10 March 1988,27
Recognizing the catalytic effect ofUnited Nations initiatives on national and regional public information activities

in the field of human rights,
Recognizing a/so the valuable role that nongovernmental organizations can play in these endeavours,
Emphasizing the importance of adherence by ali Governments to the principies contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights2 and believing that the fortieth
anniversary of its adoption has provided a focus and
renewed ímpetus to the promotional activities of the
United Nations system in the field of human rights,
Believing that a world public information campaign on
human rights would be a valuable complemcnt to the activities of thc United Nations further to promote and to
protect human rights worldwide,

l. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the development of public information activities in the
field of human rights 12 g and on the advisability of launching, within existing rcsourccs, a world public information
campaign on human rights;I2 9
2. Reaffirms the need for information materials on human rights to be carefully designed in clear and accessible
form, to be tailored to regional and national requirements
and circumstances with specific target audiences in mind
and to be effectively disseminated in national and local
languages and in sufficient volume to havc the dcsircd im-

12 5 Resolution 35/56, annex.
126 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).

128 A/43/721

121 E/CN.4/1988/10.

124 See A/43;711.
