S/2020/585

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 June 2020
Original: English

Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report covers the period from 1 January to 22 June 2020 and
provides an overview of developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel. It also
captures the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and highlights progress made in the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. In addition, it provides an update on the
situation in the Lake Chad basin, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2349 (2017).

II. Developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
2.
Since my previous report (S/2019/1005), the political situation in West Africa
and the Sahel has been marked by uneven progress. Electoral and constitutional
processes proceeded with varying degrees of inclusivity, transparency and credibility,
raising tensions in some countries. Terrorist activities and intercommunal violence
contributed to a degrading regional security environment amid a worsening
humanitarian crisis and the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic. Systematic attacks by armed groups on civilian and military targets in
Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria posed serious threats to peace and stability
for the region and beyond.
3.
Voting was held in Benin (local), Guinea (legislative, as well as a constitutional
referendum), Mali (legislative) and Togo (presidential). Preparations for presidential
elections continued in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and the Niger. The
countries of the region and regional institutions continued to address competing
political, security and development challenges while grappling with response
measures to the COVID-19 crisis.

A.

Political and governance trends
4.
In Benin, on 23 April, the Government announced the withdrawal of its
declaration on the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Establishment of an African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights, following the
Court’s ruling, on 17 April, requesting Benin to temporarily suspend the holding of

20-08025 (E)

290620

*2008025*

S/2020/585

the local elections on 17 May, citing a lack of inclusivity. The Court had ruled on an
injunction request submitted by the exiled businessman and opposition politician
Sébastien Ajavon. Despite some calls for an opposition boycott, the elections were
held relatively peacefully in all 77 communes with the participation of five political
parties. According to the Autonomous National Electoral Commission, which
announced the provisional results, two pro-Government parties, Union progressiste
and Bloc républicain, obtained 39.97 and 37.38 per cent of the votes, respectively, and
the opposition party Force Cauris pour un Bénin émergent received 14.98 per cent.
5.
On 26 January, the Government of Burkina Faso announced the completion of the
biometric registration of voters in the Burkinabe diaspora in 22 countries, ahead of the
legislative and presidential elections planned for 22 November. In March, the
Independent National Electoral Commission suspended the in-country voter registration
process owing to COVID-19 until 8 May and is scheduled to end on 30 July.
6.
In Côte d’Ivoire, on 6 March, the Government revised the composition of the
Independent Electoral Commission, adding one seat for the opp osition party Parti
démocratique de Côte d’Ivoire – Rassemblement démocratique africain. However,
opposition parties represented in the National Assembly rejected the proposal and
continued to demand broader electoral reforms. On 5 March, the President, Al assane
Ouattara, announced that he would not stand for re-election in October. On 19 March,
he promulgated a new constitution, which required the Vice-President to be appointed
by the President rather than elected on a joint ticket. On 22 April, the Africa n Court
on Human and Peoples’ Rights ruled that the Government suspend the execution of
an arrest warrant issued on 23 December 2019 against the former Speaker of the
National Assembly, Guillaume Soro, and release 19 of his supporters from prison. On
28 April, Mr. Soro was sentenced in absentia by a high court in Abidjan to 20 years’
imprisonment and ordered to pay a fine of 4.5 billion CFA francs (about $7.4 million)
for embezzlement and money-laundering. On 29 April, the Government withdrew its
declaration on the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Establishment of an African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights.
7.
In the Gambia, on 30 March, the Constitutional Review Commission submitted
the final draft constitution to the President, Adama Barrow, following broad-based
national consultations. The proposal, inter alia, introduces a limit of two presidential
terms and provisions limiting the executive authority of the President. A constitutional
referendum should be held no later than six months prior to the next presidential
election, in December 2021, or else the existing Constitution of 1997 will prevail. On
29 April, the Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission submitted its interim
report to the Government. It concluded that violations and abuses committed during
the previous regime were massive and included torture, unlawful killings, gender and
sexual-based violence, enforced disappearances and arbitrary arrests and detention.
The Commission’s proceedings were suspended owing to COVID-19.
8.
In Ghana, on 17 March, owing to restrictive measures established by the
Government to contain the pandemic, the Electoral Commission temporarily
suspended the voter registration process for the general elections scheduled for
7 December.
9.
In Guinea, political tensions continued to rise ahead of the presidential election
anticipated in October. On 22 March, legislative elections and a constitutional
referendum were held. The main opposition parties boycotted the vote, claiming
irregularities in the voter register and suspicion that the constitutional change was a
ploy by the incumbent President to seek a third term. The elections were marred by
violence in certain neighbourhoods of Conakry and other towns throughout the
country. On 6 April, the President enacted the new Constitution, which, according to
the Constitutional Court, was backed by 89.76 per cent of the electorate. The ruling
2/16

20-08025

S/2020/585

party, Rassemblement du peuple de Guinée, and its allies won 97 of the 114 seats in
parliament; 18 newly elected representatives are women.
10. In Guinea-Bissau, on 1 January, the National Electoral Commission declared
Umaro Sissoco Embaló the winner of the second round of the presidential election,
held on 29 December 2019, against Domingos Simões Pereira. Mr. Pereira contested
the results and filed a case with the Supreme Court of Justice. On 27 February, the
legal process was interrupted by the self-investiture of Mr. Embaló. On 28 February,
Mr. Embaló dismissed the Prime Minister, Aristides Gomes, replacing him with Nuno
Gomes Nabiam. On 22 April, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) recognized Mr. Embaló as President and requested him to, among other
things, appoint a prime minister and form a new Government no later t han 22 May on
the basis of the results of the legislative elections held in March 2019, in accordance
with the Constitution. Amid competing claims by the political parties in the National
People’s Assembly regarding the parliamentary coalition that holds t he majority, no
progress has been made thus far to determine who takes the lead in appointing a prime
minister and forming a government. An ordinary session of the Assembly is scheduled
for 29 June to settle the matter.
11. In Liberia, on 6 May, the National Elections Commission announced that the
holding of special senatorial elections and a constitutional referendum, which had
been scheduled for 13 October, was not feasible owing to restrictive measures related
to COVID-19. The Commission recommended that the President request the
legislature to postpone the polls to a new date before the end of the year.
12. In Mali, the first and second rounds of the legislative elections were held on
29 March and 19 April, respectively, despite the pandemic, an increase in attacks by
community-based militia in the centre and terrorist attacks on national and foreign
security forces in central and northern Mali. The elections had low voter participation,
35 per cent in the first round and 23 per cent in the second. On 25 March, while
campaigning, the leader of the opposition party Union pour la République et la
démocratie, Soumaïla Cissé, was abducted by a Jihadist group. The Government has
since established a crisis cell to coordinate efforts to liberate Mr. Cissé. In the
aftermath of the contested legislative elections, rallies were held in Bamako on 5 and
19 June, gathering tens of thousands of people. The rallies included people from
opposition parties and civil society organizations led by Imam Mahmoud Dicko,
demanding the resignation of the President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita. On 11 June, the
Prime Minister, Boubou Cisse, tendered his resignation, but was reappointed by the
President to form a government of “national unity”. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali, Mahamat Saleh Annadif; representatives of the
African Union; and ECOWAS in Mali engaged with Mr. Keita, Imam Dicko and other
key stakeholders on measures to calm the situation.
13. In Mauritania, the President, Mohamed Ould Ghazouani, held several meetings
with opposition leaders, which contributed to calming the political climate. On
14 February, a parliamentary commission of inquiry launched an investigation into
the management of public assets under the tenure of the former President, Mo hamed
Ould Abdel Aziz. On 10 March, a number of opponents of the former regime returned
to Nouakchott.
14. In the Niger, preparations for the elections of November and December 2020
continued. However, on 30 March, the National Independent Electoral Commis sion
suspended voter registration in Niamey in response to government measures to curb
the spread of COVID-19. Outside Niamey, voter enrolment began on 3 April for the
regions of Diffa, Maradi and Zinder. In the Agadez region, the postings of the
provisional biometric electoral lists for possible claims began on 27 April. On
30 March, with a view to reducing the spread of the disease among inmates, the
20-08025

3/16

S/2020/585

President, Mahamadou Issoufou, granted amnesty to 1,540 prisoners, including the
opposition leader Hama Amadou, who had served eight months of a one-year sentence.
15. In Nigeria, on 29 January, the House of Representatives passed a motion calling
upon all military service chiefs to resign owing to the uptick in insecurity in the
country and for the President, Muhammadu Buhari, to dismiss them if they failed to
do so. The motion followed similar calls during debates in the Senate on the same
day. On 6 February, the Independent National Electoral Commission announced that
75 of the 93 registered political parties in Nigeria had been deregistered for breaching
regulations governing political parties. On 23 March, the Commission announced the
suspension of its regular activities owing to the pandemic while also stating that the
suspension would not affect its activities relating to the governorship elections in Edo
and Ondo States, which are scheduled for September and October 2020, respectively.
16. In Senegal, the steering committee of the national dialogue held its first plenary
session on 14 January. Eight thematic commissions were officially established, terms
of reference validated and an agenda of meetings agreed on. However, owing to
COVID-19, consultations were put on hold on 23 March.
17. In Sierra Leone, on 10 January, two ministers and two senior governme nt
officials were dismissed for alleged corruption related to the sale of several tons of
donated rice on 14 August 2019 to support the school feeding programme across the
country.
18. In Togo, the presidential election was held on 22 February. According t o official
results endorsed by the Constitutional Court, the incumbent President, Faure
Essozimna Gnassingbé, obtained 70.78 per cent of the vote, followed by Agbéyomé
Kodjo, with 19.46 per cent. Mr. Kodjo rejected the results. Following a request by the
Public Prosecutor, Parliament lifted the immunity of Mr. Kodjo on 16 March. He and
several officials of his party were arrested on 21 April on the grounds of undermining
public order and State security and publishing false information. He has since been
granted bail, pending the outcome of the judicial process. On 3 May, Mr. Gnassingbé
was sworn in to office.

B.

Security trends
19. The security situation in West Africa and the Sahel has continued to deteriorate.
The region suffered recurring complex terrorist attacks on civilians and defence and
security forces, as well as forced recruitment and abductions, in particular in Burkina
Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. On 9 March, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
encouraged its fighters to step up their attacks while governments were struggling to
manage COVID-19. As defence and security forces continued to suffer casualties as
a result of the attacks, communities resorted to self-defence militias for protection
amid concerns about human rights abuses committed by the militias. While counterterrorism operations carried out by national and multinational forces have produced
successes, human rights actors have raised concerns about reports of human rights
violations in the conduct of such operations.
20. The incidence of terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso remained high, affecting
predominantly the Sahel and Centre-Nord regions. Militants affiliated with Ansar alIslam, Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara
increased their attacks. The increase was matched by an increase in counter-terrorism
operations by defence and security forces. On 10 March, in clashes in Tasmakatt,
Oudalan Province, 70 attackers were killed by the Burkinabe armed forces. As a result
of major attacks by unidentified armed groups on villages inhabited by Fulani herders
in the North region, 24 civilians were killed and at least 18 wounded in Pansi in an
attack on a church on 16 February; 39 civilians were killed in Silgadji, Soum

4/16

20-08025

S/2020/585

Province, on 25 February; and 43 civilians were killed in Barga and Dinguila. In
addition, at least 15 civilians were killed in Zitenga, Bam Province, on 28 March. On
12 March, the French military, which led Operation Barkhane, announced that dozens
of militants had been killed in northern Burkina Faso during joint operations with the
national army. On 21 January, the Government passed a law on the recruitment,
training and arming of civilians to complement security forces in community
protection, prompting concerns about potential human rights abuses and increased
intercommunal violence.
21. In Mali, terrorist attacks and violence along community lines continued. In an
interview, on 10 February, President Keita acknowledged that a negotiated solution
with terrorist groups was being explored. On 8 March, Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa alMuslimin conditioned negotiations with the Government of Mali on the departure of
French troops. On 5 April, clashes between Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and
Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin militants in Mopti resulted in more than 100
deaths. International military operations increased, with Operation Barkhane
receiving pledged contributions, which are expected to be deployed by the end of
2020, from various European countries.
22. The security situation in the Diffa, Tahoua and Tillabéri regions of the Niger
continued to be highly volatile. On 9 January, the Nigerien army suffered its deadliest
attack yet at the Chinagodrar military post in Tillabéri, resulting in at least 89
casualties, in addition to the 77 casualties suffered by the terrorist group. The Nigerien
army scaled up operations and security restrictions in the Tillabéri region after attacks
by terrorist groups killed 174 Nigerien soldiers between December 2019 and January
2020. On 21 February, the Minister of Defence announced that a joint Nigerien French operation had killed 120 terrorist fighters in the Tillabéri region. On 2 April,
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara attacked an army post at Tamalaoulaout, killing 4
soldiers, while 63 militants were killed by the army in the ensuing counteroffensive.
On 16 March, the army killed at least 50 Boko Haram fighters after the fighters
attacked a military post in Toumour, in the south-east. Overall, the number of
offensive military operations carried out by the Nigerien army increased, with State
sources reporting more than 620 militants killed within the first four months of 2020,
compared with about 370 in the same period in 2019.
23. Nigeria faced security challenges on multiple fronts throughout the country.
Boko Haram factions, including the so-called Islamic State West Africa Province and
Jama'atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda'Awati Wal-Jihad, remained a security threat in north-east
Nigeria. On 23 March, at least 47 Nigerian soldiers in Gorgi village, Borno State, and
some 98 Chadian soldiers on Boma island, in the Lake Chad basin, were killed in
coordinated terrorist attacks. In a major military operation extended into the Niger
and Nigeria, the Chadian army announced that, from 31 March to 8 April, it had
pushed Boko Haram factions in Chad across the border, with several so-called Islamic
State West Africa Province convoys observed travelling southward to various local
government areas in Borno State. The Nigerian military then increased its operations.
Between February and April, some 1,609 terrorist fighters and 375 defence and
security forces were killed. Boko Haram factions were responsible for approximately
240 civilian deaths between 1 February and 15 April. Intercommunal violence,
including farmer-herder clashes, continued. The country also continued to face high
rates of kidnapping for ransom, communal violence and banditry attacks, with some
431 civilians killed between January and April. On 9 January, the six governors of
South West Nigeria launched Operation Amotekun to curb insecurity. In a similar
move, on 5 March, the South-South Governors Forum decided to create its own
security outfit. To eliminate friction and enhance coordination and coherence, the
governors agreed to align State-level security mechanisms with the community
policing mechanisms of the federal Government.
20-08025

5/16

S/2020/585

24. The Gulf of Guinea remained a major piracy hotspot. The Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea recorded
34 incidents of piracy in the first quarter of 2020, compared with 31 incidents in the
last quarter of 2019, indicating a marginal upward trend. Of the 34 incidents, 25
occurred in the ECOWAS maritime space, while 9 occurred in the maritime space of
the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS). As in the previous
reporting period, the International Maritime Bureau reported that attacks occur
increasingly beyond 70 nautical miles at sea.
25. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, drug seizures in
West Africa were on the rise, reflecting both increased supply and strengthened
interdiction capacities. On 28 January, Senegalese authorities discovered 120 kg of
cocaine hidden in a container ship that was under seizure at the port of Dakar. On
3 February, Côte d’Ivoire seized 405 kg of cocaine in Abidjan, on board a ship. On
3 April, the regional tribunal of Bissau sentenced 12 persons to jail terms ranging
from 4 to 16 years and ordered the confiscation of assets worth more than $500, 000
for their involvement in trafficking following the seizure of 1.8 tons of cocaine on
3 September 2019. In February, the Ivorian police rescued 153 victims of
exploitation, forced labour and domestic servitude.

C.

Sustainable development trends
26. The pandemic threatens the reversal of important strides made in recent years
in economic growth, poverty reduction and the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals in West Africa and the Sahel. According to the Economic
Commission for Africa (ECA), the outbreak will worsen the current human security
crisis in the Sahel region owing to the combination of poverty, climate change, low
human development and conflict. Furthermore, the pandemic has struck against a
background of stagnating progress in the subregion towards the Sustainable
Development Goals, with Goal 3 (good health and well-being) and Goal 9 (industry,
innovation and infrastructure) being pressing concerns.
27. The closure of schools to prevent the spread of COVID-19 has had profound
consequences for education in the region and, ultimately, for the job market and the
economy. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) estimates that some 119 million children and 4 million teachers are
affected in West and Central Africa.
28. ECA estimates that the growth rate of Nigeria, the largest economy in the
subregion, could decline from an initial projection of 2.9 per cent to -3.4 per cent in
2020 owing to the pandemic. Assuming that there will be an effect similar to that of
the financial crisis of 2008, ECA posits that remittances to West Africa and the Sahel
will fall, from $35.5 billion in 2019 to an estimated $27.3 billion in 2020. Tourism,
which is a key contributor to gross domestic product and employm ent in the region,
may in an optimistic scenario fall by 25 per cent, as was the case during the Ebola
crisis, or it may decline by as much as 50 per cent because of the pandemic. The
prospects for recovery will depend on the measures implemented by States and the
international support that will allow economies to resume their production potential
in the post-crisis period.

D.

Humanitarian trends
29. The rapid escalation of the crisis in the Sahel has driven humanitarian needs
throughout the region, which could be further exacerbated by the spread of the
disease, to unprecedented levels. According to the Office for the Coordination of

6/16

20-08025

S/2020/585

Humanitarian Affairs, in 2020, a new record high of 24 million Sahelians will need
humanitarian assistance and protection. According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, West Africa and the Sahel host 870,000 refugees
and 4.9 million internally displaced persons. The United Nations Population Fund
projects that some 6.5 million women and young people will need humanitarian
support, including sexual and reproductive health and gender-based violence services,
in the subregion in 2020.
30. In West Africa and the Sahel, 19.1 million persons are projected to be food insecure during the lean season, June to August, a 77 per cent increase compared with
2019 and the highest in a decade. Food insecurity, whose hotspots include southern
Mauritania and northern Senegal, the Lake Chad basin and the central Sahel, is mainly
a result of the persistence of conflict and insecurity, leading to displacement,
dysfunctional social infrastructure, the destabilization of market and economic flows
and the disruption of livelihoods.
31. In Burkina Faso, the humanitarian situation deteriorated sharply over the past
year. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as at
April, 848,000 persons had been forced to flee their homes, an increase of 67 per cent
compared with late 2019. More than 60 per cent of the internally displaced are
children. More than 135 health centres and 2,500 schools are closed owing to
insecurity, depriving 338,000 children and young people of access to education and
millions of persons of access to essential health care.
32. In Mali, growing instability has led to a new surge in internal displacement.
Nearly 220,000 persons, 54 per cent of whom are women, are displaced within the
country. In March, more than 11,000 newly displaced persons fleeing attacks were
registered in Mopti, central Mali. During the lean season, 1.3 mil lion persons will
face starvation or be threatened by food insecurity. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs projects that, in 2020, 4.3 million persons will need
humanitarian assistance, more than 1 million more than in early 2019.
33. In the Niger, the humanitarian situation in the Tahoua and Tillabéri regions
worsened significantly, and the situation in Diffa remained highly insecure and
volatile. As at February, 441,000 persons had been forced to flee their homes. The
number included some 103,000 internally displaced persons and 126,000 Nigerian
refugees in Diffa, 109,000 internally displaced persons and 55,000 Malian refugees
in Tillabéri and Tahoua and 36,000 Nigerian refugees and 12,000 internally displaced
persons in Maradi. The ongoing application of state of emergency rules and military
operations in those three regions has continued to limit humanitarian access to some
locations. In April, 10,000 persons fled I-n-Atès and its surrounding villages in
Tillabéri region owing to violence and the worsening humanitarian situation.
34. In Nigeria, the humanitarian community estimates that 7.7 million persons will
need emergency assistance in 2020. More than 1.8 million persons, more than half of
them women, in Adamawa, Borno and Yobe states still live in camps or are hosted in
communities that are themselves extremely vulnerable. Multiple attacks by non -State
armed groups continued to trigger new displacements. Influxes were recorded in the
Borno state capital of Maiduguri, where resources and facilities were stretched to
capacity. In North East Nigeria, humanitarian access remained limited owing to the
highly militarized environment. An estimated 1.2 million persons in need in areas not
under the control of the Nigerian military were depri ved of life-saving aid.
35. The resurgence of armed attacks in the Lake Chad basin continued to drive
displacement and disrupt relief operations throughout Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria. Some 2.7 million persons have fled their homes, including 2.4 million
internally displaced persons and 292,000 Nigerian refugees.

20-08025

7/16

S/2020/585

36. The pandemic has the potential to overwhelm fragile health systems in the
region, hitting women in particular, as well as marginalized and vulnerable groups,
the hardest. The outbreak risks aggravating existing health system challenges and
creating additional needs in areas already ravaged by conflict and facing dramatic
new spikes in food insecurity. In addition to existing humanitarian response plans,
there is an updated Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19, which was
issued in May and includes an appeal for $640 million to fight the disease in the
countries of the Sahel. Across the Sahel, humanitarian partners require $2.5 billion to
provide life-saving assistance and protection to 17 million persons. The scaling up of
the response has been hampered by a lack of funding, however. As at the end of April,
only 15 per cent of the required amount had been received.

E.

Trends in human rights
37. Systematic attacks by violent extremists on civilians; intercommunal and
electoral violence; the excessive and disproportionate use of force by security forces;
and restrictions on the freedoms of assembly and of the press, in a climate of impunity,
affected respect for human rights and the rule of law in West Africa and the Sahel.
38. Notwithstanding increased pressure from defence and security forces, violent
extremists continued to carry out fatal attacks on civilians. On 10 February,
30 persons, including a pregnant woman and a baby, were killed when Boko Haram
set ablaze 18 vehicles and their occupants in Auno, about 20 km from Maiduguri,
Borno state. The United Nations continued to receive reports of human rights
violations when counter-terrorism operations are conducted. They included the
alleged burning down of houses in Borno state by Nigerian security forces on 3 and
4 January, the alleged killing of civilians by Malian defence forces between January
and April, the alleged killing of civilians by Nigerien security forces bet ween
27 March and 2 April and the alleged killing of 31 men by the security forces of
Burkina Faso on 9 April in the town of Djibo, 200 km north of Ouagadougou.
39. Electoral and intercommunal violence continued to affect the protection of
human rights, including the rights to life and physical integrity. In Guinea, electoral
violence resulted in at least 31 deaths, with scores wounded during protracted
demonstrations against the constitutional revision process. Accountability for human
rights abuses is still lacking in the context of intercommunal violence in Burkina
Faso, Guinea and Mali, fuelling the cycle of violence.
40. Human rights actors have called for greater accountability and a human rights based approach in the response to the pandemic. On 15 Ap ril, the National Human
Rights Commission of Nigeria reported 18 fatalities and other violations allegedly
committed by security forces and the correctional services. In Ghana, Guinea -Bissau
and Senegal, human rights actors reported the use of force and al leged punitive
measures by security forces with regard to civilians for non -compliance with
mitigation efforts to limit the spread of COVID-19. The arrest of protesters in the
Gambia and Liberia, as well as of human rights activists and bloggers in Maurita nia,
raised concerns about the exercise of fundamental freedoms. Of concern were a lack
of health-care services and limited access to health facilities, in particular in remote
areas and conflict zones, as well as a disproportionate social and economic tol l taken
on vulnerable and marginalized groups owing to the confinement measures.
41. In Benin, on 22 February, a court barred a former Prime Minister and
presidential candidate, Lionel Zinsou, from standing for elections for a period of five
years on charges of having allegedly exceeded campaign expenses during the 2016
presidential election. Human rights actors have called for the expedited extradition of
François Compaoré from France to Burkina Faso to answer to pending charges. At

8/16

20-08025

S/2020/585

least 5,584 detainees were released through presidential pardons in response to
COVID-19 in the Niger, Senegal and Togo.

F.

Trends in gender and youth issues
42. Participation and representation in political and peace processes, as well as in
security services in the subregion, remained low. However, in a positive development,
concrete measures are being taken to promote the political participation of women.
In Burkina Faso, a 30 per cent quota for women candidates in legislative and local
elections was set through a new electoral law, and in Liberia, two women were
appointed as Chair of the National Elections Commission and as Head of the National
Civil Society Council of Liberia, respectively. In Mali, in keeping with the Law on
Gender of 2015, through which a 30 per cent quota for women in elective positions
was instituted, 42 women were elected to the 142 -seat parliament in the legislative
elections, held from March to April, compared with 14 in the previous legislature.
43. Despite continuous attacks, kidnappings and sexual and gender-based violence
targeting women in areas affected by terrorism, such as the Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin, countries in the subregion continued their efforts to promote the protection of
women and young people. In Senegal, following a unanimou s vote by parliament on
31 December 2019, the President, Macky Sall, promulgated a law on 10 January fully
criminalizing acts of rape and paedophilia.
44. To promote the youth and peace and security agenda, countries took steps
towards involving young women and men in political processes. In Cabo Verde, for
example, on 14 February, the Prime Minister swore in 20 representatives of young
people, 10 of whom were women, to serve for two years on the Youth Advisory
Council, a platform through which young people engage with and advise the prime
minister.
45. Since the outbreak, women, in particular civil society members, have mobilized
support for vulnerable groups. The imposition of lockdowns, border closures and
restrictive measures is expected to severely affect the informal sector, which is
constituted mainly by women, possibly exacerbating existing vulnerabilities. The
outbreak may also result in increased sexual and gender-based violence and attacks
on female health workers and expose girls to additional exploitation and abuse.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel
A.

Good offices and special assignments of my Special Representative
46. My Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel continued to support
national and regional efforts to sustain peace, in collaboration with regional and
international partners, including through advocacy and support for inclusive
approaches to national dialogues and electoral processes, the promotion of human
rights and constitutional and institutional reforms. He has also been advocating a
response in the subregion to my call for a global ceasefire amid the pandemic.
47. From 13 to 17 January, my Special Representative accompanied the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs to Burkina Faso, GuineaBissau, the Niger and Senegal, where she met those countries’ Heads of State and a
variety of stakeholders. She also met the President of the ECOWAS Commission in
Nigeria and the Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the G5 Sahel in the Niger.

20-08025

9/16

S/2020/585

The visit was aimed at supporting ongoing initiatives to enhance democratic
consolidation, security, sustainable development and peace in the subregion.
48. My Special Representative visited Guinea on two separate occa sions (on 26 and
27 January and from 9 to 11 March), during which he urged Guineans to find a
peaceful solution to the prevailing political crisis through consensual and constructive
dialogue.
49. My Special Representative visited the Niger on 16 and 17 March, where he
exchanged information on developments in the subregion, including with
Mr. Issoufou, the current Chair of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and
Government.
50. My Special Representative visited Lomé from 23 to 28 January, to consult wi th
relevant actors ahead of the country’s presidential election. In collaboration with the
ECOWAS Commission, UNOWAS organized a workshop to promote peaceful
elections and enhance exchanges among relevant national stakeholders. My Special
Representative emphasized the need for a peaceful, credible, transparent and inclusive
electoral process underpinned by respect for the rule of law and human rights.

B.

Sustaining peace
51. The United Nations system continued to scale up its presence in Burkina Faso
through five integrated offices, in Bobo-Dioulasso, Dori, Fada Ngourma, Kaya and
Ouahigouya. On 5 March, the Peacebuilding Commission convened a meeting on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in Burkina Faso to help to mobilize adequate and
coherent international support for the Government’s peacebuilding priorities.

C.

Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
52. The pandemic had a serious impact on the activities of the Cameroon -Nigeria
Mixed Commission, slowing the momentum generated by the contribution of
$6 million by Cameroon and Nigeria to the demarcation trust fund.
53. The procurement process for the construction of the remaining 1,352 boundary
pillars was finalized. An inspection mission for lot 4B was completed, and the
commencement of project execution for lot 5 was planned for April. However, owing
to restrictions related to COVID-19, field operations were temporarily suspended.
Mediation meetings to resolve outstanding areas of disagreement and the final
mapping were also postponed.

D.

Enhancing regional and subregional partnerships to address
cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and security
54. UNOWAS continued to enhance its collaboration with regional partners and
United Nations country teams on issues that included conflict prevention, women and
young people, climate change, human rights, the rule of law and security.
55. In January, the United Nations Development Programme deployed a senior
adviser to the permanent secretariat of the G5 Sahel to support institutional capacity building. In April, UNOWAS and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs recruited a planning specialist to boost the implementation of the action plan
of the Mauritanian presidency of the G5 Sahel, as was done during the preceding
Burkinabe presidency. Moreover, they continued to support the establishment of the
Sahelian Threat Analysis and Early Warning Centre, based in Ouagadougou.

10/16

20-08025

S/2020/585

56. On 11 and 12 February, UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) held their annual desk-to-desk meeting, in Libreville. They
identified initiatives to support regional partners, strengthen interregional
cooperation and address common challenges, including terrorism and the spread of
violent extremism, maritime insecurity and organized crime, the adverse effects of
climate change, farmer-herder conflicts and governance deficits.
57. On 25 February, my Special Representative participated in the sixth annual
summit of the G5 Sahel Heads of State, held in Nouakchott. The need for the Unite d
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to continue to
provide logistical support to the Joint Force of the G5 Sahel was reiterated at the
summit. For that purpose, a revised tripartite agreement among the United Nations,
the European Union and the G5 Sahel was signed at the summit. In order to strengthen
the capacity of the G5 Sahel, the permanent secretariat was transformed into an
executive secretariat, and a new integrated priority initiatives framework, which
comprised a number of stabilization projects in vulnerable, conflict-affected regions,
was endorsed.
58. From 10 to 12 March, UNOWAS attended the second Liptako-Gourma
Authority Governors’ Forum, held in Bamako. The Forum adopted a formal
framework for cooperation.
59. Within the framework of the Declaration of the G5 Sahel Countries on
Countering Radicalization and Violent Extremism in the Sahel, the United Nations
continued to support the Regional Cell for the Prevention of Radicalization and
Violent Extremism and its national units. In that regard, UNOWAS, in collaboration
with the International Organization for Migration, supported the Regional Cell and
the Ministry of Islamic Affairs and Original Education of Mauritania in developing
an action plan to promote the prevention of violent extremism in that country.
60. On 23 April, my Special Representative participated in an extraordinary
videoconference session of the ECOWAS Authority on the pandemic and conveyed
the solidarity of the United Nations with the governments and people of the subregion.
The Authority appointed the President of Nigeria, Muhammadu Buhari, as Champion
to lead the regional COVID-19 response efforts and to set up, under his supervision,
ministerial coordination committees on health, finance an d transport to coordinate
regional efforts to address the outbreak.
61. UNOWAS, in consultation with resident coordinators, carried out an analysis of
the potential impact of COVID-19 on peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel,
as well as of the impact of the disease on the implementation of the UNOWAS
mandate. In the analysis, various regional and country-level scenarios were identified
and actions suggested.
Conflicts between herders and farmers
62. On 10 and 11 February, UNOWAS and ECOWAS jointly organized, in
collaboration with the Institute for Security Studies, a workshop on good practices in
preventing and resolving farmer-herder conflicts. The workshop, which was held in
Abuja, brought together key stakeholders from Ghana, Guinea, Mali, N igeria and
Senegal. Participants decided to set up a regional network of practitioners and civil
society organizations on farmer-herder conflicts, in collaboration with the West
African Civil Society Forum. Subsequently, UNOWAS produced a handbook on good
practices stemming from local conflict prevention and dispute resolution
mechanisms.
63. UNOWAS continued to chair the regional working group on the prevention and
resolution of farmer-herder conflicts, which includes regional United Nations partners
20-08025

11/16

S/2020/585

and selected non-governmental organizations. On 15 April, during a session of the
working group, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN-Women) and UNOWAS agreed to enhance joint efforts to strengthen
the role and participation of women and young people as peacebuilders in community driven development in agricultural and pastoral production.
Lake Chad basin
64. On 4 March, my Special Representative facilitated a meeting between the
Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and Head of the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Regional United Nations Sustainable
Development Group, held in Dakar, to discuss the Regional Stabilization, Recovery
and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lak e Chad Basin
Region. The meeting was aimed at developing a common understanding of the role
of United Nations agencies in the implementation of the Regional Strategy and
ensuring coherence with existing regional programmes, including the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Cross-border security strategy in the Mano River Union
65. On 19 February, UNOWAS and the Mano River Union signed a framework of
cooperation agreement that endorsed the joint workplan elaborated in November 2019
in Freetown. The agreement is focused on peace and security-related issues and
support for young people and women across the borders.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
66. Within the framework of Security Council resolution 2039 (2012), UNOWAS
and UNOCA continued to support regional efforts to enhance collaboration to counter
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea. My Special Representative for West Africa
and the Sahel and my Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa undertook a joint visit to the
Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of
Guinea, in Yaoundé, and to the Gulf of Guinea Commission, in Luanda, from 4 to 6
and from 6 to 8 February, respectively. They assessed the implementation of the
regional strategy for maritime safety and security in West and Centra l Africa with a
view to identifying specific areas that the United Nations could support and where
synergies between the two subregions should be enhanced. My Special Representatives
reaffirmed the readiness of the United Nations to provide support to, and work closely
with, ECOWAS and ECCAS. My Special Representative for West Africa and the
Sahel continued to advocate the operationalization of maritime zone G, which had yet
to reach its full capacity.
Terrorism and violent extremism
67. From 3 to 5 February, UNOWAS supported the third plenary meeting of the
Capacity-building in the West Africa Region Working Group of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, held in Lomé. The meeting, with support from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, brought together West African and international
stakeholders to take stock of implementation, cooperation and capacity -building
efforts in priority areas with regard to preventing and countering terrorism and violent
extremism.
Adverse implications of climate change
68. On 3 March, my Deputy Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel
delivered the keynote speech at a UN75 subregional meeting on multilateral
12/16

20-08025

S/2020/585

cooperation to address climate-related security and development risks in Africa, held
in Dakar. She highlighted the role of climate change as a risk multiplier that
exacerbated existing security concerns and called for reinforced multilateral
cooperation including support for regional peacebuilding approaches, as part of the
response.
Security sector reform
69. UNOWAS continued to support security sector reform processes in the
subregion. On 18 January, my Special Representative and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs discussed with the President of
Burkina Faso, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, ongoing efforts to reform national
security, which the United Nations has been supporting. From 16 to 20 March,
UNOWAS undertook a technical mission to Burkina Faso to assess progress towards
security sector reform and define areas of support with regard to the Senior Security
Sector Reform Adviser to the President.
70. In the Gambia, the United Nations country team, with support from the
Peacebuilding Fund, continued its efforts towards integrated support for security
sector reform at the programmatic level. A security sector reform programme
framework is being elaborated as the next phase of United Nations support for the
Government’s process.
71. Against a backdrop of sociopolitical tension in Guinea regarding the
constitutional referendum and legislative polls, the United Nations continued to
support the implementation of the Government’s national security sector reform
process through capacity-building for defence and security forces in the areas of the
penal chain, forensic services and the use of drones on security missions.

E.

Implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel
72. While programmes continued to be implemented under the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, the pandemic force d the United Nations response to
be adjusted. Joint programming continued in the Liptako-Gourma area despite
increasing difficulty of access owing to the security situation. With regard to the
operationalization of the implementation support unit, recruitm ent of the programme
coordinator was finalized. The Food and Agricultural Organization, the World Food
Programme, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
International Labour Organization and UNESCO have either deployed technical
expertise or nominated focal points to build capacity, in line with the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and the road map for cooperation between the
G5 Sahel and the United Nations of June 2015. Areas of United Nations support for
the G5 Sahel include project formulation and implementation, planning, field
assessment and advocacy.
73. The meeting of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel, schedule d
to be held in Niamey in the first half of 2020, was rescheduled for the end of 2020.
Bilateral discussions were held between my Special Representative and Sahel
stakeholders, including special envoys and regional organizations, on the situation in
the region.
74. On 28 April, Mr. Ghazouani co-chaired a meeting of the G5 Sahel with the
President of the European Council. The Deputy Secretary-General and the President
of the African Union Commission were also in attendance. In a joint declaration, four

20-08025

13/16

S/2020/585

pillars of the partnership between the G5 Sahel and the European Union were
established: combating terrorist groups; strengthening the capacities of armed forces;
supporting State authority, including through strengthening the penal chain; and
coordinating development actors through the Alliance for the Sahel.
75. On 21 July, I will report to the Economic and Social Council on progress on the
implementation of integrated, coherent and coordinated support to the Sahel by the
United Nations system, outlining the main developments pursued under the auspices
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, as operationalized by the
Regional United Nations Sustainable Development Group through the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel.

F.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
76. On 16 January, UNOWAS participated in the commemoration of ECOWAS
Human Rights Day in Abuja. At the event, which was attended by the ECOWAS
Commission and key partners, including human rights and humanitarian
organizations, national institutions and the diplomatic corps, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, a platform was presented for advocacy of the right
to education, as well as for ways of addressing the main human rights challenges in
the region.
77. On 2 and 3 March, UNOWAS participated in a regional seminar with
UN-Women and the Ambassador of Canada, held in Dakar, inaugurating a two -year
exhibition on African women and political leadership. At the seminar, stock was taken
of the political participation of women in the region, with a special focus on
enhancing legal reforms and the functioning of political parties to promote the
effective political participation of women in the Central Af rican Republic, Guinea,
Liberia and Nigeria. Participants established a regional mechanism, which will be
supported by UNOWAS and ECOWAS, through which to follow up on legal reforms
and facilitate experience-sharing and advocacy with regard to the representation and
participation of women in elections.
78. Through videoconferences, UNOWAS facilitated three thematic exchange
sessions of the Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace and Security in West Africa
and the Sahel, on the impact of COVID-19 on gender and the women and peace and
security agenda; the new mandate of UNOWAS and its implication for the women
and peace and security agenda in West Africa and the Sahel; and the assessment of
the 20 years of implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in the
subregion. Participants committed themselves to reinforcing synergies to collect
monthly gender-disaggregated data on the disease in the region and called upon
UNOWAS and other United Nations entities to increase support for initiatives for
women and young people.

IV. Observations and recommendations
79. I welcome the positive developments in West Africa and the Sahel, such as the
relatively peaceful conduct of the presidential election in Togo and the completion of
the work of the Constitutional Review Commission in the Gambia.
80. I take note of the holding of legislative elections and a constitutional referendum
in Guinea amid tensions and violence, which, regrettably, led to the loss of life. I urge
all political actors to engage in inclusive dialogue in order to find peaceful solutions
to their differences ahead of the presidential election.
14/16

20-08025

S/2020/585

81. As preparations for elections continue in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana,
Guinea and the Niger, I urge all relevant political stakeholders to build consensus
around those critical processes, in particular in the context of the current health crisis,
in order to ensure inclusive, transparent, credible and peaceful outcomes.
82. I am deeply concerned about the impact of the pandemic on the peace, stability
and socioeconomic development of the countries of West Africa and the Sahel. I
reiterate my appeal for an immediate global ceasefire to reinforce diplomatic action,
as well as for debt relief and help in creating conditions for the delivery of life-saving
aid and bringing hope to places that are among the most vulnerable to the outbreak.
83. I salute the efforts of ECOWAS Member States to prevent and limit the spread
of COVID-19 and welcome the holding of the extraordinary session of the ECOWAS
Authority on the pandemic on 23 April. I urge subregional leaders to ensure
inclusivity and consensus regarding decisions taken on measures to address the
outbreak while maintaining a focus on other pressing threats to peace and security, as
well as socioeconomic and development challenges facing the subregion.
84. I remain concerned about the rise in intercommunity violence, as well as its
implications for security and respect for human rights in West Afr ica and the Sahel,
and urge the countries of the region to speed up efforts to strengthen community based dispute resolution mechanisms while ensuring full accountability for crimes
committed during intercommunal clashes.
85. I note with concern the increase in terrorist activity in the Sahel and in the Lake
Chad basin, which has caused mass displacement, reduced access to basic services,
in particular health and education, and disrupted livelihoods, with serious
humanitarian consequences. I urge countries of the region to redouble their efforts to
address the root causes through a more integrated approach, encompassing
humanitarian assistance, development aid and security and human rights dimensions.
I call upon countries of the region to enhance their investments in human development
and the promotion of social cohesion. Response programmes have to be conflict sensitive and attuned to the underlying causes of instability to avoid worsening the
situation. I also urge international partners to make good on th eir pledges and expedite
disbursement to support regional efforts.
86. I commend the efforts of countries participating in the Multinational Joint Task
Force and the Joint Force of the G5 Sahel to address security challenges in the
subregion. I encourage the countries to enhance their coordination and reiterate my
call for international partners to continue to scale up support for those initiatives.
87. I urge Member States to intensify efforts towards addressing the root causes of
insecurity in the subregion and reducing the populations’ need to rely on armed
vigilante and militia groups as security providers. I call upon partners to fully support
holistic and integrated approaches to addressing those challenges, including through
the implementation of the stabilization strategy for countries affected by the Boko
Haram crisis, the G5 Sahel priority investment plan, the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel and its Support Plan for the Sahel.
88. I encourage national, regional and international partners to redouble their efforts
towards responding to current and projected threats posed by worsening climate
change, which could further exacerbate the volatile situation in the Lake Chad basin
and the Sahel.
89. I am deeply concerned about the continued limiting of humanitarian access in
the Lake Chad basin and in the Liptako-Gourma tri-border region, which has resulted
increasingly in unnecessary human suffering. I call upon the parties concerned to
respect the humanitarian principles of impartiality and neutrality and allow the

20-08025

15/16

S/2020/585

unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to populations in need, in particular
children, older persons, women and other vulnerable groups.
90. I welcome efforts made by some countries to enhance the participation of
women and young people in national peace, security, development and COVID -19
response strategies. I urge countries in the subregion to take specific measures, in
accordance with their national and regional commitments, to enhance inclusive
processes and political, social and economic opportunities for women and young
people.
91. The United Nations will continue to support Member States in enhancing their
institutional and operational frameworks for the promotion and protect ion of human
rights and the rule of law. I urge Member States to take concrete steps to enhance
respect for human rights, in particular during electoral processes and counter terrorism operations, while ensuring accountability for violations and abuses. Wi th
regard to the pandemic, I urge Member States to adopt a human rights -based approach
in their response, which is essential to guarantee that societies emerge more resilient
thereafter.
92. I commend the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria for their conti nuous
commitment to completing the demarcation of their land and maritime boundaries. I
encourage them to expedite the process with a view to accelerating the completion of
the mandate of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission once the challenges caused
by the pandemic have been addressed.
93. I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of West Africa and the
Sahel region, the African Union, ECOWAS, the G5 Sahel, the Mano River Union, the
Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission for their continued
cooperation with UNOWAS. I also extend my appreciation to the United Nations
system in West Africa and the Sahel, civil society organizations and other institutions
for their close partnership with UNOWAS. I commend and further encourag e the close
collaboration between UNOCA and UNOWAS on an increasing range of topical and
transversal challenges, which reflects and responds proactively to the enhanced
cooperation between ECCAS and ECOWAS. I would like to express particular
appreciation to my Special Representative, Mohamed ibn Chambas, as well as the
staff of UNOWAS and the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, for their
continuing efforts to advance peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel.

16/16

20-08025
