V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Ac­
tion for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries; 154
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United Na­
tions Development Programme to consider measures to en­
hance the capacity of the United Nations Capital Development
Fund to respond effectively to the priority needs of the least
developed countries, including measures to improve com­
plementarity between the capital assistance available to them
from the Fund and other types of assistance available to the
least developed countries administered by the United Na­
tions Development Programme, with a view to maximizing
the impact and effective utilization of those resources in the
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Ac­
tion for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries;
5. Endorses the programme orientation and operational
policies of the United Nations Capital Development Fund
as described in the report of the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme on the activities of the
Fund in 1980 and, in particular, stresses the importance of
achieving a balance between resources allocated for meeting
basic needs of low-income groups and those required for
strengthening the productive sectors and dealing with other
structural bottle-necks, with a view to promoting national
self-reliance and accelerated self-sustained economic growth
of the least developed among the developing countries;
6. Decides that the administrative and programme sup­
port costs of the United Nations Capital Development Fund
shall be met from the general resources of the Fund, while
the United Nations Development Programme will continue
to provide field support services as well as all headquarters
administrative support services to the Fund;
7. Calls upon Governments not already contributing to
the United Nations Capital Development Fund, particularly
developed countries and others in a position to do so, to
provide financial support to the activities of the Fund.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
36/197. United Nations Children's Fund 159
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the Economic and Social Council reso­
lution 1981/56 of 22 July 1981,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children's Fund on its session held at
United Nations Headquarters from 11 to 22 May 198 I, 160
Reaffirming the principles and guidelines for the pro­
gramme activities of the United Nations Children's Fund
laid down by the Executive Board, in particular the field­
oriented and action-oriented approach of the Fund and the
maintenance of a low ratio of administration to programme
costs,
Acutely aware that the present global economic situation
adversely affects the ability of developing countries to im­
plement plans for the extension of basic services to children
and mothers, which requires the most effective use of avail­
able resources to advance the well-being of children,
Concerned that the situation regarding the income of or­
ganizations of the United Nations system depending on vol­
untary contributions, including the United Nations Children's
Fund, has recently been adversely affected by a number of
unfavourable factors,

Bearing in mind that the programmes of co-operation of
the United Nations Children's Fund are contributing to the
realization of the relevant goals and objectives of the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade, 161
I. Commends the policies and activities of the United
Nations Children's Fund;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/56;
3. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations Children's
Fund as the lead agency in the United Nations system re­
sponsible for co-ordinating the follow-up activities of the
International Year of the Child related to the goals and
objectives concerning children set forth in the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Devel­
opment Decade;
4. Commends the Executive Director and the secretariat
of the United Nations Children's Fund for their efforts to
enlarge the income of the Fund so that it may respond more
effectively to the needs of developing countries in support
of their programmes to enlarge basic services for the benefit
of children and mothers;
5. Urges all organizations concerned in supporting the
activities of the United Nations Children's Fund, including
the national committees for the Fund and the co-operating
non-governmental organizations, as well as other organi­
zations of the United Nations system, to enlarge and enhance
their co-operation with the Fund in order to maximize the
effectiveness of such co-operation in the interests of children
and mothers in developing countries;
6. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have
responded to the needs of the United Nations Children's
Fund and expresses the hope that more Member States will
follow their example;
7. Invites all Governments that make pledges of vol­
untary contributions to make payment thereof as early as
possible so that the United Nations Children's Fund may
proceed with the implementation of its programmes without
undue delay while maintaining an adequate level of oper­
ating capital;
8. Appeals to all Governments to increase their contri­
butions, if possible on a multiyear basis, so that the United
Nations Children's Fund may, in the present global eco­
nomic situation, be able to augment its co-operation with
developing countries and respond to the urgent needs of the
children in those countries.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
36/198.

See also sect. II, resolution 36/244.

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 198/. Sup­
plement No. 8 (E/1981/48).
160

United Nations Volunteers programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December 1970,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
twenty-eighth session 162 and its decision 81/l of 18 June
1981 163 on the United Nations Volunteers programme,
I. Notes with satisfaction the successful achievement
of the United Nations Volunteers programme during the
first decade of service, that it is active in ninety-three coun­
tries, including the least developed countries, and that it
has, in response to General Assembly resolution 34/107 of
101

9
"

131

Resolution 35/56, annex.

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1981. Sup­
plemenr No. II (E/1981161/Rev I)
1
"' /hid .. annex I.
1 2
"

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

132

14 December 1979, reached ahead of schedule the target
of one thousand volunteers in service;
2. Notes the activities of the programme in the fields
of youth and domestic development service;
3. Considers that the programme is a valuable instru­
ment of multilateral technical co-operation in response to
the needs of the developing countries, in particular the least
developed and newly independent countries;
4. Reiterates its appeal to Governments, organizations
and individuals to contribute or to increase their contribu­
tions to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Volunteers so as to enable the programme to overcome the
financial constraints affecting it, and requests the Executive
Co-ordinator to explore ways of ensuring increased re­
sources and to make proposals thereon to the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme.

103rd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

36/199.

Operational activities for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-Vl) of

1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Eco­
nomic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, con­
taining the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35156 of 5 December I 980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling further its resolutions 33/201 of 29 January
1979 and 35/81 of 5 December 1980 on a comprehensive
policy review of operational activities for development.
Recalling its resolutions 2688 (XXV) of 11 December
1970 on the capacity of the United Nations development
system and 3405 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 on new
dimensions in technical co-operation,
Having noted with deep concern the outcome of the 1981
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Ac­
tivities, held on 3 and 4 November 1981,
Having examined the annual report for I 981 of the Di­
rector-General for Development and International Economic
Co-operation on operational activities for development of
the United Nations system, 164
Reiterating that a substantial part of world resources,
material as well as human, continues to be diverted to arm­
aments with detrimental effect on international security and
on efforts to achieve the new international economic order,
including operational activities for development of the
United Nations system, and calling upon Governments to
take effective measures in the field of real disarmament that
would increase the possibilities of allocation of resources
now being used for military purposes to economic and social
development, especially development of developing countries,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the annual report for
1981 of the Director-General for Development and Inter­
national Economic Co-operation on operational activities
for development of the United Nations system, and takes
note of the areas identified by the Director-General in which
further progress can be made;
2. Reaffirms that the operational activities for devel­
opment of the United Nations system should contribute ef­
fectively to the implementation of the International
164

A/36/478 and Corr. I. annex

Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Devel­
opment Decade, which should provide the framework within
which those activities should be planned and conducted;
3. Expresses its deep concern that over-all voluntary
contributions from Governments and other sources to the
funds and programmes that are included in the United Na­
tions pledging conferences for development activities have
been stagnating and falling short in many cases of targets
which have been set by the relevant intergovernmental bod­
ies, with serious consequences for the organizations con­
cerned with respect to their capacity to maintain the level
of their operational programmes in support of the growing
needs of developing countries for multilateral concessional
assistance through the United Nations system;
4. Strongly reiterates the need for a substantial and real
increase in the flow of resources for operational activities
on an increasingly predictable, continuous and assured basis
and, in this context. urges all countries, particularly those
developed countries whose over-all performance is not com­
mensurate with their capacity, to increase rapidly and sub­
stantially their contributions to the system's operational
activities for development:
5. Invites all countries to inform the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session of the steps they have taken or
intend to take in response to the present resolution and other
relevant resolutions of the Assembly, taking into account
targets which have been set by the relevant intergovern­
mental bodies;
6. Decides to review and appraise on a regular basis the
mobilization of resources for operational activities for de­
velopment, taking into account targets which have been set
by the relevant intergovernmental bodies and, for this pur­
pose. requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation to include in his an­
nual report to the General Assembly a compilation of in­
formation provided by Governments, in accordance with
paragraph 5 above, and other relevant information, together
with his comments and recommendations;
7. Expresses its deep concern at the slow progress to­
wards placing the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system engaged in operational activities for
development on a more stable financial basis and, in this
context, urges all countries that are able to do so to indicate,
while making their pledges, their probable contributions for
a multiyear period, taking into account the need to ensure
increased resources in real terms on an increasingly pre­
dictable, continuous and assured basis:
8. Reiterates its invitation to the governing bodies of
the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, as appropriate, ,o consider new and specific
ways and means of mobilizing increased resources for op­
erational activities for development on an increasingly pre­
dictable, continuous and assured basis and requests the
Director-General for Development and International Eco­
nomic Co-operation to take into account the outcome of
these considerations in the preparation of his report to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session;
9. Welcomes paragraph 4 of decision 81/16 of 27 June
1981 of the Governing Council of the United Nations De­
velopment Programme, 16·' in which the Council urged the
Administrator to reduce the size of the administrative budget
of the Programme, and urges all the governing bodies of
the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system engaged in operational activities for development,
as a general guideline. to seek to minimize the administrative
and overhead costs with a view to increasing the proportion
of resources available to meet the assistance requirements
of developing countries:
