S/PV.7442

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7442nd meeting

Wednesday, 13 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Small arms
The human cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons (S/2015/289)
Letter dated 1 May 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/306)

15-13955 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1513955*

S/PV.7442

Small arms

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small arms
The human cost of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms
and light weapons (S/2015/289)
Letter dated 1 May 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/306)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Colombia, Croatia, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Finland, Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Zeid Ra‘ad
Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Mr. Karamoko Diakité, President
of the Côte d’Ivoire chapter of the West African Action
Network on Small Arms.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/289, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons. I
also wish to draw the attention of Council members to

2/72

13/05/2015

document S/2015/306, containing a letter dated 1 May
2015 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the President for
convening this important debate.
Over the past decade, the world has been afflicted
by over 250 conflicts. While no two have been the same,
the widespread availability of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition is common to all. More
than 50,000 men, women and children are killed each
year as a direct consequence, and the number of those
displaced has reached levels not seen since the Second
World War. Civilians, including children, suffer the
most. Ruthless, targeted attacks on schools, hospitals
and markets continue, against all basic principles of
international law.
The diversion of weaponry, including from
Government stockpiles, is further fuelling conflict,
allowing rebels, gangs, criminal organizations,
pirates, terrorist groups and insurgents to bolster their
firepower. Poor weapons management is an area of
alarming concern. Many States lack thorough planning
and consistent attention to the safe storage, handling,
transportation and disposal of their arsenals.
The recent entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) laid the foundations for a global framework of
arms transfer controls, including for small arms and
light weapons and ammunition. The ATT is designed to
help advance international peace and security, reduce
human suffering and promote cooperation, transparency
and responsible action on the part of States. The ATT
requires exporting States parties to ensure that their
arms exports will not be used, for instance, to violate
arms embargoes, fuel conflict, facilitate terrorism or
engage in serious violations of international human
rights or humanitarian law. I encourage all Member
States to accede to the Treaty and to faithfully implement
it. A universal ATT, adequately implemented, is critical
to removing the tools for armed conflict. The ATT and
other instruments can prevent the misuse and illicit
circulation of the thousands of weapons that are often
part of the roots of conflict.

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

My report to the Council highlights (S/2015/289)
two key elements to tackle this worldwide challenge.
First, we need to ensure that the use of weapons and
ammunition by national security forces conforms with
commitments under global treaties and instruments.
That also means ensuring the proper and safe storage
of weapons and ammunition. Secondly, we need
further measures to combat the proliferation of illicit
weapons. States must enforce arms embargoes and
strengthen United Nations missions tasked with arms
and ammunition identification, recordkeeping, tracing
and stockpile management. States contributing troops
and police can assist by deploying personnel with the
relevant expertise. I also encourage greater efforts to
accelerate the exchange of operational information on
arms trafficking.
In all aspects of arms and ammunition management,
States can make use of the tested standards and
guidelines developed by the United Nations. And as an
international community, we should think creatively.
States may already be implementing good practices
that could become a global standard. One area that
deserves far more attention is ammunition. Monitoring
ammunition flows can help identify sources, trafficking
patterns and diversion points. It can remove source
material for improvised explosive devices and interrupt
the resupply of ammunition into crime and conflict
areas. Cutting ammunition flows has an immediate
impact on the intensity of armed activity. In situations
where there is high risk to civilian populations, this
should be a priority.
The causes of conflict are complex. However,
weapons, ammunition and their storage facilities
are physical commodities. Guns can be licensed,
marked and confiscated; ammunition can be tracked,
removed or destroyed; and depots can be guarded,
cleared or secured. Deny access to illegal weapons and
ammunition, and you deny criminals, armed groups
and extremists a central means to perpetrate violence,
intimidation and harm. That must be our common goal.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.
Mr. Al Hussein: I am delighted to see you,
Madam President, presiding over the Council this
month. I wish you the best of success. I am also grateful
for the opportunity to address the Council on the human

S/PV.7442

cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons.
The bloodshed and devastation caused by these
weapons never fail to elicit unanimous declarations of
dismay, but when the international community is called
upon to control more effectively the production and
trade of small arms and light weaponry, States push for
loose definitions, as well as numerous exclusions and
loopholes, and enforcement remains weak. The reason
is clear. The trade in small arms is a multi-billion-dollar
business. And yet, the human and economic cost
of armed violence also runs into the hundreds of
billions of dollars. These are the weapons of the easy
kill — the most portable, most easily accessible, most
casual instruments of death. Even a small child can,
with its tiny muscles, vanquish a life. In war, however,
appallingly, it is often the child that receives the bullet.
The vast majority of victims are not the live version
of the silhouetted man on a white sheet of paper holding
a gun, which law enforcement and militaries the world
over use for target practice. The live version is very
different. The majority of bullet-ridden and mortarblasted humans are ordinary people, not combatants
in armed conflict. They tend to be among the poorest
or most vulnerable members of society: older people,
women, children and people with disabilities.
Frequently, they are the left-behinds — people who
cannot flee when danger looms because they have
nowhere to go or because they are not physically able
to move. Many are killed; countless others are maimed,
and may be permanently disabled.
If they were to reflect reality more closely, the
silhouettes used for target practice would not then be
menacing gunmen, but terrified people hiding under
tables, or cowering in the corners of dark rooms with
their families, or lying face down in a ditch. And
why? Because war is not just the clinical fulfilment
of some military or strategic objective; war, in the
killing zone, often means a gruesome showcasing of
human cruelty, for reasons we still do not yet properly
understand. Why does it have to be violent to civilians
and non-combatants?
The pathologies of human behaviour have yet
to determine why. But we do know that, if the oldest
companion of war is war crime, its bride is the profiteer.
There are simply too many who will indulge in the
commerce of death and in the illicit business of arms
transfers, which is undeniably damaging to human

15-139553/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

life. Yet we rarely see those responsible for facilitating
and abetting serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law held accountable in any
way. We must place the protection of human life and
human rights at the centre of this discussion.
The contrast is also breathtakingly stark between
the comfortable profits of the brokers of these
weapons — not to speak the accompanying lifestyles
of the more successful of them — and the victims of
their use, who in the majority of cases are likely to find
no recourse or remedy for the torment and disabilities
these arms and weapons have caused them.
We are all aware small arms do not only make easy
the taking of lives, and the maiming of lives, they also
kill economies and the social bonds on which every
kind of collective institution and progress rely. Their
ubiquitous availability can contribute to the sustained
denial of human rights, including to education and
health; the lethality of criminal behaviour; the
breakdown of social structures; the illicit plundering
of natural resources; decreasing trade and investment;
rising violence against women and girls; gang violence;
the collapse of the rule of law; and a generalized sense
of impunity, opening up in many parts of the world
completely lawless landscapes.
My Office welcomes the convening of this meeting.
We appeal to the Security Council to continue to build
on resolution 2117 (2013). We also note the upcoming
second open-ended meeting of the Group of Experts
in a few weeks’ time, and hope it will make serious
progress.
The recent entry into force of the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) is a real source of hope, if more Member
States ratify it and agree to implement it genuinely,
particularly articles 6 and 7, which provide for the
human rights safeguards that are the treaty’s heart. The
Security Council should continue to provide strong
support to the ATT, and it should mandate United
Nations operations to build ATT implementation
capacity into their regional and national assistance,
hand-in-hand with capacity-building for human rights
and rule-of-law institutions.
When in came to the ATT, my predecessor, Navi
Pillay, proposed to the Council in August 2014 that
“where there are concerns about human rights in
States that purchase arms, one condition of sale
would be that they accept a small human rights
monitoring team”. (S/PV.7247, p. 5)
4/72

13/05/2015

I, too, believe this form of innovative thinking deserves
further elaboration. I urge the States parties to explore
it, along with the members of the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Diakité.
Mr. Diakité (spoke in French): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by expressing to you and your colleagues
in the Security Council my sincere gratitude for giving
me this opportunity to speak to the Council today.
I am here not only in my capacity as President of
the West Africa Action Network on Small Arms in Côte
d’Ivoire and as a representative of our global network,
the International Action Network on Small Arms, but
mostly and especially as the voice of the millions of
innocent victims of the illicit transfer, accumulation,
diversion and misuse of small arms around the world,
especially in Africa. My country, Côte d’Ivoire, and its
people have suffered particularly because of this during
the last decade.
I remember like it was yesterday, when this
nightmare began. I was peacefully sleeping in my room
at the University of Bouaké, where I was in my first
year of law school, when I was abruptly awakened by
weapon fire from all sides. Some frustrated individuals
who had been denied Ivorian citizenship had decided
to take up arms — too readily available — to make
their claim. We were terrorized for days, hunted like
animals, without water, without food, without receiving
help, constantly living in the fear of being killed. And
we were not the only ones. The rest of the inhabitants
suffered as well, regardless of age, sex or status. We all
paid the price, but for what? And why? When I returned
to the neighbourhood, one of my neighbors was forced,
in order to feed her family, to yield to the intimidation
and threats of armed individuals. I will never forget the
tears on her face depicting her pain and the shame of
having been a victim of forced prostitution and rape.
We were all victims of those armed men, who
would set up multiple barricades so that they could
plunder passengers and traders of their property, and
often of their lives. And we ask the question: Where do
these weapons and their ammunition come from, these
weapons that enable all this violence, all this suffering?
Following the post-elections armed conflict in
2010 and 2011, I personally witnessed multiple abuses,
the lifeless bodies lying in the middle of the roadway,

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

the destroyed and burned buildings and the streams
of haggard and displaced refugees fleeing Abidjan by
the thousands for an unknown destination, leaving
behind the entire fruit of a life-time of hard work. I
also experienced the consequences of the collapse of
Government control, where power fell to groups of
young, lawless offenders who had no difficulty getting
hold of arms and ammunition and who, without any
reason, would not hesitate to take life or to indulge in all
forms of abuses on a terrorized population, particularly
women and girls. All public infrastructure was
destroyed, the population deprived of water, electricity
and food. Families were separated, and hospitals were
overwhelmed and unable to cope with the flood of the
wounded. Many owed their salvation to the courage of
some women who, at great risk to their lives, ventured
out to bring a handful of cassava semolina, called
attieke, to feed the families.
Electoral dispute in my country led to a strong
anarchic distribution of weapons and ammunition
by some political leaders and district leaders.
Those weapons and their ammunition had entered
the country, in violation of a United Nations arms
embargo, from neighbouring countries as well as
trafficking networks. The cost in human life was well
over 3,000; the total cost to the country is beyond any
estimation. Obviously, the ease of access to weapons
and ammunition acquired by illicit means, by leakages
from legal stockpiles, from military and police stock,
and even by local manufacturing, were the main
factors in this tragic toll. Similarly, illegal weapons
and ammunition coming from the abandoned arsenals
after the fall of Al-Qadhafi in Libya started to pour
into the region — and presently continue to flood our
region and fuel terrorist movements in Mali, the Niger,
Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon.
As a consequence, democratic institutions are
severely destabilized and organized crime is spreading
rapidly. It is therefore urgent, if we are to avoid the entire
region being engulfed in protracted and unresolvable
conflicts and overwhelmed by horrific crime, that
the international community mobilize to counter this
problem and act quickly to curb the proliferation of
such weapons in Africa and the world.
It is an undeniable fact that the illicit transfer,
accumulation, diversion and misuse of small arms
and their ammunition are key factors in the human
costs resulting from destruction and destabilization.
Every United Nations Member State must do all it can

S/PV.7442

to ensure that it is meeting all relevant international
obligations and commitments related to controlling the
movement and misuse of small arms and light weapons
and stemming the flow of arms into conflict zones.
It is more vital than ever that States be encouraged
to implement the United Nations Programme of
Action and the Arms Trade Treaty in order to slow
if not eliminate the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons. They must do more to enhance and
strengthen international cooperation and assistance.
That assistance can and should take many forms,
from helping to ensure that stockpiles — whether in
the largest national armoury or the smallest village
police station — are secured, to assisting the victims
and survivors of armed violence, whether conflict- or
crime-related. Member States should also ensure that
preventing and combating small arms and ammunition
proliferation and misuse are fundamental elements of
the mandates of all peacekeeping operations, and they
should support the work of civil society in its efforts to
combat the harmful consequences of small arms and
ammunition proliferation. Civil society played a pivotal
role in resolving the conflict in Côte d’Ivoire and can
do so elsewhere as well.
In that regard, I would like to make the following
three recommendations to the Security Council. First,
all United Nations Member States should fully honour all
their commitments under the Programme of Action and
ensure that they follow up on its Biennial Meetings and
Review Conferences on progress achieved, including
the International Tracing Instrument. Secondly, all
Member States should ratify the Arms Trade Treaty
and implement it robustly in order to ensure the
establishment of strict new international standards.
Similarly, all States should ratify the Firearms Protocol.
Thirdly, all States should actively promote and support a
full role for women as participants and decision-makers
in addressing the proliferation and misuse of small
arms and ammunition, including in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and peace
processes at all levels.
I and the many innocent victims in my community
and all over the world have suffered from the terrible
yet preventable reality of the misuse and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. It is up to the members
of the Security Council to work with the international
community to prevent others from being subjected to
such horrible suffering. On behalf of all the victims, I

15-139555/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

urge every member of the Security Council to adopt a
resolution on small arms and light weapons, because
we perish or survive at their will.
The President: I thank Mr. Diakité for his personal
testimony and his plea on behalf of so many victims.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Lithuania for organizing
this meeting. My thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral, the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
Mr. Diakité for their briefings.
The current international security situation is
complex and volatile. Terrorism is spreading and
organized crime is on the rise. The dangers created by
the illicit trade in and excessive stockpiling of small
and light weapons have become more prominent and
severe. Globalization and the revolution in technologies,
including information technology, have added many
new features to that trade. The fight against illicit
trafficking in small and light weapons has become
increasingly complicated and difficult. The Security
Council should continue to play a positive role in
strengthening international efforts to combat the illicit
trade in such weapons and to prevent the damaging
humanitarian consequences of their proliferation. We
would like to make the following points.
First, we should take a multifaceted approach in
order to address the problem in an integrated manner.
The international community should learn from the
lessons of history. Political and diplomatic means
should be used to settle disputes in order to maintain
international and regional peace and stability and
eliminate the motives behind the illicit trade in small
arms. Meanwhile, we should intensify our efforts in the
areas of peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction
in order to provide solid assistance to the countries
concerned in achieving economic development and
social stability and to halt the abuse of such weapons
where it begins.
Secondly, the United Nations should play a major,
leading role in combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. Every country should continue to
fully implement the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects in order to enhance the multilateral process

6/72

13/05/2015

in combating that trade. We hope the soon-to-be-held
second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental Experts
under the Programme of Action will bring progress
on efforts to combat the illicit trade at the national,
regional and international levels to new heights.
Thirdly, control at the source should be
strengthened in order to break the chain of supply.
National Governments have the primary responsibility
in fighting the illicit trade, and all countries should
comply strictly with Security Council resolutions on
arms embargoes, adopting responsible policies towards
the arms trade and undertaking not to transfer arms
to non-State actors. Meanwhile, domestic controls
should be tightened in order to prevent small arms
and light weapons from flowing into illegal channels.
The international community should take measures
to strengthen institutions and build capacities for
combating the illicit trade.
Fourthly, international cooperation should be
strengthened and assistance increased. All law
enforcement agencies should improve their cooperation
and coordination and their relations with INTERPOL
and other multilateral institutions so as to strengthen
the exchange of information and practical cooperation
through bilateral and multilateral channels, thus
preventing the flow of small arms and light weapons
into the hands of terrorists and transnational organized
criminal groups. Developed countries should increase
their aid to developing nations in order to improve
their capacity for stockpile management, combating
smuggling and confiscating and destroying illegal
firearms.
The Chinese Government has always opposed the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, and takes
a responsible and prudent approach to the export of
such weapons, abiding strictly by the principles of not
undermining regional peace and stability or interfering
in internal affairs of recipient countries. We do not
transfer arms to countries or regions that are under
Security Council arms embargoes or to non-State actors
and individuals. The Chinese Government has put in
place a comprehensive export control system, including
end-use certificates and export licences, among other
things. In recent years we have vigorously supported
and taken an active part in international and regional
cooperation in the fight against the illicit trade in
firearms. Meanwhile, we have also dedicated ourselves
to continuing to strengthen domestic legislation and
enforcement.

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

Efforts to stop the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons are of great importance to maintaining
regional peace and stability. They are the guarantee
of national stability and development by building an
arms-free world of peace and stability, providing for
the protection of women and children and ensuring
their safety and security, which is a common dream
of all countries. China is ready to join the rest of the
international community in an unremitting effort to
promote the elimination of the illicit trade, resolve the
problem of excessive stockpiles and stop the abuse of
such weapons.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and Mr. Diakité for
their briefings.
The Russian Federation shares the growing concern
around the world for the problem of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. Each year thousands
of innocent people become its victims. These types
of weapons are widely used by terrorist, criminal and
illegal armed groups in order to achieve their illicit ends.
To prevent these weapons from reaching black markets,
the coordinated efforts of the entire international
community are necessary, while maintaining the
central role of the United Nations.
We attach great importance to the implementation
of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Today, it remains
the only universal specialized international instrument
in the area of combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. It provides for a broad range of
measures for States to implement at the global, regional
and national levels for the purpose of combating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, preventing
their being diverted into illicit trade, reaching terrorist
organizations, organized crime syndicates or States
subject to Security Council sanctions.
At the same time, we are convinced that the
potential of the Programme of Action is far from
exhausted. Much remains to be done to enhance its
practical impact, especially at the national and regional
levels. The implementation in practice of the approach
proposed by Russia to strengthen national controls on
transfers of small arms and light weapons will make
it possible to strengthen the security of individual
countries and whole regions coping with the severe

S/PV.7442

consequences of the use of illicit small arms and light
weapons.
It would be possible to significantly reduce the
risk of uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and
light weapons by strengthening national controls over
all phases of the life cycle of such weapons, from
their production to destruction. Among the various
necessary measures being sought is the introduction of
a ban on the delivery of all types of small arms and
light weapons to unauthorized State entities, as well
as the strict regulation of brokering activity, a ban
on unsanctioned re-export of weapons, and an end to
pirated production — that is, the production of weapons
without licences or based on expired licences.
Measures aimed at significantly lowering the risks
of the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons are scarcely included in the draft resolution
currently being put together. Furthermore, the draft
text in its current form does not reflect our approach on
this topic. Bearing this in mind, the Russian Federation
would not be able to support the draft resolution, if it
were put to a vote.
At the same time, we have to admit that we are
surprised at the methods of work of the authors of the
draft, who have basically disregarded our concrete
proposals. The final version of the text lacks balance on
the most topical issues related to combating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. Furthermore,
unlike resolution 2117 (2013), adopted in September
2013, which we believe remains valid, the current draft
has a number of substantive innovations that infringe
on the sovereignty of States, in particular the attempt to
draw up some sort of blueprint for the future expansion
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions in the area of control small arms and
light weapons, although the main responsibility for
fulfilling these functions within national territories
falls to the Governments of the corresponding States.
In implementing decisions to authorize exemptions
to arms embargoes, the Security Council sanctions
committees have, based on these proposed blueprints,
endowed themselves with the de facto authority to
determine at their discretion the needs of countries
under embargo with respect to certain types of
weapons, and States and groups of experts would be
encouraged to provide such information at the request
of the corresponding sanctions committees. We
consider this to be an attempt not only to have access

15-139557/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

to sensitive information about the defence capacities of
States subject to sanctions, but also to pave the way to
the unsound practice of double standards in the future.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate the Lithuanian presidency on taking the
initiative to convene today’s important and far-reaching
open debate of the Security Council on the human
cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons (SALW).
My delegation also expresses our appreciation to the
President for the interesting concept note on this theme
(S/2015/306, annex).
I thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings. I
would also like in particular to express my delegation’s
gratitude to the representative of the West African
Action Network on Small Arms, Mr. Karamoko Diakité
of Côte d’Ivoire, and convey our appreciation for his
valuable advocacy on this crucial matter.
Malaysia strongly believes that efforts to address
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons must
be taken consistent with a holistic perspective on arms
control and disarmament, post-conflict peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and socioeconomic development.
We would further underline the need to address the
root causes of the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons, including inter alia, the supply of SALW to
armed groups, whether by Governments or through
the black market, excessive accumulation and surplus
of SALW in post-conflict situations and the growing
demand for small arms and light weapons by armed
groups and non-State actors.
Accordingly, we welcome today’s open debate of
the Council as a reflection on how the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons in armed conflicts has
resulted in an alarming human cost. While the Council
has also maintained a focus on non-proliferation,
including on weapons of mass destruction, we are of the
view that it should also give due consideration to small
arms and light weapons as the main cause of death in
armed conflicts.
In this regard, the Secretary-General’s latest
report on small arms and light weapons (S/2015/289)
further reaffirms the need for concerted action on this
matter. The apparent ease with which small arms and
light weapons are obtained through illicit means has
continued to exacerbate and prolong armed conflicts
and post-conflict situations. The Council is no a

8/72

13/05/2015

stranger to depressing narratives as it discusses distinct
regional situations, but we have to recognize that a
common thread lies in these discussions, namely the
prevalence of small arms and light weapons in these
conflict areas.
Malaysia is particularly concerned about the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons on children,
who, as the Secretary-General has rightly noted in his
report (S/2015/289), are disproportionately affected by
hostilities. In the event that children in armed conflict
do not end up as victims of small arms and light weapons
themselves, they can also face abduction, displacement
and other forms of psychosocial distress. Even in
post-conflict situations, we should not underestimate
the danger posed to children by small arms and light
weapons, as seen in instances where children had been
killed or injured by playing with unexploded ordnance.
The proliferation of inexpensive and lightweight
small arms and light weapons in conflict regions has
also contributed to the recruitment of children as
combatants, whether forced or otherwise. As we are
painfully aware, there are many unscrupulous groups
which are willing to prey on this vulnerability and fill
a child’s empty pair of hands with the instruments of
death. It cannot be denied that the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons serves to prolong conflict
and intensify its impact on children. Malaysia reiterates
the Council’s call for relevant parties to take measure
to stem the illicit flow of small arms and light weapons,
including through resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005) on children in armed conflict.
In addressing the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, the international community has
established relevant parameters and guidelines. The
2001 United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons are key elements of
that framework.
However, despite the adoption of those
instruments, the marking and tracing of illicit small
arms and light weapons continues to be limited and
difficult, particularly in conflict or post-conflict
environments. We therefore recognize the need for
more capacity-building to meet the requirements and
capacities of Member States related to the prevention
of illicit trading in small arms and light weapons. That
15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

includes increased facilitation of technology transfer to
developing countries, upon their request, with respect
to physical security and stockpile management, as well
as marking and tracing capacities. We believe that
would significantly boost the implementation of the
Programme of Action at the national level.
The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which Malaysia
signed on 26 September 2013 and entered into force
in late 2014, also stands as a landmark instrument. As
countries begin to implement the ATT, they need to
hold fast to the principle of ensuring that they do so in
a consistent, objective and non-discriminatory manner.
That principle will ensure that all countries will be able
to work together to close any gap, remove any loophole
and bring interpretations and implementation closer to
the ultimate goal of establishing the highest possible
common international standards for regulating the
international trade in conventional arms. That applies
to today’s discussion in the context of ensuring that the
implementation of national obligations will contribute
to reducing the human cost of the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons.
One element that my delegation considers to be a
future task for the Council is the linkage between the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Security
Council. The PBC is well placed to play an effective
role in post-conflict disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and could also work closely
with other United Nations entities to ensure that
peacebuilding processes effectively complement one
another. Going forward, we hope that the Council will
consider the merits of interfacing with the PBC, not only
on DDR, but also through country-specific initiatives
on community security and conflict prevention, which
can be more attuned to local concerns regarding small
arms and light weapons.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing and his report (S/2015/289),
of which we take note. I would also like to thank the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and commend
the work of his Office. I thank Mr. Diakité for his
briefing.
The growing illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons throughout the world, particularly in hotbeds
of tension, in addition to their inextricable link to
terrorist organizations and drug traffickers, requires
those of us concerned with maintaining international
peace and security to detect the signs of such activity

S/PV.7442

and to dismantle all illegal operations, even as we
work to halt the arms race among weapons-producing
States. Our firm belief in the need for States to use and
manufacture small arms and light weapons for selfdefence and to defend their citizens, as well as in the
legitimate right of all peoples to self-determination,
including those chafing under the yoke of occupation,
does not run counter to attempts to halt the illicit arms
trade. We are dutybound to pursue our efforts to control
and overcome a scourge that affects us all, in particular
societies suffering from the illicit proliferation of such
weapons. The illicit and illegitimate use of small arms
and light weapons can be traced to the growing trade in
such arms by untrustworthy groups that find it all too
easy to obtain them in some parts of the world.
We are well aware of the gravity and repercussions
of the problem. Terrorists and criminal organizations
view small arms and light weapons as a tool that enables
them to pursue their illegitimate goals in a number of
ways, often in the context of a culture that, in some
societies, as is well known, favours such possession. All
States and Governments must therefore try to change
the prevailing societal and cultural attitudes towards
such activities and promote the principle of the rule of
law so that State institutions will be able to effectively
protect their citizens societies.
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
has led to the proliferation of conflicts that have
been accompanied by an alarming number of civilian
casualties. The number of civilian victims of violence
in armed conflict represents the visible face of the
illicit market in small arms and light weapons and of
their abuse. Despite the dark, invisible side of the illicit
arms trade, its effects can be seen in its humanitarian
consequences, especially on young people, women
and children. It is vital to offer assistance to States
enduring the consequences and the medium- and longterm effects of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, upon their request, and to assist them in
developing national strategies to control them, with the
participation of all sectors of society at the local level.
Civil society and mass media have a pivotal role to play
in addressing that phenomenon.
States must extend their authority across the full span
of their national territory and implement international
humanitarian law and human rights law with the aim of
curbing the proliferation of such weapons. Alongside
international efforts to curb the flow of small arms and
light weapons, decisive new laws aimed at punishing

15-139559/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

the illegal acquisition of such weapons must be enacted.
We continue to emphasize the need to adopt further
controls to monitor the weapons market and to honestly
implement the relevant international treaties. At the
regional level, neighbouring States must continue
mutual cooperation and coordination to promote border
security.
In the various forums that address the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, Jordan has emphasized
its commitment to the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, and to pressing ahead with the development of
national legislation to combat such trade.
To conclude, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons is not a cause but rather the result of
numerous factors. Conflicts must therefore be resolved
in a just manner. Many crucial issues demand to be
addressed. We will not reach our destination so long
as international peace and security continue to be
seriously and systematically threatened in many parts
of the world by the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Lithuania for organizing this open debate. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, High Commissioner for Human Rights; and
Mr. Karamoko Diakité, President of the Côte d’Ivoire
chapter of the West African Action Network on Small
Arms, for their statements.
Chad, which has long been ravaged by civil wars
and has been a victim of repeated foreign aggression,
is better poised than anyone to give an account of the
devastating consequences of the illicit trafficking,
destabilizing accumulation and diversion of small arms
and light weapons. Africa is one of the most severely
affected regions in the world by the destabilizing
impact of small arms and light weapons. The
consequences of the abusive use of such weapons are
immeasurable. They prolong and fuel crises and armed
conflicts, with their toll of misfortune and the loss of
human lives. There are waves of internally displaced
persons who are often the victims of atrocities, such as
rape, forced disappearance, torture and so on. Based
on certain sources, the human lives lost because of
small arms and light weapons exceed half a million
per year. Furthermore, the proliferation of weapons,
whether they are linked to crime or conflict, destabilize

10/72

13/05/2015

societies, causes human suffering, inverts the pyramid
of values and gives rise to a culture of violence.
Chad is extremely concerned by the scale and
consequences of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Accoding to some statistics, approximately
1 billion of these devices are circulating globally. They
are used mostly by non-State actors such as rebel and
terrorist groups, pirates, drug cartels, private security
firms, mercenaries, et cetera. The international
community must redouble its efforts to counter the longlasting devastating effects of the abusive use of small
arms and light weaopns. In that regard, it is critical that
we develop comprehensive mechanisms to combat this
phenomenon internationally and nationally.
At the national level, it is up to each State to assume
its responsibility to address the potential for the illicit
use, diversion and circulation of weapons. States must
ensure that the arms and ammunition in their possession
are properly used and that they are securely stockpiled.
They must ensure that there are systems to manage and
monitor arsenals. Because of its painful experience
of conflict, in 2008 Chad established a national
disarmament commission that has carried out operations
to collect illegally acquired weapons throughout the
whole of its national territory. Those operations have
enabled us to recover thousands of weapons, firearms
and ammunition alike. This collection of weapons was
additionally supported by a long campaign to raise
awareness among the public about the dangers of small
arms and light weapons. Practical measures have also
been taken to step up border-controls and exchange
intelligence with neighbouring countries. A jointforce of 4,000 Chadian and Sudanese soldiers has been
deployed along our common as part of this fight. Along
the same lines, on 25 March, Chad signed the Arms
Trade Treaty and deposited its ratification instrument
with the Secretariat.
At the international level, we must deal with
the underlying causes for the circulation of arms
and ammunition by combating the flow of such
arms, especially in conflict areas. In that regard,
effective measures must be taken in order to prohibit
the unscrupulous manufacture and brokering of
weapons — whether they be State or non-State
actors — so that they do not profit from death and
chaos, especially in the Middle East and Africa. In so
doing, they fuel conflicts to achieve their ends with
no consideration for human life. Chad condemns the
transfer of arms and ammunition, which more often

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

than not, flies in the face of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. Such transfers lead to
civilian deaths, especially among women and children,
destabilize States and impede long-term governance,
while complicating the resolution of conflicts.
In the same way that we are endeavouring to
put in place laws and arrangements to monitor and
control weapons in our own countries, we must also
identify, locate and hold responsible the State and
non-State actors involved in the illicit transfer of arms
and ammunition. The recommendations on marking,
registering and tracing of small arms and light weapons
will not be effective unless all States commit in good
faith to putting and end to the illegal supply of arms
and ammunition. Furthermore, it is urgent that we
ensure, by way of an international legal instrument,
that non-State and State manufacturers, brokers,
importers and traffickers are held accountable for the
destabilizing illicit transfer, accumlation and diversion
of small arms and light weapons.
We regret the fact that certain prominent members of
the Council oppose the inclusion in the draft resolution
under discussion of a provision on the inadmissible
nature of the transfer of small arms and light weapons
to non-State actors. Chad hopes that these legitimate
concerns on the issue will be taken into account in the
final version of the text that is currently being discussed.
The issue of small arms and light weapons has been on
the Council’s agenda since 1999, and it is our view that
this organ, vested with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must be find a solution, in particular to the critical issue
of transferring weapons to non-State actors.
Finally, the human cost of illicit transfers and
of destabilizing accumulation and diversion of light
weapons is intolerable. States must assume their
responsibilities and do everything in their power
to prevent and put an end to these activities, which
jeopardize international peace and security. The United
Nations must also do its part to advance this effort. We
therefore call on the Secretary-General to take into
account in his upcoming biennial report the issue of
the illicit transfer of small arms and light weaopns to
non-State actors.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you very
much, Madam President, for convening this open debate
on a subject of profound contemporary significance.
I also thank you for the deeply analytical concept
note (S/2015/306, annex) that you have provided as a

S/PV.7442

compass for our deliberations. I would like to express
my deepest appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his briefing as well his detailed report on Small Arms
and Light Weapons (S/2015/289). Our appreciation also
goes to Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for his soulsearching briefing, as well as to Mr. Karamoko Diakité
for stirring our moral conscience.
The world today is witnessing mindless killings and
despicable violence occasioned by terrorist groups such
as Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaida, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front. We
all know that what drives and sustains their mindless
behaviour is the unbridled proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. The pervasive misuse of weapons in
conflicts worldwide is also an immediate driving factor
in fostering the displacement of peoples. That can be
seen in conflict dynamics in various theatres of war
where such weapons are readily available. I believe
that we must employ a more dynamic approach to the
elimination of the illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and ready access to ammunition.
The illicit supply of small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors has been a major factor of political
instability and insecurity in Africa. That is precisely
why we deem it a vital necessity for the Security
Council, and indeed the international community,
to take strident, concrete and effective measures to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons.
The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects remains the key United
Nations initiative with a comprehensive approach
aimed at addressing the scourge that the illicit transfer
of small arms and light weapons has become. It needs
to be emphasized, however, that the realization of the
full potential of the Programme of Action lies in the full
synergy of its trilateral implementation mechanism.
Nigeria has remained consistent with regard
to the need for a regional approach to combating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
The adoption of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Small Arms
and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Materials, signed in Abuja in June 2006, and
the ECOWAS 1998 Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa are significant responses
forged by regional contributions to the global challenge

15-1395511/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

that is posed by the proliferation of illicit small arms.
The fact that an estimated 8 million small arms are in
circulation in the West African subregion, of which
about 80,000 are estimated to be held by insurgent
groups and other non-State actors, underscores the
need for ECOWAS member States to work relentlessly
together to deal with the problem of small arms and
light weapons.
Nigeria shares the view of the Secretary-General
that the diversion of small arms is a major problem
across the world, which contributes to insecurity and
is linked to the activities of mobs terrorizing people’s
homes, rebel attacks on civilians and peacekeepers,
organized crime and terrorism. It is therefore crucial that
attention be paid to the factors causing the diversion of
small arms, including improper controls, unauthorized
retransfer, thefts from poorly secured stockpiles,
handouts to armed groups and other non-State actors
in barter exchanges involving, in particular, natural
resources.
Nigeria believes that the support of the Security
Council for the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
should be reflected in the adoption and implementation
of practical measures to eliminate illicit small arms. In
addition to the measures envisaged in resolution 2117
(2013), the Council should continue to pursue genuine
efforts to prevent conflicts and support the pacific
settlement of disputes in order to remove or, at least,
minimize the risk of armed conflict.
There is also a need to support the creation of a
political atmosphere that is conducive to harmonious
relationships at the national, subregional and regional
levels. It is particularly important to foster a sense
of belonging among people in countries that are
susceptible to political instability. Nigeria urges
the Security Council to aim for and encourage, with
greater intensity, structures and processes that promote
democracy, human rights and the rule of law where they
do not exist, and their consolidation in unstable political
environments where they already exist. Above all, the
international community should vigorously address,
in an integrated manner, the economic, security and
developmental challenges faced by countries that are
vulnerable to armed conflict. Such measures would, in
our view, obviate the recourse to the illicit acquisition
of small arms and light weapons in order to pursue
political goals.

12/72

13/05/2015

Nigeria welcomes the entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty on 24 December 2014. As one of the first
countries in Africa to ratify the Treaty, we are firmly
committed to meeting our obligations under it. We are
of the belief that it could make a vital contribution to
international peace and security and the stability of
nations, including the reduction of human suffering.
We urge more States, in particular large exporters
and importers of conventional weapons, to ratify and
accede to the Treaty, which would bring us closer to the
overall objective of its universalization.
Nigeria reiterates its commitment to participate in
all initiatives at the subregional, regional and global
levels aimed at addressing, in a comprehensive manner,
the illicit transfer and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Madam President,
I am pleased and honoured to take part in this debate
under your leadership. I look forward to getting to know
my other colleagues on the Council as soon as possible.
The problem of small arms and light weapons is
extremely important but also very difficult. One reason
that it is difficult is that it is a hard issue to consider
in the abstract. So much depends on the conditions
in the society, country or region where the problem
arises. Take my own country as an example. On a percapita basis, New Zealanders have quite an arsenal
of weapons in private homes, but they are mostly for
recreational purposes, and the use of firearms in social
unrest, crime and domestic violence is relatively rare in
my country, although, sadly, it is on the increase. Our
police are still not routinely armed when they are on the
beat. That is possible because the history, the economic
and social conditions and the physical location of our
country have meant that guns are not a major social
problem — at least not yet. But that is not the case in
many countries that are awash in firearms and where
firearms are all too often a weapon of first resort. We
do not buy the bumper sticker that people, not guns,
kill people. Guns are a problem in their own right, and
they warrant our attention. So, too, does the issue of
ammunition, as the Secretary-General has reminded us.
Experience has shown that firearms can make a
bad situation much worse; the presence and use of a
lot of firearms can tear the fabric of society, threaten
the security of a country and destabilize a region. Even
a small number of guns in the wrong hands can have
devastating consequences, especially in vulnerable
communities. Too often, the innocent suffer the most,
15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

children and caregivers — usually women — as the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and Mr. Diakité have graphically pointed out.
There are numerous examples from all parts of the
world: from South and North America, the Caribbean,
the Middle East, Western and Eastern Europe, Africa
and Asia. My own region, the Pacific, is also not
immune, as has been shown in the Solomon Islands and
Timor-Leste. It is the ubiquity and seriousness of the
problem that has led to international efforts to control
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, in
particular the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and, most significantly, the
negotiation, adoption and entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty, which New Zealand has ratified.
New Zealand hailed the adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty as one of the most important arms-controls
agreements adopted in recent years. That achievement,
together with the adoption of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions, rank as signal successes. They stand in stark
contrast to the meagre returns in other disarmament
negotiations — a situation currently under critical
scrutiny in an adjacent chamber.
The Council has an important and long-standing
role in this issue, as it has shown in the imposition of
arms embargoes and the adoption of measures to disarm
and demobilize combatants, secure the collection of
weapons and prevent their diversion. In resolution 2117
(2013), the Council provided a framework for a more
consistent approach to this set of issues. We sincerely
hope that the Council will be able, this week, to build on
that achievement by adopting a further resolution that
will: promote a more integrated approach to addressing
small-arms and light-weapons issues across the United
Nations agenda; encourage enhanced support from
United Nations agencies to host countries in countering
illicit transfers and the destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons; and strengthen
the implementation of arms embargoes.
We commend Lithuania for its concept note
(S/2015/306, annex) and for its preparation of a
comprehensive draft resolution. New Zealand is
concerned that there is serious contention over one
aspect of the draft resolution, namely, the language
bearing on illicit transfers to non-State actors, which
was not included in resolution 2117 (2013). For its part,
New Zealand could accept any of the formulations
under discussion, and we believe that, with a modicum

S/PV.7442

of goodwill, a solution can be found. While recognizing
the strength of the positions in play, we are concerned
that a battle over an issue on which none of the key
arms-exporting protagonists can plead a clean record
threatens to subvert the much larger gains that this
draft resolution represents for the wider United Nations
membership, especially the small and the vulnerable,
who suffer the consequences and reap none of the
rewards of the global arms trade.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would,
first of all, like to thank Lithuania for having organized
an open debate on the central issue of small arms and
light weapons. The statements made by the SecretaryGeneral and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights help us to gauge the real scale of the problem.
I would also like to thank Mr. Diakité for his briefing
on the situation in West Africa — a region that is,
unfortunately, particularly affected by the proliferation
of small weapons — and for his very powerful
testimony. We will certainly heed his call.
France also associates itself fully with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.
Today’s debate is based on an alarming fact.
According to the Small Arms Survey research project,
over 800 million small arms and light weapons are
in circulation around the world. These weapons have
caused over half a million deaths each year and are
responsible for almost 90 per cent of the victims of
armed conflicts. Make no mistake — today, small arms
are by far the most lethal weapons in the world. Their
main victims, unfortunately, are too often civilians,
among whom women and children are particularly
affected.
The proliferation of such weapons also fuels
regional conflicts and benefits terrorist groups, which
thus armed can continue their destabilizing and
barbarous activities. It also sows the seeds for organized
crime, which no longer knows any borders. And this
phenomenon is constantly evolving. Porous borders in
conflict zones, combined with advances in technology,
communications, finance and transportation, have
fostered relations among terrorist networks and
criminal groups operating internationally, making the
fight against this scourge even more complex. Lastly,
by encouraging the continuation of conflicts and the
destabilization of entire regions the illicit trafficking in
those deadly weapons presents a major obstacle to the
socioeconomic development of the most fragile States.

15-1395513/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

In the face of this dark scenario, the international
community cannot stand idly by. France is also aware
of the particular responsibility that falls upon it as an
arms-exporting country. That is why we, together with
our partners, have joined the front ranks in the combat
against the illicit trafficking in small arms. The United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by consensus
in 2001, was the first cornerstone of this edifice,
providing a general framework for efforts aimed at
containing the flow of small arms. The International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, which was authored by France and
Switzerland, further bolstered that framework in 2006.
We would now like to see the Programme of Action,
which is still legally non-binding, be strengthened in
the years to come.
In the face of such a scourge, which defies the
authority of States, the adoption of legally binding
instruments is indeed essential. That is why we were
among the first, together with our European partners,
to promote an Arms Trade Treaty that is commensurate
with the scale of this challenge, and which today has
become transnational. We worked together to achieve
a demanding and innovative treaty that, first, imposes
a new global standard for the trade in conventional
arms, including ammunition; secondly, triggers, for the
first time, the responsibility of exporting States; and,
thirdly, accords a paramount role to human rights and
international humanitarian law by banning the export
of all kinds of arms when there is a risk of genocide or
crimes against humanity. Together with African States,
we fought to make sure that the Treaty ultimately
included small arms and light weapons in its scope of
application.
The historic adoption of the Treaty by the General
Assembly in April 2013 ( resolution 67/234 B) and
its entry into force last December will contribute to
providing solutions to the illicit trafficking in small
arms. France is proud to have been among the first to
sign and ratify that treaty. In that regard, we call on all
Member States to sign and ratify the treaty, which will
strengthen international peace and security.
Other instruments exist, and they must, of course,
be supported. In the framework of the European Union,
for a long time we adopted common measures against
the stockpiling and destabilizing proliferation of small

14/72

13/05/2015

arms, as well as a common position on controlling the
brokering of arms deals. Finally, we also participate
in the financing of innovative instruments, such as
the iTRACE programme and the INTERPOL iARMS
system.
We welcome the fact that Lithuania has decided to
continue the deliberation within the Security Council
launched two years ago by Australia, which led to the
adoption of resolution 2117 (2013). That resolution
served as a major step forward by actively involving all
the instruments of our Organization in order to better
combat the destabilizing and illicit trafficking in such
weapons in all regions of the world.
The efforts undertaken by Lithuania with a view
to adopting a new resolution on the subject are, in that
context, extremely important. The fight against the
trafficking in small arms should indeed be a crosscutting topic in all the areas of United Nations activities:
within the sanctions committees and the panels of expert
in charge of monitoring embargoes, but also within
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
when that is deemed useful and necessary. Structures
within the United Nations involved in combating
terrorism can also play an important role, and we hope
that the issue will be systematically taken into account
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.
The Secretary General’s report on small
arms (S/2015/289), circulated a few weeks ago,
provides important clarifications and additional
recommendations that we will also need to implement.
We would like, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral, for this issue to remain on the agenda of the
Council.
Control over all arms is the primary condition
for security in the world. For France, this is not just
a conviction, it is a historical commitment. No doubt
because our country has been the theatre of many wars,
we have been, and continue to be, one of the countries
that is most favourable to disarmament. We will
continue this fight as long as necessary, together with
the international community.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): My
Government very much welcomes this meeting and the
greater attention being paid to the danger posed by the
illicit trafficking in and stockpiling and use of small
arms and light weapons. I would like to thank Lithuania

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

for its leadership on this issue and also to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/289). We also
appreciate the briefings today by Mr. Diakité and by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Today, I would like to touch on three essential
issues. The scope of the small-arms and light-weapons
problem and the violence that results, the importance
of stockpile security and management, and what we
need to do to disrupt supply routes. A conservative
estimate of the official global trade in small arms and
light weapons is approximately $1 billion annually.
Black markets alone are estimated to account for
another $200 million. Estimates suggest there are over
600 million small arms and light weapons in circulation
worldwide. Readily available and easy to use, small
arms and light weapons have been the primary or
sole tools of violence in almost every recent conflict
dealt with by the United Nations and, too often, they
are being used by children who are too young, too
vulnerable, exploited and in danger. Stockpiles of arms
and ammunitions are widely available. Such weapons
are so small, so cheap, so convenient and easy to use
and transfer around the world. It is all too common to
see a teenage boy walking around with a gun almost as
heavy as he is.
We do not need to look far to see the impact of and
immense misery caused by this deadly phenomenon.
Large caches of weapons available in Darfur, Libya
and South Sudan have exacerbated conflicts in those
countries and in others throughout Africa and the
Middle East. Illicit weapons have a way of travelling
and where they go, they wreak havoc. Weapons from
Libya alone have been used in Egypt, Gaza, the Niger,
Somalia and Syria.
When South Sudan became independent in 2011, it
was estimated that there were 3.2 million small arms in
circulation, which is one gun for every fourth person.
We have seen their deadly toll, including widespread
and systematic killings of civilians and targeting of
individuals based on ethnicity, often in their homes,
churches and hospitals. In Darfur, terror is wrought
by a Government that continues to complement
indiscriminate bombings with ground attacks
conducted by its well-armed rapid-support force. Just
three months ago, the Security Council deplored the
routine conveyance of weapons and ammunition into
Darfur, but little has changed. Despite the presence of
a large peacekeeping operation, guns continue to flow
and terror reigns supreme.

S/PV.7442

The Secretary-General is right to highlight in
his report the need to address stockpile security and
management on an urgent basis. The United States has
been among the leading donors in helping Member
States to secure their stockpiles of conventional arms
and ammunition and to destroy those weapons no
longer required for national defence. We have supported
programmes that have destroyed approximately
1.6 million excess or poorly secured weapons and over
90,000 tons of munitions worldwide. We also continue
to cooperate with law enforcement authorities around
the world in tracing illicitly trafficked small arms and
light weapons. The United States has also worked with
the Organization of American States and the Nairobibased Regional Centre on Small Arms to assist Member
States in marking their State-held stockpiles.
That leads me to a point about the imperative of
controlling and regulating illicit weapons supply
routes. More robust enforcement of Security Council
embargoes and sanctions regimes by all Member States
is essential if the prohibitions already in place are to
be successful. Related to that, improvements in export
and import controls would mitigate the risk of illegal
transfers. Currently, bogus end-use certifications and
intentional diversions of legal arms transfers are used
to channel arms to Governments and others in violation
of national and international laws. Establishing high
standards for end-use certification, more robust postexport verification by arms-exporting countries and
appropriate regulation of commercial arms brokers
would all contribute greatly to addressing the illicit
movement of small arms and light weapons.
We must also redouble our commitment to strong
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
measures in post-conflict situations. Effective DDR,
including the expeditious destruction of war surpluses,
can ensure that the tools of today’s wars do not fuel
conflict somewhere else tomorrow. Nations have the
right to defend themselves and their citizens. Small
arms and light weapons are often manufactured legally
and appropriately, traded and retained for legitimate
and lawful purposes. That must be respected and
protected. But when legal controls break down and,
through weaknesses of governance, corruption or
other illicit lawless activity, deadly weapons fall into
the wrong hands, the victims are too often too many
vulnerable innocents.
This debate has helpfully laid out the grave
problems that small arms and light weapons pose to

15-1395515/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

international peace and security. But it has also offered
practical and effective solutions, and in that vein, we
support Lithuania’s draft resolution on the issue and
urge our colleagues to do so as well.
The threat posed by cynical profiteers who
trade in an illicit economy of corruption merit our
attention. The misery wreaked by the illicit movement
of small arms demands our focus. Children, whom
the High Commissioner powerfully observed with
their small muscles can vanquish a life, are too often
instrumentalized and victimized by our failure to
effectively address the illicit movement and unlawful
proliferation of small arms. The United States is deeply
committed to continuing our work together to address
that challenge and advance our collective goal of
forging a more peaceful and secure world.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the President of
the Côte d’Ivoire chapter of the West Africa Action
Network on Small Arms for their excellent briefings.
I fully endorse the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
As we hold this debate, the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons is convened in this same United
Nations Headquarters. Curiously, however, as the
Secretary-General stated a few years ago, the true
weapons of mass destruction are small arms and light
weapons, because they are the weapons that have caused
the highest number of deaths in recent times. One of
the main principles of peaceful coexistence among
States and the maintenance of international peace and
security is the State’s established monopoly on the use
of force. Nevertheless, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction could challenge the State’s monopoly.
I wish to examine that thought from three points of
view.
The first is terrorism. I am convinced that one
of the causes of the increase in terrorism today is
precisely due to the increase in the trade of small
arms and light weapons. I believe that it would not be
possible for terrorist groups to control broad swaths of
territory in increasingly large areas of the Middle East
and elsewhere if they did not possess a large number
of small arms and light weapons. The proliferation of

16/72

13/05/2015

small arms and light weapons is thus one of the causes
of the increase of terrorism today.
The second perspective is the protection of
civilians. Unfortunately, the victims of the illicit trade
of small arms are civilians, particularly in areas where
the State is the weakest. Where borders are distant from
the State nucleus of control are precisely those areas
where civilians are most affected.
Thirdly, as the High Commissioner vigorously and
emotionally stated, women and children are particularly
affected. Women are often victims of sexual violence,
both during and following conflicts. Sadly, as Council
members are aware, children are recruited as child
soldiers and sometimes used as human shields and
instruments of war.
What is the solution to all those problems? States
have the solution. States must do more to establish better
controls over the end use of weapons. That is clearly
stated in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/289)
and in the reports of the Group of Experts. To better
combat the illicit trafficking of weapons of small arms,
it is essential to have good international cooperation, as
the Ambassador of China expressed so well.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the new
Ambassador of New Zealand and fully subscribe to
his statement regarding the need for a new Security
Council resolution. I think it would be necessary
and appropriate to have a new resolution to provide
continuity to resolution 2117 (2013). Such a resolution is
necessary because it would establish better international
control, more effectively prevent access by terrorists
to small arms, and ultimately lead to a more secure
world. Finally, I fully support the efforts of Lithuania to
ensure that the draft resolution can be adopted as soon
as possible. I trust that the Council members can reach
an agreement on it soon.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
open debate. We are also grateful for the briefings and
presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein; and Mr. Karamoko Diakité.
There are no exact figures on the number of small
arms and light weapons currently in circulation globally.
Some sources estimate that at least 875 million small
arms and light weapons are available, many of them in

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

the hands of non-State individuals and entities. Reports
are that between 7 and 8 million of those weapons are
produced every year. The legal international sales of
such weapons bring in at least $8.5 billion annually.
In addition, illicit sales, according to the World Bank,
account for up to an additional 20 per cent.
Hundreds of thousands of small arms and light
weapons, including heavy machine guns, grenade
launchers, ground-to-air missiles, portable anti-aircraft
systems, portable rocket launchers, rifles and
handguns, are diverted every year into the illicit market
and to non-State actors, including terrorist groups. The
diversion of those weapons exacerbates armed violence
and fuels conflicts, civil wars and transnational
organized crime, including drug trafficking, trafficking
in women and children, and it undermines respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights.
At least 508,000 persons die violent deaths every
year, including approximately 60,000 women and girls,
and most of them are victims of small arms and light
weapons. Such are the statistics of the culture and the
logic of death.
Although the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons has been a constant for decades in North
Africa and the Middle East, recent reports on the
subject point to an unprecedented escalation of the
phenomenon throughout the entire region. There is no
doubt that military intervention, war and the collapse of
institutions in Iraq and Libya, as well as the escalation
of the conflict in Syria, are the key factors explaining
this staggering increase in the trafficking and flow of
small arms and light weapons throughout the entire
region.
The Secretary-General’s 2013 report on small arms
and light weapons (S/2013/503) referred to the impact
caused by the collapse of the Libyan State and its
terrible consequences for the security of neighbouring
countries. The report demonstrated that munitions and
explosives had ended up in at least 12 countries of the
Maghreb, the Sahel, the Levant and the Horn of Africa.
It also documented the terrible impact that the military
intervention and war in Iraq had had on the security of
the Middle East, leading to the collapse of the country’s
institutions and army, with the subsequent proliferation
in the flow of weapons and explosives of all types.
Within their capacities, States can and must manage
and monitor their arsenals appropriately; promote
cooperation mechanisms, mark firearms when they are

S/PV.7442

being manufactured and imported; prohibit the export
or transfer of unmarked small arms and light weapons;
penalize illicit trafficking in those weapons; and
enforce law. For that reason, the collapse of States and
the disappearance of their institutions play a decisive
role in aggravating the problem we are discussing
today. The staggering increase in the flow and illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons in North Africa
and the Middle East, with its terrible toll in violence,
impunity, crimes against humanity and massive human
rights violations, is one of the terrible consequences of
political destabilization, interventionism and the wars
in Iraq, Syria and Libya.
In addition to the problem caused by the collapse
of States and institutions in the region, there is another
element that we must address, namely, the promotion
and proliferation of non-State armed groups as an
instrument of political destabilization and fomenting
war as a mechanism for overthrowing Governments.
Many non-State actors in North Africa and the Middle
East receive small arms and light weapons from
sponsoring States. Each weapon that lands in the hands
of non-State actors in such countries as Iraq, Libya and
Syria stokes barbarity, war, cruelty, suffering and the
death of innocent persons.
There is a very thin line between non-State actors
and terrorist groups. There are armed and extremist
groups that act with absolute disdain for human life and
human rights, that, once they are given small arms and
light weapons of all kinds, acquire significant military
capacity and, more important, huge lethal capacity to
deal death to every nook and cranny of the region. It is
for that reason that we are very concerned that major
small arms and light weapons-producing countries
have refused to include a prohibition on the transfer
of conventional weapons, including small arms and
light weapons, to non-State actors in the framework
of previous negotiations on this issue at the United
Nations. That has created a large legal vacuum that
allows them to continue to supply small arms and light
weapons to their political allies throughout the world.
The Security Council has a clear definition of
non-State actors. Furthermore, we have resolution
1540 (2004), which establishes a valuable precedent
for the prohibition of the transfer of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. We thus have enough
legal and political elements to extend the scope of the
prohibition on the sale and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons to non-State actors and terrorist groups.

15-1395517/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

Whoever supplies small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors — whether they be militias or democratic
opposition movements in countries in conflict, in wars
or in processes of political destabilization, and whatever
their name or motive, in societies overwhelmed by
poverty, inequalities, exclusion and various forms of
social discrimination — are stoking those conflicts
and creating conditions for an unthinkable expansion
of violence, suffering and death, as is unfortunately
the case today in many of our brother countries in the
Middle East and North Africa.
It would be an extraordinary contribution to the
preservation of peace, the protection of human rights
and the promotion of international law if the Security
Council, in the context of this open debate, and given the
situation of humanitarian tragedy, conflicts and wars
besetting North African and Middle Eastern countries,
were to take a decisive step as a firm expression of our
political will to adopt a draft resolution that clearly
prohibits the sale, supply, trafficking or transfer of
small arms and light weapons, provided that the draft
resolution includes non-State actors and terrorist
groups.
We would like to insist on the fact that the prohibition
must encompass non-State actors and terrorist groups.
This provision cannot be avoided by resorting to double
standards and excuses. It is particularly important,
given that it is those entities that are today acting with
full impunity, causing chaos, death and suffering to
the most vulnerable and to the peoples of these regions
beset by violence. This is an matter of political will for
the parties that have the most responsibility to bear on
this issue.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important open
debate on small arms and light weapons and for your
leadership on this issue. I welcome the briefings by
the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Prince Zeid. I also thank Karamoko
Diakité, for sharing his personal experiences of the
horrific impact that these weapons can have.
By the time I finish delivering this statement, six
more people will have been killed as a direct result of
small arms and light weapons. The human cost of these
weapons is astonishing owing to their illicit transfer,
destabilizing influence and misuse. Every year, enough
ammunition is manufactured to kill every single
person in the world twice over. Every year, 8 million
new weapons enter into circulation. When States fail
18/72

13/05/2015

to control the supply and sale of these weapons, they
not only jeopardize the safety and security of innocent
people across the world, they also fuel instability and
threaten international peace and security. Therefore,
the need for collective action is clear. In 2013, the
Council spoke on the issue for the first time. Today,
we return under the Lithuanian presidency to the issue
to reflect on how far we have come in addressing this
scourge, and what more needs to be done.
The United Kingdom welcomes the draft resolution
proposed by the presidency. It aims to strengthen
the international community’s ability to counter the
challenges posed by the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and to build on resolution 2117 (2013).
It would help to improve the United Nations work
and support the Arms Trade Treaty. We place a high
priority on addressing the threats posed by small arms
and light weapons, and believe that there are three key
areas where we can contribute.
First, we support greater efforts to ensure effective
stockpile management, removal and destruction.
Proper storage prevents the flow of these weapons
into the hands of those who seek to misuse them. It
helps curtail an illicit economy where supply feeds
demand, and it helps ensure safe storage and removal,
preventing incidents like the one in Libya in November
2013, in which over 40 people were killed in an arms
depot explosion. Indeed, it is Libya that presents the
greatest concern to my Government on the issue of
small arms. The vast, unsecured arms and ammunition
of the Al-Qadhafi era are now fuelling the instability
and violence facing the country and the region, and it
is this instability that has allowed human traffickers
and criminal gangs to thrive and send thousands of
migrants to their deaths in the Mediterranean.
That is why the United Kingdom has planned to
commit over $30 million to assist Libya with arms and
ammunition management. We are providing a senior
disarmament adviser to work with the United Nations
and the Libyans, and we stand ready to increase our
efforts to match the scale of the challenge. A political
solution remains vital to this effort, and we reiterate
our support for Special Envoy León. We urge all sides
to engage in talks to agree a national unity Government
and implement a ceasefire.
Secondly, the United Kingdom will continue to
champion the implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty.
As the world’s first legally binding treaty regulating the
international trade in conventional arms, it shows how
15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

much we can achieve when we work together, so let us
seize the momentum it has created. It is a historic treaty
and it has the ability to change the lives of those most
affected by the supply of illegal small arms and light
weapons.
To do so, we should ensure that the core structure
and functions of the Treaty are effective and costefficient. We look forward to negotiating the rules of
procedure for the Treaty, establishing a secretariat
and encouraging open and accessible transparency
reporting. As we approach the first conference of
States parties in August, we will continue to lobby
our international partners to support and accede to
the Treaty. We want as many countries as possible to
join us. We stand ready to offer our expertise, where
possible and appropriate, to any State that wants to
accede, yet lacks the capacity to do so.
Finally, let us not lose sight of the disproportionate
and distressing impact that small arms and light
weapons have on women and children. As the SecretaryGeneral makes clear in his report (S/2015/289), sexual
and gender-based violence is often perpetrated by
individuals and militias armed with these weapons.
In this fifteenth anniversary year of resolution 1325
(2000), we welcome the report’s recommendation to
give greater recognition to the impact of these weapons
on women and children. But women can also play a
key role in resolving these problems. Women can help
combat and eradicate the illicit transfer, the destabilising
accumulation and the misuse of small arms. They can
do so by participating in all programmes, planning and
implementation processes, including at grass-roots
level. In the United Kingdom’s national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000), we pledge that women will play
a key role to control the use of small arms and light
weapons, and we call on other Members to do the same.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like first of
all to congratulate you, Madam, on your presidency and
to thank you for organizing this debate on an issue of
the utmost importance, given its harmful consequences
to the lives of so many people.
We thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
and detailed report on this issue (S/2015/289), and High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein
for his briefing. I also thank Mr. Karamoko Diakité for
sharing with the Council his direct experience of what
it means to live with conflict and violence resulting
from the proliferation of small arms.

S/PV.7442

Unfortunately, many small weapons fall into the
wrong hands, resulting in severe damage of alarming
proportions, the deaths of innocent people, violations
of human rights and huge destruction of property. In
many cases, perpetrators target even United Nations
peacekeepers supporting peace processes in several
Member States. Additionally, weapons are supplied
or sold to non-State actors to fuel conflicts against
established authorities and destabilize entire regions
and societies, leading in the final resort to the creation
of terrorist groups and armed criminal networks.
Angola was the victim of such deeds for many
years. An Angola non-State actor was for many years
armed and funded to challenge State authority, causing
death and despair that we were able to neutralize only
thanks to the support of the international community
and the resilience of the Angolan people and its will
to live in peace and freedom. Given the experience
we have lived through so recently in building a State
founded on the rule of law, as well as the situation
prevailing in so many African countries and other parts
of the world beset with conflict, I think we have, both
as the Council and individually, the moral duty and
political responsibility to openly oppose the supply of
small arms and light weapons to non-State actors, in
particular. Small arms in the hands of such people have
been the real weapons of mass destruction.
It is alarming that, as the direct result of more
than 250 armed conflicts and acts of violence recorded
over the past decade throughout the world, as reported
by the Secretary-General, nearly 55,000 people have
lost their lives every year and many thousands more
have been displaced from their areas of origin. Even
more alarming is the fact that, in many of these armed
conflicts, thousands of children have been recruited,
used sexually and forced to commit acts of violence.
The extensive availability of small arms and their
ammunition is a key facilitator of the destabilization
caused by armed conflicts, as well as organized
transnational crime and terrorism.
The trade and illicit flows of these weapons, which
fall too easily into the hands of criminal terrorists,
pirates and other armed groups, are the main cause
of the devastating situations prevailing in Syria, Iraq,
Libya, Yemen, Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic, among other countries. Corruption, theft and
the lack of appropriate mechanisms for the management
and control of weapons stockpiles, particularly in the
disarmament phase, have worsened the proliferation of

15-1395519/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

13/05/2015

and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition.

laws in conformity with the United Nations Programme
of Action.

We therefore welcome the entry into force in
December 2014 of the Arms Trade Treaty, which we
signed in September 2013. The Treaty constitutes a
global control system for the transfer of weapons,
including small arms and light weapons. The Treaty also
complements and consolidates other legal instruments,
namely, the United Nations Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition. In that
context, we also welcome the role of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and its International Tracing Instrument.
We would also like to highlight the role played by the
Regional Centres for Peace and Disarmament and by
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs in
the fight against the proliferation of illegal weapons, as
well as by other actors that have directly or indirectly
contributed to preventing weapons from falling into
the hands of non-State actors, rebel groups, criminal
organizations, pirates, terrorist groups and others.

With regard to international cooperation, Angola
is a member of two subregional organizations, namely,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Southern African Development Community,
both of which have programmes to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

As a country that experienced a devastating
civil was that lasted for more than 30 years, the
Government of Angola unequivocally supports all the
efforts of the United Nations and of the international
community with a view to preventing, combating and
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Following the adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty, considerable progress has been made in our
country with respect to legislative and administrative
procedures, including the passing of a new law on
private security companies that aims to restrict the
use of weapons of war by such companies, a review
of legislation on the use and possession of firearms,
including hunting and recreational arms, the enactment
of legislation on the registration and marking of weapons
and the implementation of changes in functional
regulation of arms and national police depositories
and stockpiles. However, that success would not have
been possible without the cooperation of civil society
and non-governmental organizations (NGO) such as
the Council of Christian Churches of Angola and the
action of some NGOs such as the Halo Trust, which is
dedicated to the destruction of obsolete weapons and
to mine-clearance. In addition to those activities, there
has been increased involvement, especially by young
people, in conferences, debates and other forums with
the goal of adopting and disseminating international
20/72

In conclusion, let me reiterate our attachment to
international instruments on arms control. We stand
ready to continue to work with you, Madam President,
and the other members of the Council in order to reach
agreement on a draft resolution that takes into account
the burning problem of the proliferation of small arms
to non-State actors, which have been at the centre of
many conflicts in the world, some of which are on the
agenda of the Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Prince
Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein and the President of the Côte
d’Ivoire chapter of the West Africa Action Network on
Small Arms, Mr. Karamoko Diakité, for their briefings.
We also appreciate the initiative of the Lithuanian
presidency in organizing this debate and in preparing
the concept note (S/2015/306).
Chile promotes disarmament in all its forms and
calls for an effective fight against the illicit trafficking
in arms and ammunition while framing such efforts
against the backdrop of a view on the human perspective
that is comprehensive and manifold and considers the
well-being of people to be the ultimate goal of such
efforts.
We support the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
We urge Member States to advance its implementation
by adopting legally binding instruments on marking,
tracing and illicit brokering. The Arms Trade Treaty
deserves special mention. Chile has signed the Treaty
and will soon to ratify it.
Our main concern is the impact of these weapons
on civilians in conflict zones. We must not forget that in
conflict situations the majority of deaths are the result
of the use of small arms and light weapons. In turn,
such weapons constitute a serious threat to peace and
stability in pre- and post-conflict societies. Moreover,
15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

such weapons facilitate a broad range of human rights
violations, including murder, mutilation, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, enforced disappearance,
torture and forced recruitment of children by armed
groups. More violations and abuses of human rights
are committed with small arms and light weapons than
with any other weapon. The uncontrolled accumulation
and proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition have severe implications for human
development, peace and sustainable economic growth.
Armed violence erodes the social fabric, gives rise to
legal uncertainty, increases crime, produces political
instability and creates a climate of impunity.
This issue cuts across all issues on the agenda of
the Council. Therefore, the diversion of weapons to
non-State actors or unauthorized users — which are often
linked to terrorist groups and their support networks
and recruit and use children — the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, among other things, negatively impact
civilian populations in all regions. We therefore believe
it to be a priority to strengthen existing mechanisms
to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
Traceability is part of the whole system of exchange
of goods worldwide, and these weapons cannot be
excluded from registration mechanisms. In that context,
we call upon States to fulfil their responsibilities to
protect their populations against the devastating effects
of the illicit trade in small arms. We also emphasize the
role of the international community in that effort. We
believe that the work of the Security Council could be
enhanced by a frequent dialogue on the impact of the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons on
international security, based on the 2014 Arms Trade
Treaty.
The draft resolution being developed by the
Lithuanian presidency sets out clear progress since the
Council’s previous resolution on the matter, namely,
resolution 2117 (2003). Nonetheless, we believe that
it is important to recognize the impact of the illicit
transfer of small arms and ammunition to non-State
actors and unauthorized groups, an issue that must
be addressed given the harmful effects it can have
through the actions of non-State actors, which now
cross international borders and have a major impact on
the civilian populations of the affected regions and on
international peace and security.

S/PV.7442

In conclusion, we believe that the Council cannot
remain oblivious to the serious consequences that illicit
trafficking and unregulated trade in small arms and
light weapons have for civilian populations, including
children and women. While we commend the convening
of this meeting, therefore, we believe it is vital that the
Council continue to follow the issue very closely.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Lithuania.
Let me start by thanking the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his report on small arms and
light weapons (S/2015/289) underpinning today’s
discussion. I would also like to thank the United Nations
Commissioner for Human Rights for highlighting the
very important human dimension of the issue at hand,
and Mr. Karamoko Diakité for his personal testimony,
which provided an eye-opening perspective on the
real-life impact of small arms and light weapons.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union.
The subject of small arms and light weapons does
not often appear on the Security Council’s agenda,
and yet it is a matter of life and death every single
day for hundreds of thousands of people in conflictaffected zones, with civilians and in particular women,
children, refugees and the displaced facing increased
risks caused by the much too easy availability of such
arms. Deplorably, more than half a million people,
including 60,000 women and girls, die every year as a
result of the violence caused by small arms. Even very
basic daily tasks, such as fetching water from a remote
well, gathering wood for cooking and foraging for
food in war-ravaged areas, are fraught with increased
risks of being attacked, terrorized, robbed of meagre
belongings or raped at gunpoint. Children even as
young as pre-teens are recruited by force to become
soldiers and made to kill and maim with small arms in
order not to be killed themselves.
The World Bank estimates that more than
900 million small arms and light weapons are in
circulation globally, while the quantities of weapons
amassed by terrorists, armed groups and criminal
networks are almost impossible to assess. It is
undeniable that terrorists, other armed groups and
criminal networks have accumulated vast arsenals of
both light and heavy weapons by seizing them from
Government forces, diverting them from legal trade

15-1395521/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

and smuggling or tapping into civilian-owned stocks.
Illegal arms trading and smuggling support criminal
networks and finance terrorist activities, spreading
death, chaos and forced displacement as terrorist groups
expand their sway. The international community must
fundamentally and urgently address this threat, since
every day we spend arguing about concepts takes a
very real toll in human lives.
Since the last Council debate on small arms (see
S/PV.7036), we have seen some major advances made
in systematically addressing the illicit trade in small
arms. In December 2014, the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)
entered into force. To date, that landmark Treaty has
been signed by 130 Member States and ratified by 67.
We encourage all remaining States to accede to the
Treaty without delay and proceed with its ratification as
quickly as possible. Its scope includes small arms and
light weapons, and it will become an important tool for
countering the illicit trade in small arms and increasing
the transparency of their transfers. Most importantly, it
will help prevent arms falling into the hands of human
rights abusers and those who violate the rules of war.
It is vital that the international community, including
the Security Council, contribute to its effective
implementation.
In 2013, the Council adopted the landmark
resolution 2117 (2013), establishing a framework for
United Nations action on small arms-related issues. But
as new challenges emerge and conflicts proliferate, we
believe that it is urgent for this framework to be put into
practice through concrete measures that can translate
the Council’s efforts to tackle the devastating effects of
the illicit arms trade into more concrete action. Let me
focus on what we would like to see done.
First and foremost, the United Nations should never
lose sight of the fact that the fundamental aim of its
actions is the protection of human beings — human
lives. Behind every disarmament, demobilization and
reconciliation (DDR) programme there is a former
combatant with a gun who is out of work and has a
family to feed. Behind every security sector reform
programme there are civilians who have lost faith and
trust in the police and the army, because they are often
the same men who were just recently killing, raping
and torturing. Behind every direct victim of small arms
there are more who suffer the indirect consequences,
whether they are widows raising their families alone or
orphaned children roaming the streets, an easy prey for
child recruiters and human traffickers.

22/72

13/05/2015

Secondly, all the numerous tools at the disposal
of the United Nations — peacekeeping operations,
special political missions, country teams and sanctions
committees — should be further encouraged to work
as one in fighting the illicit arms trade. Peacekeeping
operations should share information with sanctions
panels and help to implement arms embargoes. All
traditional arms control measures, such as DDR and
security sector reform, should be part of integrated
strategies encompassing interventions aimed at
strengthening community security, managing conflict
and mitigating armed violence. No DDR effort or peace
and reconciliation process can be expected to succeed
when porous borders provide an endless supply of new
weapons.
Thirdly, the Council should be more open,
particularly
with
regard
to
arms
embargo
implementation, to involving neighbouring States and
regional actors and using open briefings to keep the
wider United Nations membership regularly informed
about the work of the Sanctions Committees.
Finally, the Council should contribute to the
effective implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty.
United Nations assistance to Member States in
developing transfer control systems and physical
security and stockpile management and preventing
diversion will be reinforced by universalization and
robust implementation of the Treaty. Furthermore, the
ATT reporting mechanism will result in the increased
transparency of small arms transfers and will become
a valuable source of information for United Nations
activities.
In that context, Lithuania has proposed the adoption
of a new Security Council resolution that would focus on
practical steps for preventing the illicit transfer of small
arms. The draft text contains significant additions to
resolution 2117 (2013), making it more action-oriented,
operational and systematic in tackling the issue of small
arms and light weapons and the risks and threats they
pose to those in conflict-affected zones. Over the past
week, we have held a series of intense consultations and
bilateral discussions with the fundamental goal in mind
of alleviating the damage, harm, suffering and loss that
small arms cause to civilian populations affected by
armed conflicts, and the devastation and barbarity of
armed, criminal and terrorist groups.
We believe that a consensus on quite a number
of important new elements has emerged as a result

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

of our work together. We urge delegations to build on
those elements of convergence and to continue their
exchanges in good faith and flexibility, but also with a
due sense of urgency, so that we can quickly conclude
negotiations on that important document. What I ask is
that we not throw the proverbial baby out with the bath
water. We can make a difference in the lives of those
women, girls, boys, elderly and displaced people who
often have no recourse or defences other than the resolve
and determination of the international community to
act on their behalf. We should and we must.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I would like to remind speakers that they should
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. As usual, delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the full
texts in writing and to deliver condensed versions in the
Chamber. I appeal to speakers to deliver their statements
at a normal speed so that proper interpretation can be
provided. And I would like to inform all concerned that
we will be carrying on this open debate right through
the lunch hour, as we have a significant number of
speakers.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Minister for
Direction of Arms Control of the Ministry of Interior
and Police of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Rosa Chupany (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of the Government
of the Dominican Republic, I thank the United Nations
for permitting us to take part in this open debate. I
congratulate Lithuania on its outstanding work in
presiding over the Security Council for the month of
May and commend the excellent subject chosen for this
high-level meeting. We would also like to salute the
representatives of those countries present for this timely
opportunity to reiterate our full support for the work,
results and actions achieved thanks to this agenda.
In order not to exceed my allotted time, I shall
abridge my statement and focus on a number of aspects
that are important to the Dominican Republic. An
extensive and detailed version of this statement will be
circulated to each Permanent Mission in the course of
the day.
The stockpiling and illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons are a scourge that affects and has

S/PV.7442

repercussions around the world. It is indisputable that
the excessive, brutal and uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons poses a serious threat
to international peace and security, human rights and
the social development of our countries. It affects the
most vulnerable and sensitive groups in our civilian
populations and has a devastating impact on human,
economic and social development. The spread of
these destabilizing weapons endangers the most
highly vulnerable groups in our societies, affecting
tranquillity, harmony, peace and peaceful coexistence.
It also interferes in the initiatives of the Dominican
Government to promote poverty eradication and
sustainable development.
In order to provide a picture of the scale of
the problem of small arms and light weapons in
the Dominican Republic, I should like to offer
the following statistics, whose numbers speak for
themselves. In 2012, our country had a population of
9,680,000 inhabitants and a crime rate of 23.4 per cent
per 100,000 inhabitants. In 2013, with a population
increase of 103,717 inhabitants, the crime rate dropped
to 20.3 per cent, or a decrease of 12 per cent, with
some 1,257 deaths by firearms. However, in 2014, with
a population increase of 98,806 inhabitants the crime
rate dropped to 18.3 per cent, or a decrease of 9 per
cent, with the number of deaths by firearms dropping
to 1,132, which is 125 fewer deaths compared to 2013
for a decrease of 10 per cent. These figures give an idea
of the efforts made by our authorities to fight crime and
control the use of firearms by civilians; these efforts
have paid off.
In the Dominican Republic, we are working
strenuously to control the acquisition of illegal weapons,
and we are implementing actions to effectively regulate
their trade and combat their illicit trafficking. In the
framework of these efforts, we underscore the most
important aspects. As background, I note that the
Dominican Republic does not manufacture firearms,
components or ammunition, and a ban on their
importation has been in place since 2006. We are
currently modernizing the law on the bearing and
ownership of firearms to meet international standards.
In 2012, at the initiative of our President, we established
a national weapons system, which is an advanced
technological platform that includes a ballistic and
biometrics laboratory. Since it was put it place, we have
captured 77,774 traces of ballistic and biometric data,
and we continue to make progress in that direction.

15-1395523/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

We have also undertaken the marking of weapons
and ammunition as another effective method of control.
Since the end of 2013, some 9,968 weapons have been
marked within the framework of a programme called
Promoting Firearms Marking in Latin America and the
Caribbean, in cooperation with the secretariat of the
Organization of American States. Joint operations have
been fruitful. In 2013, the authorities confiscated some
5,732 weapons. We are also constantly decommissioning
and destroying weapons. With the support of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, we
have destroyed some 8,000 firearms since 2012.
My country signed the Arms Trade Treaty on
3 June 2013 and ratified it on 5 June 2014, completing
the process within approximately a year and eight
months, which is proof of our commitment to fulfilling
the goals of the Treaty.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Dominican
Government, I would like to thank the Council for the
opportunity to participate in today’s important debate
and, as I said earlier in this statement, I reiterate the
Dominican Republic’s commitment to supporting all
initiatives that are launched in this area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the African Union.
Mr. António: First of all, I would like to thank the
delegation of Lithuania for organizing today’s open
debate and for giving us the opportunity to present the
African Union’s perspectives on the very important
question of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their comprehensive briefings. I thank my brother,
Mr. Karamoko Diakité, for the very profound and
moving testimony he offered on behalf of victims.
One of the major threats to peace and security in
Africa is the presence and continued proliferation of
small arms and light weapons (SALW). According to
2004 statistics, out of the approximately 500 million
illicit small arms and light weapons in circulation
worldwide at that time, more than 100 million were
in Africa. In the light of arms flows within and from
outside the continent, irresponsible trade and diversion,
porous borders between countries and the absence of
effective measures to control illicit proliferation, this
number is growing.

24/72

13/05/2015

Although they do not in themselves trigger
conflicts or cause the criminal or terrorist activities
in which they are used, the widescale availability,
accumulation and illicit flows of such weapons
contribute to the escalation of conflicts and serious
human rights violations, undermine peace agreements,
put peacekeepers and humanitarian workers at risk
and impede economic development, social stability,
democracy and good governance in post-conflict
settings. Furthermore, the destructive continued
existence of many non-State actors, including
insurgents, armed gang members, pirates and terrorists,
has been strengthened by the easy availability of these
weapons. We therefore support the position expressed
on this specific issue by the Permanent Representatives
of the three African non-permanent members of the
Security Council — Angola, Chad and Nigeria — and
we hope that the draft resolution under consideration by
the Council will adequately address the important issue
of non-State actors, especially since United Nations
reports have consistently corroborated this fact.
As already note by Mr. Diakité, it is indeed well
known that countless arms have flowed from Libya
into other North and West African countries as well
as the Middle East, fuelling conflicts, terrorism and
crime, and causing further instability. It has also been
reported that illegal small arms and light weapons from
Yemen have been flowing into Somalia, where they
are now boosting the terrorist activities of Al-Shabaab.
It should also be noted that, at the heart of the Arms
Trade Treaty, adopted after years of negotiations and
hard work by all Member States, lies the true desire of
all States to prevent the irresponsible trade in arms and
their diversion into the illicit sphere. The African Union
Common Position on an Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by
the Assembly of the African Union prior to the March
2013 United Nations Conference, called for a treaty that
explicitly prohibits the transfer of conventional weapons
to non-State actors. The principled position of the
African Union on this matter is therefore undisputable
and unwavering.
In the face of these challenges, the African Union
continues to press forward in its efforts aimed at
addressing the scourge of illicit small arms and light
weapons on the continent. In addition to its longstanding support for the different instruments adopted
within the United Nations framework, the African
Union has made significant progress over recent years
in establishing the mechanisms needed to control the

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

circulation, transfer and use of small arms and light
weapons in Africa. In that regard, the African Common
Position on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and
Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, also
known as the Bamako Declaration, which was adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity in December 2000, remains the
main policy document. In the Declaration, member
States undertook to identify, seize and destroy illicit
weapons. By so doing, the African Union succeeded
in bringing together the different regions to build
synergies and collaborate to address the issue through
the establishment, in 2008, of the AU-Regions Steering
Committee on Small Arms and Lights Weapons.
Charged with the task of coordinating the
implementation of continent-wide agreements related
to small arms and light weapons, as well as with
promoting the exchange of experiences and research
and data collection, the Steering Committee developed
the African Union Strategy on the Control of Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, which was adopted by
member State experts in September 2011.
Furthermore, with the support of the European
Union, the AU embarked in 2010 on a three-year project
on the fight against illicit firearms in Africa, managed
by the Regional Centre on Small Arms. That project was
renewed for a further three years in July 2013, thanks to
the substantial support of the European Union.
Currently, the African Union is working with
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany,
within the framework of it Group of Seven presidency,
on developing and launching a project focused on
enhancing physical security and stockpile management
in the Sahel region. Physical security and stockpile
management is an area in which substantial work needs
to be done and in which immediate gains can be made
to prevent the diversion to the illicit market of arms
procured for legitimate security needs.
Before concluding, allow me to stress that, for the
African Union, the problem of the illicit proliferation
of small arms and light weapons requires the
commitment of all States in order to achieve a holistic
and integrated solution through improved cooperation
and coordination, as well as by reinforcing capacities to
regulate compliance with all aspects, as provided for in
existing international and regional instruments.

S/PV.7442

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Lithuania on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate and for the
important role that country is playing in the Council
through you, Madam Ambassador. I would also like to
thank you for the illuminating concept note (S/2015/306,
annex) that is guiding today’s deliberations. In addition,
I wish to express our recognition to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein and to
Mr. Karamoko Diakité for their informative briefings,
including in particular the moving and clear statement
Mr. Diakité made this afternoon. Similarly, we thank the
Secretary-General for the valuable recommendations
he presented in his biennial report (S/2015/289).
Slightly less than two years ago, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2117 (2013), the first of
its kind, which sought to address the devastating
impact of small arms and light weapons, with a focus
on the repercussions of illicit transfers, destabilizing
accumulation and the improper use of small arms and
light weapons on international peace and security. The
resolution was an important step towards harnessing
international cooperation in arms control, including
through its provisions on improving the use of arms
embargoes and its recognition of the importance of the
Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), with the aim of reducing
human suffering. The Security Council, more than
any other international forum, has witnessed the high
cost in human life caused by the absence of a legally
binding instrument in that regard, which strengthens
the case for ensuring the Treaty’s full implementation
and universality.
The scourge of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons has grave consequences that impact
international peace and security, in particular with
respect to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
The illicit arms trade fuels armed violence and
insecurity and exacerbates criminality and gender-based
violence. The civilian population, especially women
and children, most often suffers the consequences.
Despite the peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations
and existing mechanisms to help States comply with
arms embargoes, the unregulated circulation of
small arms continues its alarming proliferation. That
situation is able to persist due to the lucrative illegal

15-1395525/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

market, inadequate regulation and the lack of controls,
including poor or minimal supervision of stockpiles.
Addressing that complex phenomenon requires a
focus supported by integrated policies that highlight
the role of international, regional and subregional
organizations. Moreover, within the United Nations,
even though the theme of small arms and light weapons
is amply addressed by the General Assembly, whose
leadership on the issue deserves recognition, the
Security Council too, inasmuch as this is a transectoral
phenomenon that impacts international peace and
security, should play an active and complementary
role in its areas of specific competence. For that
reason, we support the draft resolution on the matter,
which is based on resolution 2117 (2013) and which we
hope will be adopted soon. We would especially like
to stress the responsibility of States to protect their
civilian populations, and to emphasize that preventing
the proliferation of small arms should be part of that
commitment.
It is not enough to control the flow of arms. In that
regard, we welcome the specific focus on the flow of
illegal munitions in the Secretary-General’s report. We
agree with his recommendation to explore new ways to
combat the flow of illicit munitions, especially within
the context of arms embargoes. That could have an
immediate effect on armed violence; indeed, the report
recognizes that the true value of small arms “depends
on the uninterrupted supply of munitions”. While it is
true that the Arms Trade Treaty addresses munitions
and their parts and components, the latter are not
subject to the same degree of control as weapons and
are excluded from the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as its
follow-up mechanisms. As the Secretary-General’s
report recognizes, given that the searchability of
consumer products has evolved in other areas, whether
or not munitions are included in weapons regulations
appears to be more a matter of political will than to
reflect a technical or logistical problem that would
prevent it. Munitions are the essence of what makes
firearms lethal; their exclusion leaves our attention to
illicit traffic incomplete.
Moreover, the Secretary-General’s report also
refers to the fact that, in post-conflict periods,
criminal violence often replaces political violence,
which has long-term implications for those States.
While responsibility for establishing effective

26/72

13/05/2015

norms and controls over firearms redounds to those
sovereign States, it is important to bear in mind that
the challenges facing States emerging from conflict
generally reveal serious institutional defects that make
them particularly vulnerable to arms trafficking, which
is often linked, in the case of Latin America and other
countries in Africa and Asia, to drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General‘s recommendation on
the importance of ensuring that measures to collect
weapons and related activities should go hand in hand
with development programmes aimed at preventing and
reducing armed violence. Concerning the role of the
arms industry, we wish to reiterate that, while it may
prove useful to consider new technologies to improve
stockpile management and reduce the diversion of arms
to illicit markets, it would not be remiss to encourage
producer States to promote responsibility and the
full implementation of the relevant laws and norms.
Our common goal should be to put a halt to the overproduction of all weapons.
Firearms claim the lives of hundreds of thousands of
people each year, not to mention the related and indirect
damage. Given the high toll, we all must support and
improve the existing regulatory framework to ensure
maximum effectiveness of the Council’s response to
threats to international peace and security caused by
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
To prevent illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, we must strengthen our efforts and create
synergies among the various instruments in order have
coordinated mechanisms that reinforce our efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellencey Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
Herzegovia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We wish to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this important open debate, for continuing
Australia’s pioneering work on small arms and light
weapons in the Security Council in 2013 and for your
excellent concept note (S/2015/306, annex). We also

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
biennial report to the Security Council on small arms
and light weapons (S/2015/289), and in particular for
the 14 pertinent recommendations for consideration by
the Council.
We very much welcomed the adoption of resolution
2117 (2013). Small arms and light weapons are still
the most frequently used weapons in the majority of
recent armed conflicts. The consequences of the illicit
spread, widespread availability and trafficking in these
arms and ammunition remain a highly disturbing and
lasting problem, and thus a major challenge for the
international community. The many times the Security
Council has expressed its concerns over the threat to
peace and security arising from the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons since 2013 illustrate the scope of this
challenge. It also reflects the conviction that a specific
focus on adequate control of small arms and light
weapons is required if we want to effectively tackle
conflict and post-conflict settings. We therefore strongly
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the wide-ranging impact of the illicit circulation and
the misuse of these weapons needs to be consistently
addressed by the Security Council when considering
geographic and thematic issues on its agenda. The
wide range of the humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences of illicit Small arms and light weapons
and the serious threat that they pose to peace, safety,
security, stability and sustainable development at the
individual, local, national, regional and international
levels require a comprehensive and multidimensional
approach.
Resolution 2117 (2013) represented a major step
forward in international cooperation on the control of
these weapons by bringing together a wide range of
tools and actions for the Security Council, Member
States, United Nations entities and intergovernmental,
regional and subregional organizations to use in order
to prevent and combat the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of these weapons.
The European Union strategy to combat the illicit
accumulation and trafficking of these weapons and
their ammunition seeks to ensure that the EU’s security
policy and its development policy are consistent, and
to fully exploit the means available to it at multilateral
and regional levels to develop a comprehensive and
coherent approach that harnesses all forms of leverage
at our disposal. It is based on the recognition that human

S/PV.7442

security and human development are interdependent
and cover preventive and reactive measures.
Many issues are of key concern to us — many have
been singled out by Lithuania’s concept note and the
Secretary-General’s report. I would just like to mention
a few of them.
Among other things, we will continue to call for
the inclusion of ammunition as part of a comprehensive
approach to the control of small arms and light weapons.
Small arms and light weapons can be operated and
misused only if ammunition is available. Effective
controls therefore also need to include significant
efforts to regulate and control ammunition. The relevant
provisions of the United Nations Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trade in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition and the Arms
Trade Treaty are steps in the right direction, but further
measures are required by the international community
to deal with the issue of ammunition.
In order to effectively combat diversion and illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, marking,
tracing and systematic and appropriate record-keeping
are essential. Weapons need to be marked upon
production; import and existing stocks should also
be marked. The secure and effective management of
stockpiles is also central to curb the illicit spread of
these weapons, including the destruction of surplus. The
European Union regularly offers assistance to improve
the physical security and stockpile management of these
weapons. Limited such infrastructure leaves countries
especially vulnerable to the diversion of these weapons
when these are stored in small armouries in remote
locations, including in volatile border regions, and
during transfer. New mobile and flexible technologies
may offer solutions to effectively secure these weapons
in instances when the risk of diversion is at the highest.
The European Union will support such initiatives on
the use of such new technologies in order to concretely
demonstrate their potential.
It may remain essential to fully integrate the gender
perspective into all efforts at preventing and combating
the risk of the misuse, diversion and illicit circulation
of these weapons, so that the gender aspects of armed
violence are adequately addressed. They also require
the full and active participation of men and women.
We firmly believe that the Arms Trade Treaty, when
effectively and widely implemented, will make a major
contribution to more responsible and more transparent

15-1395527/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

international arms transfers. We therefore warmly
welcome the signatures and ratifications deposited
from all regions so far and call on all States that have
not yet done so to become signatories and State parties
to the Treaty. All member States of the European
Union are signatories of the Treaty, and so far 26 of
the 28 member States have ratified it. The remaining
ratifications are expected shortly. The European Union
assists a number of third countries in strengthening
their arms-transfer controls system in line with the
requirements of the Treaty. The European Union also
remains committed to providing, upon request, further
assistance to countries that have identified their needs
in their national systems in keeping with the obligations
of the Arms Trade Treaty.
We support the view that it is necessary to
integrate small arms and light-weapons-related issues
into the planning and when drafting or updating the
mandates of United Nations operations. The European
Union Foreign Affairs Council has also underlined the
importance of including these issues in the planning of
future EU civilian and military Common Security and
Defence Policy missions.
The diversion of small arms and light weapons
remains a tremendous problem in many parts of the
world. Poor weapon-security and management, leading
to leakages of such weapons to the illicit market, is
another area of great concern to us. In that context,
we believe that the international community still lacks
vital monitoring and diagnostic capacity, so that, in
many cases, we do not have sufficient information to
formulate effective policies against the diversion, illicit
spread and trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
To provide such information, the European Union
is funding the iTRACE project, which is providing
verified, on-the-ground data on illicit trade routes of
diverted and trafficked conventional weapons and
their ammunition. The project combines an extensive
programme of field investigations in today’s armed
conflicts, especially in Africa and the Middle East,
and documents identified illicit weapons in sight site
with a global, public access weapon-tracking database
on individual and diverted or trafficked weapons.
It seeks to provide new insights into the diversion
patterns. It is thus also very relevant for the work of
the Security Council sanctions groups and a number of
United Nations missions, and can make a contribution
to making the implementation of arms embargoes
more effective. The iTRACE project also specifically
aims to support the implementation of the Arms Trade
28/72

13/05/2015

Treaty by assisting national export-control authorities
in detecting relevant diversion activities.
We also wish to echo the Secretary-General’s
call that States should make full use of INTERPOL’s
Illicit Arms Records and Tracing Management System
(iARMS), which provides a common global platform
for facilitating information exchange and investigative
cooperation. It is an integral part of the international
strategy and operational framework to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and is funded by
the European Union. We welcome the fact that iARMS
is being used by law enforcement agencies in more and
more States, and that it has already recorded its first
operational success.
In conclusion, we are confident that the Security
Council will continue to pay special attention to small
arms and light weapons issues in its agenda, and call on
all States to do their utmost to contribute to the fight
against this scourge. We will continue to play our part
in this common endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this open debate on the human cost of
the illicit transfer, destablilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons. The issue is
of the utmost importance in the current context and
underscores how the challenges to peace and security
of nations are closely linked to illicit arms trafficking. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the West Africa Action Network on Small Arms for
their briefings and reports.
For many years, Colombia has suffered the
terrible impact that the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons has not only on the life and security
of individuals but on a country’s stability and
development prospects. Colombia is aware that illicit
arms trafficking is a phenomenon that does not respect
borders and that is related to the world drug problem,
transnational organized crime, terrorism and violations
of human rights. Accordingly, the phenomenon should
be approached from a broad, multilateral and holistic
perspective. That is why Colombia has actively
participated in all efforts to ensure that this issue is
addressed in multilateral forums. For example, in the
late 1980s we began to request, initially with a small

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

group of countries, that the issue of illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons be included on the
agenda of the General Assembly. The most important
development of that process was the approval of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects in July 2001. The Programme of
Action includes a vigorous process of review that has
made it possible to periodically evaluate and review its
implementation and propose the measures necessary to
ensure its continued relevance.
At the level of our hemisphere, we participated
in the negotiation of the Inter-American Convention
against the Manufacturing of and Illicit Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related
Materials, adopted in December 1997, and, until
recently, the only binding instrument on this issue.
Colombia also raised the issue of illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons in the Security Council.
During our presidency in August 2001, an open debate
(see S/PV.4362) was held during which a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2001/21) was approved. I would like
to highlight several elements of that statement.
First, the destabilizing accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, in addition to increasing the intensity and
duration of armed conflicts and thwarting efforts to
prevent armed conflict, poses a major obstacle to the
provision of humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, there is a need for effective national
regulations and controls concerning small arms and
light weapons, that is, arms-exporting countries
should exercise the highest degree of responsibility
with regard to transactions involving small arms and
light weapons. All countries have the responsibility
to prevent the illegal diversion and re-export of such
weapons so that the spread of legal weapons to illegal
markets is contained.
Thirdly, the Council welcomed the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.
By the same token, Colombia participated in the
most recent developments in this field — the Arms
Trade Treaty — and argued that small arms and light
weapons should be included in the Treaty and that
measures to prevent their diversion be defined. On
24 September 2013, the President of the Republic

S/PV.7442

signed the Arms Trade Treaty, having determined that
the Treaty is a useful and necessary tool to prevent
crimes such as the diversion and illicit trade in arms by
such unauthorized persons as terrorist groups, criminal
gangs and criminal organizations. At this time, my
country is in the process of ratifying the Treaty.
Also at the domestic level, my country, which
acknowledges the nefarious consequences of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
destabilizing impact of their use by unauthorized
actors, included in its Constitution article 223, which
states
“only the Government can introduce and
manufacture weapons, munitions and explosives.
No person shall possess or carry them without
permission from the competent authority.”
Since 2002, together with South Africa and Japan,
we have presented every year a draft resolution on
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
all its aspects, which underscores, in addition to
other elements, the need for States to intensify their
cooperation, build national capacities related to the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
and which urges all countries to fully implement the
Programme of Action.
In conclusion, allow me to mention that, while the
international community has over the past few decades
developed the instruments necessary to effectively
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, the economic benefits that derive from that
trade and the lack of political will to implement those
instruments have allowed the trade to remain a problem
of alarming magnitude, as many of the previous
speakers have noted. That is why we believe it is time
to act with a greater sense of humanity and to truly
commit to fulfilling our obligations, legal, political and
moral, and to move towards a world in which arms are
only used by the proper authorities to guarantee peace,
security and the safety of their citizens.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to
you, Madam President, for assuming the presidency
of the Council for this month, the professional manner
with which you are steering the Council’s deliberations,

15-1395529/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

and your initiative to devote this meeting to the human
cost of the illicit transfer, destablilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons. I would
also like to extend our thanks to Jordan for its wise
leadership of the Council last month. We also wish
to extend our thanks to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, as well as to
Mr. Diakité for their briefings to the Council.
The trafficking, proliferation and trade in small
arms and light weapons constitutes one of the alarming
situations that face societies and the international
community. Looking at the adverse consequences
of that phenomenon, which affects the security and
economies of States, victims of such weapons are
primarily civilians, the elderly, women and children.
That reality has no doubt led to the submission of
international resolutions, conventions and initiatives to
grapple with the illicit trade in all such weapons in all
their aspects.
In the current global environment, the international
community is at a decisive and delicate crossroads
given the crimes perpetrated by terrorist groups and
organized crime networks, and the exacerbation of
internal and regional crises. That makes it necessary for
us to cooperate, redouble our efforts and demonstrate
sincere political will to curb the indiscriminate
proliferation of small arms and light weapons (SALW)
and to prevent the illicit trade in those weapons, which
are no different from the weapons of mass destruction
in their disastrous consequences.
Iraq realizes the need for continuous and serious
work to counter both the phenomenon of the illicit trade
in SALW, as well as their adverse effect in many areas
and regions of the world, especially in the Middle East.
This threatens to undermine international peace and
security, victimizes people and destabilizes societies.
Iraq welcomed the relevant international conventions
that introduced monitoring measures to combat the
proliferation of these weapons. We accord special
attention to these weapons, for we suffer from their
use in the hands of the terrorist group Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria and other such groups that acquire
these weapons and use them to attack civilian and
military sites indiscriminately, destroy infrastructure
and educational services and burn libraries and cultural
heritage sites, thereby annihilating the civilization of
Mesopotamia.
In the light of this, the Security Council adopted
a number of resolutions to prevent that entity from
30/72

13/05/2015

continuing its crimes. I would like to take this
opportunity to call upon the Council to urge all States
to abide by their provisions by stopping the recruitment
and transit of terrorists, as well as ceasing to arm
and smuggle all these terrorist groups. Since 2013,
when the Security Council, in the course of an open
meeting (see S/PV.7036) at the margins of the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, tackled that matter
and adopted resolution 2117 (2013), the Government of
Iraq has adopted legislative and practical measures at
different levels to curb this grave phenomenon. This
has included acceding, on 23 May 2013, to the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking
in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, which supplements the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
to which Iraq acceded on 17 May 2008. We have also
drafted national legislation to curb the adverse effect
of these weapons, including gun silencers. We have
set up oversight mechanisms, modernized detection
and monitoring tools and improved storage facilities.
We are also finalizing our end-user certificate and are
disseminating it in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and the United Nations Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
We urge international partners to make further
efforts to build the capacities of developing countries
at their request. In that regard, we look forward to the
efforts of the pertinent organs of the United Nations.
We emphasize their important role in improving
the harmonization of States’ needs in line with their
relevant mandates.
We realize that raising cultural awareness among
citizens is very important in eliminating the adverse
effects of SALW. Our relevant institutions are
providing the necessary guidelines and information
to help alleviate the suffering caused by the use of
these weapons. They are also emphasizing the need for
exercising strong control over the SALW trade and its
production, as well as reporting to the authorities any
violations or detections of illicit military stockpiles.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize our
support for the efforts of the United Nations and all
international organizations concerned, in addition to
our support to international and regional initiatives
aimed at curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, their misuse and illegal transfer.

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): Let me join my
colleagues in thanking Lithuania for organizing
this timely debate and to congratulate you for the
excellent stewardship of this meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his biennial report on small arms
and light weapons (SALW) (S/2015/209) and for the
recommendations contained therein.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the elements set out in the new draft resolution. We look
forward to its adoption by the Council, thus building on
the provisions on resolution 2117 (2013) with a view to
assisting the countries affected by the illicit trade in
SALW.
While Romania fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, I would
like to briefly underline a couple of points of national
relevance.
The international community must continue to
mobilize and fight against the scourge of illicit SALW.
At the same time, we must also state that international
efforts to regular the trade in small arms and light
weapons are not aimed at constraining the rights of
States to defend themselves and to use small arms and
light weapons for legitimate purposes in a responsible
manner.
As Council members know, Romania is one of
the 64 States to have ratified the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), and we are firmly engaged in the ongoing
process aimed at ensuring its effective implementation
and universalization. My country strongly believes
that arms export control regimes are essential tools
for the maintenance of international and regional
peace and stability, as well as for enabling sustainable
development. Greater responsibility in transfers of
SALW is needed to ensure the effective prevention
of the destabilizing accumulation and misuse of such
weapons.
The Romanian policy on SALW is fully in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements on the issue and the goals
envisaged in the Arms Trade Treaty, the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, the International Instrument on Marking
and Tracing, the United Nations Protocol against the

S/PV.7442

Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, as well
as with the relevant initiatives of the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Wassenaar Arrangement.
In our view, internationally agreed regulations, as
well as regional agreements, should be implemented
and enforced at the national level in a timely and
comprehensive manner, in particular because these
instruments often facilitate the strengthening of
cooperation. In that regard and based on our experience,
the International Tracing Instrument has proved to be a
very useful and functional mechanism for exchanging
information between countries on tracing SALW in a
suitable and reliable manner.
Transparency in armaments is, in our view, a
substantial confidence-building measure that could
also help assess if an excessive or destabilizing
accumulation of arms is taking place. For Romania, the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms is a very
important practical tool, and we believe that such tools
could also be used for the effective implementation of
the ATT.
Aiming at the full and effective implementation
of arms embargoes established through Council
resolutions, our national export control agency has set
up a speedy mechanism for the enforcement of such
provisions. Our domestic law stipulates the direct
applicability of measures related to arms embargoes. I
assure the Council that efforts to continuously improve
inter-agency collaboration in order to adequately
implement such measures at the national level are not
spared.
More effective cooperation and cohesion should
also be pursued at the regional and international
levels, including within the United Nations system. For
example, national procedures have been developed in
order to warrant efficient cooperation with regional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), including through
facilitating coordination on specific documentation for
export controls. The ECOWAS Convention on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Material should be considered a successful
endeavour that addresses the illicit transfers of SALW
and their destabilizing accumulation and misuse. That
approach, we think, could be implemented in other
regions or subregions as well.

15-1395531/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

We acknowledge the significant efforts and the role
played by the United Nations agencies, as well as by
civil society organizations, in dealing with all aspects
related to preventing, combating and eradicating the
illicit trade in SALW. I would like therefore to recognize
today some of those actors, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research, the International Action
Network on Small Arms, Saferworld, International
Alert, Control Arms, Small Arms Survey and others.
They make a critical contribution to promoting public
understanding, public awareness and public support for
effective arms control policies.
Finally, I would like to underscore our call for the
further strengthening of international cooperation in
this field. It is the only way to develop an integrated
international approach to combat illicit transfers of
SALW. Cooperation is paramount to improving and
consolidating the international community’s reaction
against the illicit proliferation of SALW, especially
considering that the heavy cost of conflicts enabled by
irresponsible transfers of SALW is being increasingly
paid by innocent civilians, mostly women and children.
As Bertrand Russell said, “The only thing that
will redeem mankind is cooperation”. That is even true
so when working to ensure a safer world for future
generations, as we all try to do so here under this
beautiful roof.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
the Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this debate in an open format. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the President of the Côte d’Ivoire
chapter of the West Africa Action Network on Small
Arms for their briefings.
Brazil supports United Nations activities to combat
the risks associated with the uncontrolled spread of
small arms and light weapons and shares the concern
over the suffering and high number of casualties related
to those arms. In conflict and post-conflict situations,
small arms enhance insecurity and feed instability. The
illicit transfer, ready availability and misuse of small
arms and light weapons continue to pose a threat to
international peace and security in many parts of the
world. In discussing the issue in the Council, however,

32/72

13/05/2015

we should be mindful that there are no international
parameters to determine what constitutes destabilizing
accumulation. Brazil is of the view that States have
a legitimate right to self-defence, as provided for by
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, and to
produce, export, import and transfer small arms and
light weapons, while seeking to reduce overall military
spending and striving to prevent the illegal diversion
and re-export of small arms.
We should also clearly differentiate between the
problem of small arms and light weapons in conflict
and in non-conflict situations as a determinant of
whether a certain case falls within the purview of the
Security Council. We should not mix the concepts of
conflict and violence or blur the distinction between
threats to international peace and security and public
security issues. In the same vein, it is relevant not to
associate the negative impacts of small arms and light
weapons with poor or unstable regions of the world, as
they affect people throughout the world, in developing
and developed countries alike.
Questions related to the use of small arms and
light weapons, when not related to a specific conflict
situation, should be discussed in the General Assembly
and within the framework of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. Challenges posed by small arms and
light weapons should be dealt with by taking into
account the specific nature of each situation. The
Council should first and foremost emphasize greater
coordination among existing initiatives on the ground
and strengthen the capacity of national authorities to
better fulfil their responsibilities.
Practical measures to promote confidence in the
field of conventional weapons, such as the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the United
Nations Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military
Expenditures, play an important role in contributing
to the promotion of understanding, transparency and
cooperation among States and increased stability and
security. Also noteworthy is the recent entry into force
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) on 24 December 2014,
as highlighted by many previous speakers.
The ATT fosters the basic principle that enacting,
enforcing and strengthening export control systems
of conventional arms, including small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, parts and components,

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

are a shared responsibility of all States. We regret only
that the negotiations on the ATT could not result in
a clear prohibition on arms exports and transfers to
any non-State actor not authorized by the importing
State — a provision that would certainly contribute to
promoting the Council’s goals. While we hope that this
gap can be duly addressed in the future, we encourage
those States that have yet not done so, in particular
major producers and exporters, to sign the Arms Trade
Treaty, which is in the process of ratification by my
country, Brazil.
The importance of cooperation at the regional
and international levels in preventing, combatting and
eliminating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition cannot be overstated.
At the regional level, particularly within the framework
of the Union of South American Nations, Brazil and its
neighbours are progressively building confidence and
enhancing transparency in defence policies, including
information on military expenditures and conventional
arms. At the subregional level, a working group of the
Southern Common Market and associated States has,
since 2001, been promoting greater harmonization
of national legislation and the exchange of States’
experiences and information on combatting the illicit
trafficking of firearms, ammunition, explosives and
other related material. In addition, in September 2014
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States held in San Salvador the first meeting of the
working group on illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons.
Having chaired the Peacebuilding Commission
last year, Brazil is fully aware of the dangers that
insufficient small arms controls pose to States in
situations of fragility due to conflict and instability.
The uncontrolled spread of small arms increases the
risk of relapse into armed conflict and may hamper
development efforts, undermining prospects for
sustainable peace. The Council is right in placing a high
degree of importance on the processes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform. It is equally important that the Council take
a strong stance against the continued channelling of
weapons to zones of conflict, including those affected
by intense non-State activities. Nowhere are the tragic
effects of the flow of small arms and light weapons
more evident today than in Syria. Brazil renews its call
for the immediate halt in arms provision to all parties
in Syria.

S/PV.7442

While recognizing the immense toll that the
uncontrolled spread of small arms has exacted on peace
and security, Brazil regrets that the Council continues
to ignore the threat posed by the existence of a much
deadlier type of weapon, namely, nuclear weapons,
which are currently being discussed right next door to
us. Unfortunately, the Security Council has decided to
distance itself from any statement on the risks posed by
the lack of progress in nuclear disarmament, choosing
to concentrate only on non-proliferation. Reflection
by this body on the long-term, systemic impacts of the
failure to implement their disarmament commitments
on the part of the nuclear-weapon States is long overdue.
The Council’s Charter responsibilities with regard to
global peace and security mean that it cannot escape
the fact that nuclear weapons represent the single most
dangerous threat to the existence of humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I join others in thanking
Lithuania for organizing this important Security Council
meeting. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General and his team for his report
(S/2015/289) and the analysis and recommendations
contained therein. I would also like to align Slovenia
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union and add that we support the early
adoption of the draft resolution on the subject of small
arms prepared by the Lithuanian presidency.
The Secretary-General’s report identifies the
widespread availability of small arms and light
weapons as a key enabler of conflicts around the world.
Today, we are aware that the illicit trade in small arms
has a wide range of humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences that pose a serious threat to peace, safety,
security, stability and sustainable development in the
affected societies. In many cases, vulnerable social
groups­ — mainly women, girls and children — suffer
disproportionately owing to the attendant acts of
armed violence. The main reason for that is the illicit
trafficking in and, consequently, the wide availability
of small arms and light weapons.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights
the importance of the recent combined presence of
and linkages between transnational organized crime,
terrorism and violent extremism. In our view, today’s
debate should try to answer at least two fundamental
questions. First, what should we, the States Members

15-1395533/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

of the United Nations, do to improve the present, dire
situation, and secondly, what should the Security
Council and the United Nations do in that regard? The
Secretary-General’s report rightly outlines our key
task, one that we should undertake domestically. We
should include national export-control mechanisms and
stockpile management, ensure the physical protection
of arms and ammunition, notably of surplus stockpiles,
and adopt national practices aimed at the systematic
marking of small arms and light weapons, which should
enable the international tracing of those weapons.
In that context, I would mention the particular role
that we assign to dialogue with the armaments industry.
In most cases, the arms industry tries to behave as
all legitimate businesses do: they try to provide new
employment, invest in development and pay taxes. That
is especially important in times of social and economic
crisis, which we still witness. However, in our view, the
sensitization of and constant dialogue with the industry
is necessary. Producers need to take their share of
the responsibility and adopt so-called knowing-mycustomer policies. That is why Slovenia actively
supports the inclusion of industry representatives
among the participants in the first Conference of States
Parties of the Arms Trade Treaty, which is scheduled to
take place in late August in Mexico.
States that are in a position to do so should financially
support international projects relating to securitysector reform; the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of fighters; and the destruction of small
arms and light weapons. We encourage and would
like to commend the activities of Conflict Armament
Research, a non-governmental organization that is
implementing a project called iTrace, with the support
of the European Union. Member States should also
adopt proper legislation and, above all, ratify the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) and the United Nations Firearms
Protocol. The ATT is an important international
instrument that we have at our disposal. Unfortunately,
only 67 States have become parties to the Treaty. The
universalization of the ATT is an important task for our
generation. A universal and fully implemented ATT is
the first prerequisite for preventing the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. Slovenia counts on the
three main international producers of small arms and
light weapons to accede to the ATT as soon as possible.
Internationally, we should also do more to avoid
duplication, making use of the synergies among the
various existing international processes in the field of

34/72

13/05/2015

small arms and light weapons that take place within the
framework of the United Nations Arms Trade Treaty
and the United Nations Firearms Protocol. The first
opportunity for such a new approach will be the meeting
of the experts of the States participating in the review
process of the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will
take place in a few weeks here in New York.
That brings me to the second question. What can
the Security Council do to improve the situation? We
could not agree more with the proposal in the SecretaryGeneral’s report stating that more attention should be
paid to the various sanctions regimes and international
embargoes adopted by the Security Council and to
streamlining them effectively in their implementation.
We also support the proposal to widen the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions and add small
arms-related tasks.
In conclusion, I would like to underline Slovenia’s
commitment to doing more to prevent the illicit
international transfers of small arms and light weapons.
I have no doubt that other delegations share our
commitment. Now it is time for the Security Council
to act and start leading the way forward. It is not a
question of what we should do, but rather what should
be our priority. What we need is a strong commitment
and political will to start working together effectively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico would like to thank Lithuania for
convening this open debate and for its proposal to
have the Security Council identify synergies between
the work of the Council and the relevant instruments
aimed at preventing trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and at preventing their diversion to
non-authorized users. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on the issue under discussion today
(S/2015/289), and we urge Member States to analyse
the recommendations contained therein in order to
more systematically and effectively tackle the misuse,
diversion and illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons and their munitions as threats to international
peace and security.
The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) are the sole initiatives
adopted by the United Nations to address this problem.
We must redouble our efforts to foster synergies
between the relevant international instruments, because
all of them converge on the single challenge of ensuring
that the use of such instruments is supposed to promote
peace and security.
My delegation is concerned that the irresponsible
sale of and trafficking in small arms and light weapons
continues to take an alarming toll in civilian lives
around the world. This is a phenomenon that presents a
rather complex challenge, as its effects often result in
human-rights violations, destabilize societies, threaten
the rule of law, exacerbate and prolong armed conflicts,
and feed into transnational organized-crime activities.
Easy access to such weapons and their possession by
civilians without any limitations or effective controls
and the lack of adequate regulations have devastating
humanitarian consequences, particularly given their
impact on such vulnerable groups as women and
children.
The stockpiling of weapons for destabilizing
purposes is in itself a source of great concern in many
regions of the world, particularly those regions bearing
the heavy burden of armed violence. No less important
is the issue of the diversion of small arms and light
weapons for illicit purposes. That is a significant
challenge at the domestic level, and we believe it
essential that the membership of the Organization make
progress on strengthening our collective commitments
to eradicate this scourge. At the same time, the United
Nations should also do more to ensure the adoption
of concrete measures, including national measures, to
prevent violations of arms embargoes established by
the Security Council.
The most recent of our international instruments,
the Arms Trade Treaty, constitutes a historic
achievement. It is the first global effort to regulate the
trade in conventional weapons, including small arms
and light weapons, and to establish a legal framework
for accountability and transparency in international
arms transfers. To date, the Treaty has 130 signatures
and 67 ratifications, and my country will continue to
work to help it achieve universality. The Treaty’s recent
entry into force, less than two years after its adoption
by the General Assembly, is a clear demonstration of
the great support it has garnered.

S/PV.7442

It is for that reason and because of my Government’s
commitment to the consolidation of the international
regulation of the trade in conventional weapons
established by the ATT, that Mexico will chair the
discussions on the fundamental issues of the ATT and,
as I mentioned, will host the first Conference of States
Parties to the Treaty, to be held from 24 to 27 August.
We will continue to work openly, transparently and
inclusively, while taking into consideration the views
of the States parties and signatories to the Treaty, the
relevant international and regional organizations and the
representatives of industry and civil society. As Chair
of the Conference, Mexico will encourage inclusive
decision-making aimed at building the institutional
and procedural regime outlined in the Treaty in such
a way as to enable us to make progress in controlling
the conventional arms trade, with the two main goals
of fostering a responsible arms trade and preventing
the misuse of weapons or their diversion to the illicit
market.
My
delegation
recognizes
the
Council’s
determination, starting with its adoption of resolution
2117 (2013), to ensure that this issue receives systematic
and comprehensive attention in order to prevent
the armed conflicts on its agenda from worsening.
Diverting weapons and blocking their supply in
conflict and post-conflict situations are among the
main challenges that the international community has
to deal with, and we therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Council include
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
when considering the geographic and thematic issues
on its agenda. It is vital that the Council promote the
implementation of the arms embargoes that it imposes,
as well as the promotion and implementation of effective
programmes for collecting and registering weapons. In
that context, we believe that peacekeeping operations,
the panels of experts of the sanctions committees and
the other actors on the ground should step up their
coordination of efforts aimed at exchanging operational
information within the scope of their mandates, in order
to improve the monitoring and effective implementation
of sanctions.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity
to affirm Mexico’s support for women’s full and
meaningful participation in the policymaking, planning
and implementation relating to the fight against the
improper use and illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons, in line with the provisions of the relevant

15-1395535/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
I would first like to thank the Lithuanian presidency
of the Security Council for taking the initiative of
convening this important debate and of launching
a draft resolution to follow it up. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report
(S/2015/289) and his briefing today. And I would like
to acknowledge the important work of Member States
in implementing and developing the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, as well as that of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, UNICEF and other
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations in the field. In addition, I would like to
recognize the crime-prevention efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which make up a
critical complement to our work.
The theme of today’s debate could not be more
relevant and timely. As we have heard from many
other speakers, the illicit transfer and destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition are key drivers of
conflict, and thus continue to undermine international
peace and security. The human toll is disastrous.
The importance of mainstreaming the issue of small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition on the
Council’s agenda could not be more urgent. The same
goes for the arms-control-related findings of the highlevel review of United Nations sanctions, of which
Sweden is a sponsor. I would like to make four points.
First, we would like to see a sharper focus on
ammunition in discussions on small-arms issues.
Without ammunition, small arms and light weapons are
inoperable. While monitoring transfers of ammunition
may be difficult, it is essential if we want to prevent
the misuse of existing stocks of small arms. Reporting
must be encouraged. Mapping should be strengthened.
Tracking and traceability need to be improved.
Furthermore, we would like to see ammunition
included in the United Nations Programme of Action

36/72

13/05/2015

on Small Arms, and reporting on ammunition should
be fully included in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms.
Secondly, efforts to prevent the misuse and illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons, along
with the implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), are crucial to rebuilding peaceful societies.
We should make every effort to strengthen United
Nations peace-support operations and their mandates
with regard to small arms and stockpile security in
conflict and post-conflict areas. Poor stockpile security
constitutes a serious threat to peace and security, owing
to the risk of diversion. And tragic accidents involving
stockpiles of ammunition serve as reminders of the
immediate threat that they pose to physical security.
In that regard, international cooperation and assistance
are key. Increased coordination and local ownership
are crucial to getting results. We have seen that in
successful projects, such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Republic of Moldova and Kenya, where Sweden
and other donors and partner countries have worked in
close collaboration. Sweden will continue to promote
the development of agreed standards and best practices.
We will also continue to promote the use of technology
to improve the management and security of small arms
and ammunition, as well as to strengthen physical
and stockpile security, in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Thirdly, the use of weapons has different effects on
women and men, boys and girls. Research shows that
easily available small arms and light weapons increase
the levels of armed violence, which in turn increases the
levels of violence against women. However, the reality
is far more complex than the commonly held perception
that women are always on the receiving end of violence.
Young men are still the most common perpetrators, but
they are also more likely to become victims of armed
violence themselves. In that regard, it is vital to address
the male social roles that in many cases shape armed
violence. That will continue to be a priority for Sweden.
Without women’s full participation in combating
the misuse and illicit transfer of small arms, in line
with the agenda on the issue of women and peace
and security, effective and lasting results cannot be
achieved. Women’s participation has proved central
to sustainable peace and development. However, the
reality on the ground shows that there is considerable
scope for improvement. Of the 585 peace agreements
negotiated in the last two decades, only 92 include

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

references to women. During the same period, fewer
than 4 per cent of the signatories of peace agreements,
and less than 10 per cent of negotiators, were women.
However, that does not mean that women have not
been involved. They have been. Sweden will continue
to support women’s organizations, with a focus on
conflict and post-conflict settings, in cooperation with
civil society and through the United Nations.
For my final point, I would like to turn to a major
positive development. In regulating the international
trade in conventional arms and in helping to combat
the illicit trade in small arms, the Arms Trade Treaty
represents a giant step forward. The ATT’s success is
the result of the international community’s political
will and commitment. It shows that political support
can bridge traditional divides and lead to real progress,
and that tangible results can also be achieved when
national security interests are involved. Sweden has
long been an active participant in the Arms Trade Treaty
process, because we believe in it. The ATT remains
a political priority, and we will continue to play an
active role in supporting its effective universalization
and implementation. For Sweden, the ATT is also
important for the reason that it focuses on the potential
humanitarian consequences of the arms trade, and thus
on human security, which is at the core of Sweden’s
disarmament and non-proliferation policies. Moreover,
for the first time in a binding international instrument,
gender-based violence is included as a factor to be
considered.
I would like to conclude by referring to the words
of the Secretary-General on weapons and ammunition.
They are hardware, and, as such, they are physical
commodities on which we can take measurable action.
Weapons management is concrete in character, and
therefore warrants our unflagging attention. We can
take action, and we must take action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We congratulate Lithuania
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. We wish you every
success in carrying out your mandate, Madam.
We would like to commend the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
President of the Côte d’Ivoire chapter of the West Africa
Action Network on Small Arms for their briefings. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report on small

S/PV.7442

arms and light weapons issued on 27 April (S/2015/289),
which serves as the basis for our discussion today.
We take due note of the recommendations contained
therein.
Botswana welcomes today’s open debate, in the
hope that it will lead to concrete recommendations that
will significantly contribute to an improvement in the
state of human security at the regional, subregional and
international levels. Discussions on this subject matter
are vital if we are to debate key related issues and better
facilitate responses to the challenges posed by the illicit
movement of small arms and light weapons. In that
context, we reiterate the importance of implementing
the provisions of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, resolution 2117 (2013), adopted by the Security
Council in September 2013, and all other resolutions
adopted under this agenda item.
The achievement of peace and security is of
paramount importance to Botswana, and my delegation
believes that the ability of States to maintain safety
and stability is a precondition for the achievement of
sustained economic and social growth. As pointed out
in the report of the Secretary-General,
“Countries suffering from sustained levels of
armed conflict or violence are also those furthest
from reaching their Millennium Development Goal
targets.” (S/2015/289, para. 31)
In that light, we believe that sustainable development
is possible only when the environment is free of crime
and violence. It is for that reason that we remain deeply
concerned about the uncontrolled manufacture, transfer
and circulation of small arms and light weapons across
the world, including in my own region, Africa.
There is no doubt that the very presence of those
weapons creates tensions in communities that often
result in eruptions of conflict in one form or another;
innocent civilians, especially women and children,
often fall victim to torture, rape and other forms
of sexual exploitation. What is disheartening is the
fact that the perpetrators of those crimes continue to
undermine international humanitarian law and human
rights law through their violations of the rights of
innocent people, and they are seldom held accountable
for those violations.

15-1395537/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

Like all countries, Botswana is also experiencing
problems related to the illicit circulation of small
arms, which has led to an increase in criminal activity
involving the use of such weapons. The problem is
exacerbated by long porous borders, particularly in
Southern Africa. We believe that the destruction of
surplus, seized, collected, confiscated and forfeited
weapons and ammunition is a starting point for reducing
the weapons stockpiles available for illicit circulation,
thereby reducing the burden of managing unnecessary
stockpiles.
The highly destabilizing effect of such weapons
compels us, as responsible members of the international
community, to exercise great vigilance with a view to
ending their illegal trade. In an effort to address that
phenomenon, Botswana has entered into bilateral
framework agreements with neighbouring countries,
through which we cooperate on issues of cross-border
crime, regional security and information exchange. I am
pleased to note that the joint cooperation agreements
among our law enforcement agencies have proved
critical to promoting regional stability and providing
for the security of our citizens.
The Security Council’s deployment of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions in war-torn
countries around the world is truly commendable. The
expansion of those missions in the last decade shows
just how instrumental they are in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Strengthening
military and police capabilities on the ground is also
vital for a rapid response when conflicts break out.
I would like to conclude by assuring the Council
of Botswana’s continued cooperation as we continue
to take stock of the status of the implementation
of programmes and to identify new challenges and
solutions so as to close the gaps that exist in arms
control. Peace and security, and ensuring that levels of
crime remain low, especially gun-related crime, remain
critical. There is no way that our peoples can enjoy
a better quality of life if they live in a world that is
riddled with violent crime and where small arms and
light weapons are easily available. Let us all unite and
work together to realize a vision of a safer world, for
our own sake and for that of future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s timely

38/72

13/05/2015

and important debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his thoughtful briefing to guide
our deliberations.
The negative consequences of the misuse of
arms — small, light or heavy — are well known
and amply documented, as are factors such as illicit
trade, brokering, diversion, lax regulations and the
weak management of weapons stockpiles. Every day,
innocent people, including women and children, fall
victim to the murderous designs of terrorists, criminals
and insurgents using such weapons. Peacekeepers,
police and security forces bear the brunt of that reality
in the line of duty. Such lethal instruments of violence
are widely available, inexpensive and easy to transport
and to conceal.
We concur that such arms are major enablers of
criminal violence and conflict. The nexus between
organized crime, drug trafficking and the illegal arms
trade adds a layer of complexity to an already daunting
challenge. The United Nations Programme of Action
on Small Arms, the International Tracing Instrument
and the Firearms Protocol provide solid normative
frameworks for addressing the use, regulation and
impact of such weapons. All States need to intensify
efforts to fully implement those mechanisms.
The Arms Trade Treaty has set global benchmarks
for regulating the transfer of those arms. We hope that
the Treaty is enabled by its States parties to achieve the
goals enshrined in it.
For developing countries, particularly in Africa,
the role of international assistance and cooperation is
critical. It is the principal enabler of global, regional and
national efforts to regulate and prevent the use of such
weapons. We therefore call for stronger commitments
from the international community to mobilize resources
to that end.
The regulation of arms, including through enhanced
controls and improved standards for their transfer, is
essential. The enforcement of arms embargoes imposed
by the Security Council is also vital. Effective marking
and increased cooperation in the tracing of weapons are
also necessary.
However, such mechanisms focus primarily on
regulating the supply side of weapons. There is an
urgent need to develop mechanisms and mobilize the
political will to address the demand side. That means
dealing with unresolved disputes, the root causes of

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

conflicts, the breeding grounds for terrorism and the
factors behind the rise in organized crime.
The causes of war are even more important to
address than the instruments of war. In order to deal
with the growing and unacceptable human cost that
such weapons inflict, a comprehensive and integrated
approach is required. We wholeheartedly endorse
the Secretary-General’s call in his report for “a
multidimensional approach” (S/2015/289, para. 21) that
addresses arsenals and ammunition flows, legitimate
grievances, past and current human-rights violations
and the underlying drivers of conflict.
The current peacekeeping and peacebuilding
toolkit, while valuable and essential, needs to be
supplemented with more strategic and innovative
approaches to conflict prevention and resolution.
That means going beyond managing conflicts or their
manifestations and investing more in preventing and
resolving them. It is perhaps time to initiate a new debate
about the linkages between excessive production, trade
and the use of those arms and their impact on societies.
We know from historical experience that instituting
controls on trade and transfer cannot be separated from
motivations behind the production of arms.
Similarly, arms acquisition by States motivated
by security needs cannot be de-linked from their
production and sale, which is driven by profit and
politics. It remains a grim irony that weapons that propel
and sustain conflicts come from areas or regions that
themselves enjoy peace. Only four countries account
for two thirds of global arms exports, while developing
countries, mainly in the Middle East, Asia and Africa,
are major importers. We need to make the entire chain
of development, production, trade, transfer and the
impact of these arms part of the new global debate.
Pakistan has developed the necessary legislative,
regulatory, enforcement and institutional mechanisms
to regulate the sale, supply, import and transfer of
those arms. An inter-ministerial group addresses those
issues in an integrated manner. We have adopted policy
guidelines for the export of conventional arms and have
established mechanisms to regulate the trade, ownership
and use of these arms. We are also taking additional
measures, including in the areas of enforcement,
imports and licensing. We have regularly filed national
implementation reports on the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects that
outline national measures taken over the years.

S/PV.7442

Finally, the Council has addressed the issue of
small arms for many years in areas within its purview.
There are potential synergies that can be generated
between the Council and other processes led by the
General Assembly. Given the enormity and complexity
of small arms issues, it would be prudent to leverage
complementarities while being mindful of respective
mandates. We look forward to continuing the debate
during the meeting of governmental experts next month.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
small arms and light weapons. I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2015/289). I would also like to
express my sincere gratitude to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein and
Mr. Karamoko Diakité, President of the Côte d’Ivoire
chapter of the West Africa Action Network on Small
Arms, for their briefings.
Japan has been the lead country working on small
arms and light weapons since the 1990s. As is widely
known, Japan has been submitting draft resolutions on
small arms and light weapons to the First Committee
almost every year since 1995; every year since 2000,
they have been adopted by consensus.
After 20 years, we have witnessed the entry into
force of the Arms Trade Treaty, whose scope includes
small arms and light weapons. We congratulate all
those who worked towards that achievement and we
commend the continuous efforts of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs to reach that goal.
Japan will continue its steady efforts. Japan
submitted a working paper at the fifth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. Next month, the second Meeting of
Governmental Experts of the Programme of Action will
provide us with an important opportunity to implement
recommendations made at the fifth Biennial Meeting,
as well as to further efforts on small arms and light
weapons at the United Nations. We have submitted
a working paper and are determined to contribute
to the success of the second Meeting, in support of
Ambassador Vlad Lupan, its Chair-designate.

15-1395539/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the importance of preventing the illegal transfer or
diversion of small arms and light weapons. We have
been making great efforts with respect to tracing and
collecting such weapons. I am sure those efforts are our
priority. However, at the same time, preventing small
arms and light weapons from crossing national borders
and stopping the flow of such weapons is even more
important. I would like to give some examples that
demonstrate why.
In the 1990s, the world witnessed one ethnic
conflict after another on the Balkan Peninsula. The
flow of small arms and light weapons in the background
was massive. Small arms were sold in one post-conflict
area and flowed into the next. There ensued a sequence
of conflicts on the peninsula, from Slovenia to Croatia,
to Bosnia and Herzegovina and, finally, to Kosovo. The
transfer of small arms and light weapons turned existing
ethnic conflicts into armed and bloody ones, inflaming
feelings of hatred and vengeance among people. I was
appointed chief political officer of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in 1999. Under the leadership of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bernard Kouchner, UNMIK
cooperated with the NATO-led International Security
Force in Kosovo (KFOR) in the collection, and above
all, the border control of small arms and light weapons.
If the ethnic conflict in Kosovo did not produce
repercussions on neighbouring countries at that time,
it is because of the efforts made by UNMIK and KFOR
to prevent the flow of small arms and light weapons
from Kosovo.
Mali is another example. After the bloody civil
war ended there in the late 1990s and early 2000s, the
Government of Mali was very focused on the issue of
small arms and light weapons and cooperated with
the United Nations Development Programme on the
collection and destruction of such weapons. Those
efforts minimized the risk of the escalation of local
conflicts at that time. Unfortunately, however, the
collapse of the Al-Qadhafi regime in Libya in 2011
resulted in a tremendous outflow — we can even call it a
tsunami — of small arms and light weapons from Libya
to countries in the Sahel region, including Mali, and
worsened the conflict there. Affected by that tsunami
from Libya, Mali experienced a large-scale conflict that
risked dividing the whole nation. That situation was
also noted this morning in the briefing by Mr. Diakité.
We recognize the difficulty of controlling national
borders in areas such as the Sahel. Nevertheless, the
40/72

13/05/2015

tragic experience of Mali shows the importance of
carefully monitoring the flow of small arms and light
weapons and of regulating the international trade in
such weapons.
Finally, I would like to underline the importance
of implementing on the ground the decisions taken
here in New York. We must strengthen efforts in the
field. In that regard, the role and capacity-building of
peacekeeping operations is essential. Japan has been
providing support to countries affected by the diversion
of small arms and light weapons through concrete
programmes, such as its support for the Kofi Annan
International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Ghana.
Japan also provided financial support for the collection
of small arms and light weapons and a capacity-building
programme in Côte d’Ivoire. We hope other countries
will follow suit.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Japan has led
international efforts on small arms and light weapons
and is determined to continue doing so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I also thank you
and the other speakers for drawing attention to the
scourge of illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
which takes a heavy human toll in death and suffering,
especially among women and children, while derailing
development and destabilizing societies.
In addition, small arms and light weapons sustain
conflicts, exacerbate armed violence and aid terrorists
and armed groups and national organized crime
networks engaged in trafficking human beings, drugs
and precious national resources. As a member-observer
of the African Union, Kazakhstan notes with great
concern the adverse consequences of illicit small arms
and light weapons transfers on innocent civilians. We
are ready to share best practices with countries of the
African continent in implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. It is only through effective vigilance with
regard to these small but deadly weapons that we can
reduce human insecurity and provide for humanitarian
access and the safety of humanitarian personnel. The
havoc caused by the misuse of small arms and light
weapons destroys the social fabric of communities

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

and creates flows of refugees and internally displaced
persons, thereby pushing families into poverty and
increasing the risk of disease and shortages of food and
water.
My country stands for conflict prevention, postconflict recovery, reconstruction and development for
war-torn countries in the transformative post-2015
phase. The protection of civilians is also of the utmost
significance.
Kazakhstan is also committed to the stability of
Afghanistan, our neighbouring country, following the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force after 14 years. With a view to preventing the
smuggling of arms and narcotic drugs, we pioneered
the establishment of the Islamic Organization for
Food Security within the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) and established the headquarters of
that body in our capital city of Astana.
The recent proposal to host in Almaty the
new United Nations regional hub would promote
sustainable development, humanitarian assistance,
disaster-risk reduction and building resilience. The
hub would oversee the successful implementation
of arms embargoes and regional small arms-related
instruments, while strictly adhering to United Nations
sanctions, arms embargoes and other measures. That
cross-national effort demands well-coordinated United
Nations system-wide coherence, in close collaboration
with international and regional organizations, together
with academia, the media and civil society.
Furthermore, close collaboration between the work
of the Security Council and the Programme of Action
on Small Arms and Light Weapons at the international,
regional and national levels is of vital importance. The
scope of the Arms Trade Treaty, which entered into
force last December, encompasses small arms and
light weapons and contributes to our effectiveness in
increasing transparency with regard to transfers of
small arms and light weapons.
We also support the enhanced integration of small
arms-related challenges in the mandates of United
Nations peace operations, with trained personnel for
demilitarization, demobilization and rehabilitation
work, especially among child soldiers.
In our capacity as Chair of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), in 2010,
and of the OIC during 2010 and 2011 — as well as
through our ongoing activities with the Shanghai

S/PV.7442

Cooperation Organization, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and others
organizations — Kazakhstan is working relentlessly
to prevent the proliferation and circulation of such
illegal weapons. My country provides information
on a regular basis to the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and in connection with the OSCE
Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons, both
of which contribute to keeping the world safe. My
country and its neighbours have enacted strict national
legislation on exports control and the manufacture,
supply and transfer of small arms and light weapons.
Our Government has been increasingly successful in
uncovering crimes, as a result of which thousands of
small arms have been taken out of illegal circulation.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan stands ready to join in
the multilateral efforts to prevent the devastation of
human life caused by the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate Lithuania on its initiative to
hold this debate, a debate allowing us to reaffirm and
bolster the commitment on the Security Council, on the
basis of the Australian initiative and resolution 2117
(2013). Belgium also supports the idea of adopting a
new draft resolution based on objectives defined in the
concept note circulated by the Lithuanian presidency
(S/2015/306, annex). As the Secretary-General
underscores in his report,
“Each crisis or conflict dealt with by the Security
Council has its own characteristics.Yet,a key
common denominator in all issues on the Council’s
agenda is that availability, ownership and use of
weapons and ammunition significantly determine
the dynamics of the crisis.” (S/2015/289, para. 3)
Too often, civilians, especially women and
children, are the primary victims of armed violence and
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
availability of the latter is one of the factors that fuels
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict zones.
While the fight against the illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons cannot by itself resolve these
issues, it remains nevertheless an essential component
in a comprehensive approach.

15-1395541/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

Arms embargoes imposed by the Security Council
will be effective only if the violations of these
embargoes are detected and dealt with, bringing those
who breach them to justice. In this respect the sanctions
committees and their expert groups play an essential
role. Belgium therefore is in favour of including in the
mandates of the United Nations missions monitoring of
arms embargoes in close cooperation with the sanctions
committees and the relevant panels of experts — an
approach that is already reflected in resolution 2117
(2003) and in the conclusions of meetings held within
the framework of United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
The Secretary-General’s report referrs to positive
experiences of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
of the role played by the United Nations police units.
Last year, Belgium organized a seminar devoted to
the tracing and tracking of illicit weapons in conflict
zones, and we included the results of this seminar in our
contribution to the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The tracing of illicit weapons
in conflict zones can provide answers to the following
questions. Where do non-State actors obtain their
weapons and ammunition? Is there any unauthorized
re-exporting, and, if so, is the original supplier aware
of this? Who are the end-users, brokers and shippers
who present a heightened risk of diversion towards
conflict zones. Which Governments’ stockpiles are
sold on the black market and on what scale? Which
elements of the armed forces are possibly involved in
the diversion of weapons? Do weapons collected as part
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) effort later reappear on the black market?
The trademarks of the black market and the
diversion of small arms and light weapons that have been
made visible through tracing can be used to improve
efforts at controlling weapons. That information can
help exporting States in evaluating the risk of diversion
before issuing export licenses and to reduce these risks
before and during the transfer of these weapons. All of
this is required by article 11 of the Arms Trade Treaty.
This information can also improve the effectiveness
of DDR operations as well as security sector reform
operations and the integrated management of borders
and better secure weapons stockpiles and arsenals.

42/72

13/05/2015

We support the inclusion of stockpile security, where
appropriate, in the mandates of United Nations missions.
All of those results can be achieved only through
cooperation and information-sharing. Information
on any illicit trafficking identified should therefore
be compiled and made accessible to the relevant
authorities. That sharing of information should take
place at the national, regional and international levels.
For that reason, the reports of the groups of experts are
essential to the achievement of that end. We also believe
that the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
has a role to play in extracting the relevant data from
those reports and in compiling it in the appropriate
databases.
Regional organizations and exchanges within
the framework of the Arms Trade Treaty, bilateral
notifications, the broader use of the INTERPOL Illicit
Arms Records and Tracing Management System and
non-governmental initiatives, such as the iTRACE
project run by Conflict Armament Research, can all
also contribute to the tracking and sharing of results.
In 2014, during the fifth Biennial Meeting of States
within the framework of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, States noted that technological developments
and the design of small arms and light weapons had had
an impact on the effectiveness of the marking, registry
and tracing of such weapons. They recognized the
challenges but also the potential of such developments.
Next month, governmental experts will meet at the
United Nations in order to ensure the effectiveness
in the future of the International Tracing Instrument.
The success of that meeting, which could provide input
into the 2018 Review Conference on the Programme of
Action will be very important in our continued fight
against the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. Belgium will contribute to those efforts on
the basis of a document that we have elaborated along
with Germany and other States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate. Given
your able stewardship, I am confident that you will
lead this body to successful and fruitful outcomes
in its deliberations. I also join others in thanking the

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings.
My delegation continues to believe that the full
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects is the only universal instrument available to us
to sufficiently address the theme that you have proposed
for the membership to consider today. In addition, we
trust that the recent entry into force of the Arms Trade
Treaty, which requires States to have effective national
arms-control systems, including legislation, will also
assist in that regard. We believe that the illicit trade
in such weapons exacerbates conflicts, crime and
terrorism, and undermines respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Such illicit trade has had devastating consequences in
that it leads to trafficking in humans, drugs and certain
natural resources.
South Africa fully shares the view presented in
your concept note (S/2015/306, annex), Madam, that
illicit transfers in small arms and light weapons are a
particularly acute problem in Africa, where we have
witnessed their recycling from earlier conflicts on our
continent. It is alarming to note that non-governmental
organizations have estimated the number of illicit small
arms in circulation at between 90 and 100 million, most
of which affect civilian populations, including innocent
women and girls. South Africa has consistently
advocated the need for the full implementation of two
types of small-arms and light-weapons disarmament
measures, namely, proper stockpile management
and effective disarmament measures in post-conflict
situations. Without sufficient controls over State-owned
small arms and light weapons, there is a serious risk of
their falling into the hands of armed groups, terrorists
and individuals with pure criminal intent. That hampers
our shared aim of attaining our development goals,
combating economic stagnation, addressing crippled
health-care systems and attaining lasting peace. It
is indeed an integral part of our collective effort to
accomplish our post-2015 development agenda.
My delegation shares the objective set out in today’s
concept note, namely, that of identifying the challenges
related to small arms and light weapons in United
Nations peace operations, and the need to integrate
small arms and light weapons into initial consultations
and issues relating to new operations and the updating
of an implementation mandate. That is closely related

S/PV.7442

to stockpile security, border management, recordkeeping, the tracing of illicit arms, as well as to the
disposal of surplus, surrendered or confiscated small
arms and light weapons through their destruction.
Effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes need to be integrated into
broader peacebuilding processes. Assisting States
to implement commitments under post-conflict
agreements to which they are party is key to such
processes and fundamental to achieving those goals.
Finally, my delegation wishes to highlight its belief
that international cooperation and assistance are among
the central pillars of our overall implementation efforts
relating to the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. That relates
not only to taking care of post-conflict peace measures,
but most importantly, to stockpile management, where
the risk of diversion remains a major potential concern.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): At the outset, I
would like to extend my warm congratulations to you,
Madam, on the accession of the Republic of Lithuania
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May, and to thank you for inviting me to participate
in this important debate devoted to the human cost
of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons.
We take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the theme of this open debate and the
recommendations contained therein (S/2015/289).
We share the view that the proliferation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons is one of the main
sources of the prolonged and exacerbated humanitarian
crises in Africa. Small arms and light weapons
continue to seriously undermine social and political
stability and economic development on the continent,
as they fuel conflicts by arming those that perpetrate
violence against innocent civilians and those charged
with the responsibility of protecting and upholding
law and order. Moreover, in an increasingly globalized
world, the geographical position of our continent leaves
it exposed to exploitation by transnational organized
crime, including trafficking in weapons, drugs and
persons.

15-1395543/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

The illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons represents one of the most serious challenges
to security and political stability in our countries, as
it affects critical areas of development. As a country
that overcame a devastating conflict 23 years ago, we
know only too well the dreadful consequences of the
unlawful access to and misuse of weapons of war on
human lives, security and development. Mozambique
therefore attaches great importance to forceful action
to prevent and combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, with its impact on human life. As
such, Mozambique welcomes the Geneva Declaration
on Armed Violence and Development, particularly
its focus on the multidimensional nexus between
development, peace and security.
Recognizing that challenge, the Government
of Mozambique has enacted Decree No. 08/2007
on firearms and explosives, aimed at reducing the
circulation, possession and utilization of firearms and
ammunition by non-State actors. The law also creates
bureaucratic barriers that restrict access to firearms
and ammunition, as well as sets up control mechanisms
for firearms possessed by ordinary citizens for various
purposes.
Apart from the legal reforms, the Government of
Mozambique has been closely working with civil society
organizations in the framework of the Interministerial
Committee for the Prevention, Combat and Eradication
of Illicit Trafficking in Small Arms and Light Weapons.
This governmental body has been playing a critical
role in reducing the circulation of firearms through
awareness campaigns aiming to identify, seize and
destroy obsolete firearms from the 16-year conflict that
ended in 1992.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is one of the most serious transnational organized
crimes affecting various countries at the same time.
We strongly believe that the fight against this threat
requires a common and shared responsibility among all
Member States and international organizations whose
responsibility is to curb the usage of firearms and
their leakage into the hands that use them for criminal
purposes. In that regard, Mozambique continues to
be engaged in regional and international efforts to
mitigate the negative consequences of firearms in
global development. One such important instrument is
the implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit

44/72

13/05/2015

Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.
Furthermore, Mozambique has signed and started
the national process of ratification of the Arms Trade
Treaty. We strongly believe that this global regulatory
framework will complement the ongoing actions under
the Plan of Action, contributing to enhanced control of
the import, export, transit, transfer and use of arms.
We would therefore like to strongly recommend that all
Members do their best in order to continue ratifying
this important instrument for the benefit of global
security and the safe and lawful circulation of firearms.
In 2006, through the Geneva Declaration,
and inspired by the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), we agreed to “strive to
achieve, by 2015, measurable reductions in the global
burden of armed violence and tangible improvements in
human security worldwide”. As we are rushing towards
the finishing line of the MDGs and we are deeply
engaged in the preparation of the post-2015 development
agenda, we take this opportunity to recommend that the
elimination of armed violence and of small arms and
light weapons in the hands of non-State actors, among
other things, which aim to promote peace and security,
be consolidated as an integral cornerstone of the
sustainable economic development strategies within
the context of the noble goal of building and sustaining
peaceful societies.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
the commitment of Mozambique to the goals and
initiatives set out in the Geneva Declaration, as well as
in the Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. Mozambique also reaffirms its commitment
to the South African Development Community
Protocol on the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and
Other Related Materials, in particular when dealing
with armed violence, to strengthen community and
individual voluntary participation in arms control and
destruction across our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Let me begin by thanking you,
Madam President, for Lithuania’s able stewardship of
the Security Council this month and for holding this
very important debate, as more than half a million
people die every year as a result of the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

Last year, Israel was proud to sign the Arms Trade
Treaty. Israel supports the principles and goals of the
Treaty and believes it is an important step towards better
regulating the trade in arms and preventing weapons
from reaching terrorist groups and rogue actors. Israel
has passed significant pieces of legislation to guide its
own robust export-control system.
In the Middle East, the illicit trafficking in small
arms is a big problem. Small arms are the weapons
of choice for terrorists who seek to spread fear and
undermine stability. For years Iran has destabilized
and radicalized the Middle East. In recent years it has
also intensified its campaign to smuggle weapons to
its terrorist proxies, including the Houthis in Yemen,
Shiite militias in Iraq, Hizbullah in Lebanon and the
Syrian Golan and Hamas in Gaza.
Last summer, Hamas terrorists fired over 3,800
rockets and mortars from Gaza towards Israeli
civilian communities, an average of 1 projectile every
10 minutes. One of those mortars hit the home of Gila
and Doron Tragerman. Their four-year-old son, Daniel
was playing in the living room when the mortar shell
slammed into their house and killed the little boy. Two
days later, Ze’ev Etzion and Shahar Melamed from
Kibbutz Nirim were also killed by mortars fired by
terrorists in Gaza.
The grim reality is that small arms will continue to
take the lives of innocent civilians unless the Council
takes meaningful steps to enforce compliance with
sanctions and arms embargoes, particularly with regard
to Iran. The Iranian regime regularly transfers tons of
weapons and munitions to Hizbullah terrorists in blatant
violation of four Security Council resolutions — 1559
(2004), 1701 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1929 (2010). If
the international community continues to be missing
in action, those resolutions will continue to be dead on
arrival.
In Iraq, Syria, and Yemen, terrorists groups
have taken advantage of the chaos and instability to
raid unsecured weapons caches. After securing the
weapons, terrorist groups recruit and kidnap young
boys to fight their battles. In Yemen, for instance,
seven-year-old Hassan was recruited by Houthi rebels to
man checkpoints. Instead of learning to read and write,
Hassan’s only lessons are how to use his Kalashnikov
rifle. Like Hassan, countless young boys have been
forced to give up their childhoods to fight someone
else’s war. The next generation of children in our region

S/PV.7442

deserves a brighter future — a future without hate,
without conflict and without terror.
Every nation is threatened by the proliferation,
illegal transfer and misuse of small arms. Following
the downfall of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, armouries
brimming with assault rifles, grenades and surface-toair missiles were plundered by militants. Thousands
of Libya’s 20,000 surface-to-air missiles have fallen
into the hands of non-State actors and terrorists.
Similarly, the uncontrolled trafficking of shoulder-fired
missiles known as man-portable air-defence systems
(MANPADS), is of particular concern to Israel. In
2002, Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorists in Mombassa,
Kenya, fired two surface-to-air missiles at an Israel
Airlines plane. The missiles narrowly missed, but the
attack marked a turning point: terrorists were using
small arms to target civilian airliners.
In recent years, the Middle East has seen the
proliferation of thousands of MANPADS. Misleadingly
categorized as small arms and light weapons,
MANPADS have the potential to cause mass casualties
and undermine stability. The threat is very real and
demands the immediate attention of the international
community.
At this moment, as we speak, smuggling ships are
steaming across the high seas, cargo trucks are snaking
across mountain passes and small aircraft packed with
illegal weapons are flying low to avoid detection. The
mortars and missile launchers that they carry could
take dozens of innocent lives and spark the next major
conflict.
Terrorists and their backers depend on divisions in
the international community to keep their operations
afloat. No nation is free from responsibility, and
no nation can escape the consequences of inaction.
The Council must take a bold first step by holding
accountable those Member States that arm, train and
fund terrorists. The failure to act today will invite
disaster tomorrow.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Over the past 15 years, a broad range of instruments
and initiatives — national, regional and global — have
been developed to prevent the illicit transfer, the
destabilizing accumulation and the misuse of small
arms and light weapons. Given the immense negative

15-1395545/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

effects of these arms, the international community
must redouble its efforts in that regard. My statement
will focus on three challenges.
In order to comprehensively respond to the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons on peace,
security and development, a holistic approach that
takes into account both supply and demand for small
arms and light weapons is necessary.
On the demand side, addressing the nexus between
armed violence and development is particularly
important. In 2006, Switzerland, alongside the United
Nations Development Programme, launched the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development. The
113 States that support the initiative are dedicated to
developing measures to reduce armed violence in order
to enhance sustainable development at the global,
regional and national levels. The current goal of the
Geneva Declaration is to ensure that the experience
gained is firmly anchored in the post-2015 development
agenda.
On the supply side, lifecycle management of
Government-owned weapons and ammunition should
be improved. In that regard, existing instruments, such
as the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines
and the International Small Arms Control Standards,
play an important role. On the one hand, they contribute
to preventing the diversion of State-owned weapons and
ammunition to civilians, criminals or armed groups; on
the other, they mitigate the risk of unplanned explosions
at munition sites.
The humanitarian and security implications of
poorly managed ammunition stockpiles are highly
alarming. Measures at the international level lack
cohesiveness. Switzerland will therefore organize
an international meeting, to be held in Geneva in
November, to identify the possible next steps to improve
the safety and security of stockpiles of conventional
ammunition. Furthermore, efforts addressing the
supply side of small arms and light weapons are
particularly relevant in post-conflict situations. For
that reason, Switzerland fully supports the inclusion in
United Nations peacekeeping operations mandates of a
standardized approach to the life-cycle management of
small arms and light weapons, including ammunition.
My delegation welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General’s report on small arms and light
weapons (S/2015/289) recognizes the gendered nature
of armed violence. Switzerland takes gender-specific

46/72

13/05/2015

aspects into account in its programmes and projects
aimed at countering the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons.
Switzerland acknowledges the central role of
instruments such as the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
the International Tracing Instrument and the Firearms
Protocol. The entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) was a milestone. Only its universalization and
its thorough implementation can seriously tackle illicit
trafficking and the excessive accumulation of small
arms and light weapons. Switzerland is dedicated to
those goals and therefore supports, inter alia, capacitybuilding efforts and measures that promote the Treaty’s
universality. In order to maintain its commitment to the
Arms Trade Treaty and to contribute to its inclusive
and efficient implementation, Switzerland has offered
to host the ATT secretariat in Geneva.
In conclusion, Switzerland, like other States present
in the Chamber today, encourages the Security Council
to adopt a draft resolution that would strengthen the
principles set out in resolution 2117 (2013).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria is grateful to
Lithuania for convening this important and timely
meeting of the Security Council. The concept note
(S/2015/306, annex) prepared for this meeting clearly
delineates the problem and is highly useful for guiding
the discussion.
Austria fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The human cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons is indeed appalling. The problem transcends
national boundaries, making it absolutely imperative
for States to cooperate with each other in order to
effectively mitigate the situation. Austria’s position on
the issue is, of course, in full alignment with European
Union policies, based on the 13 January 2006 EU
strategy to combat illicit accumulation and trafficking
of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
For Austria, a chief concern around small arms
and light weapons has always been the impact of their
unauthorized spread on the humanitarian cause of the

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

protection of civilians in armed conflict. That concern
has been acknowledged by this very body. For instance,
in operative paragraph 29 of resolution 1894 (2009),
which Austria initiated, the Security Council noted:
“the excessive accumulation and destabilizing
effect of small arms and light weapons pose a
considerable impediment to the provision of
humanitarian assistance and have a potential
to exacerbate and prolong conflicts, endanger
civilians and undermine security and the confidence
required for a return to peace and stability”.
All exporters of small arms bear a particular
responsibility to promote the cause of effective small
arms and light weapons control nationally, notably by
implementing strict and effective export controls, as
well as at the international level. Therefore, Austria
is an active participant in the use of the important
international instruments in the area, such as the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, along with the concomitant
International Tracing Instrument; the Protocol against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the Wassenaar
Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional
Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies; and most
recently, the Arms Trade Treaty.
Hosting both the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, which assists States in the implementation of
the Firearms Protocol, and the Wassenaar Arrangement,
the Austrian capital Vienna has become a focal point of
international expertise on issues with a direct bearing
on small arms and light weapons control. Incidentally,
let me say that this is a strong point in favour of Vienna’s
current bid to accommodate the future secretariat of the
Arms Trade Treaty.
At the practical level, the Austrian Ministry of
Defence is currently engaged in a number of longterm assistance projects in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Moldova and Senegal. At the regional level, the
Austrian Ministry of Defence also supports a number
of respective activities in South-East Europe and East
Africa. These cooperation activities aim at capacitybuilding and knowledge transfer with regard to the
management of national stockpiles, based on the
International Small Arms Control Standards, as well as

S/PV.7442

on the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines
and on the reduction of surpluses of small arms and
light weapons and corresponding ammunition.
Austria is keenly aware that despite considerable
efforts at the national and international levels, the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons continue to pose a
serious threat to international peace and security. It is
therefore right to put the pressing issue on the agenda of
the Security Council. We call upon the members of this
body to use this debate as an impulse for further work,
which is urgently needed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I would like to thank
Lithuania for organizing this very timely and important
debate on small arms and light weapons.
Just as the spread of small arms and light weapons
tends to promote conflict, any effort to curb their
proliferation can significantly contribute to stability and
peacebuilding. I would like to recognize the important
contribution of the Security Council to international
efforts on this matter, including the adoption of the
crucial resolution 2117 (2013). We also hope for the
successful outcome of the Council’s deliberations
concerning a new draft resolution under the Lithuanian
presidency.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union, but allow
me to share a few remarks in my national capacity.
As mentioned earlier, small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition remain a phenomenon
that both ignites and sustains violent conflicts and
organized crime within communities. Their excessive
accumulation has a wide range of humanitarian and
socioeconomic consequences in many countries and
regions of the world. More than ever before, it is the
civilian population that bears the brunt of armed
conflict and organized crime in which the majority
of the human cost is caused by the use of small arms.
Small arms also facilitate a vast spectrum of human
rights abuses, including gender-based violence.
The problem of small arms and light weapons
remains a very complex issue as the international
community continues to develop appropriate policy
responses at the global level. The 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate

15-1395547/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects laid the foundation for action countering
the illicit trade and uncontrolled circulation of small
arms and light weapons at the national, regional and
global levels. I would like to emphasize the importance
that Slovakia attaches to the continued and full
implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action and to the outcome document of the fifth
Biennial Meeting of States.
All States should enhance their efforts to build
national capacity for their effective implementation of
the Programme of Action. International cooperation
and assistance remain essential and complementary to
national implementation efforts, as well as to those at
the regional and subregional levels. I would also like to
highlight the importance of improving the management
of stockpiles of small arms and light weapons,
particularly in conflict and post-conflict areas, and the
need to look further into the impact of new technologies
on the manufacture, design and storage of weapons.
We call upon all States to implement the International
Tracing Instrument.
Upon its entry into force on 24 December 2014, the
Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) became a very significant
addition that complements and bolsters the existing
arsenal of international and regional efforts to address
the problems associated with irresponsible and illegal
small arms transfer and small arms proliferation.
Slovakia ratified the Treaty in April 2014, and we are
happy to see the growing number of ATT signatures and
ratifications. We strongly advocate universal adherence
to and full implementation of the ATT.
Key aspects of efforts to prevent the outbreak or
resumption of violent conflict fueled by the uncontrolled
spread of small arms include enhancing border control
to prevent illicit trafficking, placing control of armed
forces in the hands of legitimate State authorities, and
establishing an inclusive, democratic, political, fair and
transparent judicial mechanism. To be effective, such
measures must go hand in hand with enhancing general
security, and that requires reforming the police and
armed forces and introducing mechanisms to promote
reconciliation and accountability for human rights
abuses.
This brings me to security sector reform. Security
sector reform has become central to the work of the
United Nations in reducing violence, addressing
transnational organized crime, promoting human rights

48/72

13/05/2015

and contributing to overall stability. By unanimously
adopting resolution 2151 (2014), the Security Council
underscored the importance of security sector reform
in stabilizing countries recovering from conflict. In
order to implement resolution 2151 (2014), it will be
important to ensure the integration of security sector
reform into peace processes, national reconciliation
frameworks and other political platforms.
It is imperative to ensure that such efforts are linked
to political engagement that fosters national ownership
and commitment to the inclusiveness, responsiveness
and accountability of security forces. Furthermore,
mandates for security sector reform support have
increased dramatically in number and complexity
over the past seven years. The ongoing reviews of
peace operations and of the peacebuilding architecture
are critical in addressing the identified challenges
and laying the foundations for the implementation of
resolution 2151 (2014).
Slovakia will remain committed to that goal
and, as co-chair of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, it will pursue the implementation of
the resolution. Last but not least, as part of the overall
effort to strengthen the links between peace and
security, development and human rights, I would like to
highlight the importance of adequately promoting and
strengthening the aspects of the rule of law within the
post-2015 development agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We thank the Lithuanian
delegation for organizing this debate. We compliment
you, Madam, on the very useful concept note
(S/2015/306, annex) circulated earlier, and we also
thank the briefers from this morning. We note that
the Security Council had occasion to discuss this
issue in depth in 2013 when adopting resolution 2117
(2013). Given its cross-cutting nature, this issue is also
featured in numerous other resolutions and presidential
statements of the Council.
We must bear in mind that there is consensus within
the international community, as expressed in various
General Assembly resolutions, on the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects as the main framework for measures to
prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects. Nothing must

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

be done to detract from that process, which is inclusive,
universal and consensus-based.
India has supported the full implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action. We contributed
to the success of the second United Nations Conference
to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action, held in 2012, and to that
of subsequent biennial meetings. We look forward to
the third Review Conference in 2018. India shares the
concerns of the international community on the adverse
security, political, socioeconomic and humanitarian
impact in States affected by illicit transfers and the
diversion of small arms and light arms to terrorists,
illegal armed groups and unauthorized recipients.
Insecurity and instability spawned by cross-border
terrorism impact innocent civilians, particularly women
and children, and cause large-scale displacement. India
has been a victim of cross-border terrorism for decades.
In addition, there is a huge cost to the development
agenda within affected States and across regions.
The easy availability of such weapons in large
numbers and the easy access often provided by some
States as deliberate policy have been two of the main
reasons for the growth of terrorism in various parts
of the world. Of late, we note with concern the use of
such weapons against United Nations peacekeepers by
armed groups and terrorists. Diversion of such arms has
also been a major problem. The scourge of international
terrorism cannot be defeated if this trend continues.
The strict implementation of the arms embargo covered
under Security Council sanctions regimes, such as that
established by resolution 1267 (1999), is important in
that context.
The focus for international cooperation should
continue to be on the supply side of the equation, while
encouraging effective measures on the demand side,
which is under national jurisdictions. Various events
have sharpened the focus on some of the deficiencies
of the Arms Trade Treaty, deficiencies that India had
highlighted during the negotiations, in particular,
whether the Treaty could make any meaningful impact
on illicit trafficking in conventional arms and their
illicit use by terrorists and unlawful non-State actors.
In our view, these gaps in the Treaty weaken our ability
to address a major source of international instability.
India follows a policy of responsibility and restraint
in the export of conventional arms, including small
arms and light weapons. We have put in place an export

S/PV.7442

control system that is at par with international standards.
We implement all the obligations arising out of extant
Security Council resolutions on arms embargoes.
Let me reiterate my country’s firm commitment to
preventing the misuse of small arms and light weapons
and thereby continuing to contribute to the global fight
against terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Madam President, at the
outset, I would like to thank you for convening this
open debate and for your concept note (S/2015/306,
annex). We also thank the Secretary-General, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the President of the Cote d’Ivoire chapter of the
West Africa Action Network on Small Arms for their
respective contributions. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on small arms and light weapons
(S/2015/289). The report contains many useful
recommendations.
Illegal small arms and light weapons continue to
be the weapons of choice in stocking and sustaining
conflicts with a devastating impact in far too many
regions. The lack of a strong regulatory framework
on the arms trade, related weak border controls,
corruption, stock management tracing training and
the illegal diversion and use of small arms and light
weapons are vital challenges. As a strong supporter
of the three pillars of the responsibility to protect,
Indonesia remains deeply committed to continuing to
uphold this noble imperative in consonance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We also fully recognize that illegal small arms and
light weapons have disturbed the peace and well-being
of many societies and the proliferation of those weapons
exacerbates the challenges to the responsibility to
protect. More often than not, these weapons, coupled
with unresolved grievances, poverty, wide income
disparity, misgovernance, injustice and human rights
abuses by State and non-State actors result in a toxic
mix.
Terrorism, organized crime, drugs and human
trafficking, among other ills, flourish in such conditions.
Indonesia therefore stresses a comprehensive and wellsupported approach to tackling the menace of illicit
small arms and light weapons, in which States remain
responsible for regulating their legitimate arms trade, as
well as curbing and eliminating the possession and use

15-1395549/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

of illicit weapons. When they require assistance with
their capabilities related to the control of small arms
and light weapons, the United Nations and international
partners give them the help they need.
It is worrying that despite the fact that it is well
over a decade since the adoption of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat, and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, the illicit trade in and the use of small
arms and light weapons continue to imperil many
societies. Indonesia urges the relevant national actors to
do what is necessary, and calls for robust international
cooperation and assistance in implementing the
Programme of Action.
We note that the Arms Trade Treaty has entered
into force. Its merits notwithstanding, it is essential that
the legitimate interests of States that import and export
arms be considered equitably, and that the Treaty be
exploited in a transparent, non-discriminatory and
balanced way, and not so that some exporting States
can pursue particular political agendas.
The importance of nationally identified, nationally
prioritized and nationally owned disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security
sector reform in conflict-affected countries within
a framework of peacebuilding, peacemaking and
development cannot be emphasized enough. At the
same time, Governments, the United Nations and the
international community must also have zero tolerance
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights laws. We must work together to build a better
global culture that inculcates rights and responsibilities
and upholds the rule of law for everyone.
The proliferation of illegal weapons is both a driver
and a symptom of insecurity and instability. Effective
national efforts, with greater international support, will
help to produce good governance and justice and ensure
rights and benefits for citizens, raising the stakes for
everyone to strengthen peace. Such an environment,
with a greater emphasis on the peaceful and equitable
resolution of conflicts by the United Nations and States,
will help efforts to defeat illegal small arms and light
weapons and reduce the space in which such weapons
proliferate. Let us work together to help the affected
countries raise their capacities and resources, and
strengthen a global edifice based on rights and law that
can eliminate the diversion and use of these weapons.
For its part, Indonesia will continue to play its role in
that fight with full resolve.
50/72

13/05/2015

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to
congratulate Lithuania on its presidency of the Council
for this month. I am also grateful for the concept note
that has been circulated (S/2015/306, annex), which
we believe will guide our deliberations to a successful
conclusion. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their insightful presentations. My delegation
also takes note of the recommendations included in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/289).
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
continues to threaten peace, security and stability
in many countries and regions around the world,
particularly North Africa and the Sahel region. In every
aspect, the illicit trade in weapons and their misuse
constitute a real threat to peace and security at all
levels, national, regional and international. That trade
is also a source of supply and financing for terrorist
groups and organized crime and therefore an ongoing
concern for my country.
Algeria, which is directly affected by such criminal
activities, has continued to deploy every possible effort
all along its frontiers to curb the arms trafficking
by illegal cross-border networks that fuels terrorist
activities in the region. In addition to adapting its
existing national legislation and regulations, Algeria
has taken numerous steps to strengthen its operational
readiness to counteract the actions of criminal and
terrorist groups. In our proven commitment to regional
peace and security, we have made every effort to
contribute to peace processes in our immediate
environment, as well as within the regional groups we
belong to. At the Euro-Mediterranean level, between
the two rims of the Mediterranean Sea, Algeria is
working to foster a common understanding of security
issues and multi-dimensional cooperation, including
in combating illicit trading in small arms and light
weaponry.
Based on its national experience, Algeria reaffirms
that the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, along with
the International Tracing Instrument, are more relevant
than ever. We continue to emphasize the importance of
their full, balanced and effective implementation. We
would also like to stress that international cooperation
and assistance are essential to implementing those two
15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

instruments. Algeria has ratified several international
instruments relating to conventional weapons, as well
as to transnational organized crime and combating
terrorism. We would also like to stress the importance
of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. We
take this opportunity to announce that Algeria recently
ratified the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, as well as its Protocols I, III and IV.
Any form of violence against civilians, women
and children that results from the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons is unacceptable. Unfortunately,
statistics show that such violence continues to be
pervasive all over the world. It is therefore essential
that we intensify our efforts at all levels, particularly in
terms of prevention and awareness. Since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the United Nations has
adopted specific policy directives aimed at achieving
gender equality in peacekeeping operations. If we
are to further those policies, we should ensure that
the United Nations can advance the deployment of
women protection advisers and gender advisers in both
its peacekeeping and political missions, as well as in
humanitarian operations.
In our view, effectively combating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach based on
a combination of political, economic, military and
security factors. Algeria is in favour of a unified
strategy designed to deal with problems that are
prevalent in the Sahel, such as terrorism, transnational
organized crime, hostage-taking and drug trafficking.
We would like to emphasize that in pursuit of the goal
of contributing to international peace and security, all
measures aimed at combating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons should be undertaken in full
conformity the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including the right to self-determination of all
peoples, and taking into account the particular situation
of peoples under colonialism or other forms of alien
domination or foreign occupation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): Small arms and light
weapons fuel and sustain violent conflicts. We are
forced to witness that on a daily basis in crisis hotspots

S/PV.7442

around the globe. The illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons is a major cause of massive human
suffering that can take many forms: civilian casualties,
forced displacement or humanitarian crises. To reduce
this suffering, it is vital to implement a more effective
control of small arms and light weapons, embedded
into a robust framework of security sector reform and
the rule of law.
The draft resolution put forward by Lithuania and
the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/289)
contain many valuable ideas and recommendations.
Germany is ready to join forces with other Member
States to put these ideas into practice. Let me highlight
a few points.
First, the mandates of United Nations missions
should include appropriate, feasible and adaptable
control elements for small arms and light weapons. We
appreciate proposals to strengthen the implementation
of arms embargos, including those for better cooperation
among peacekeeping missions, sanctions committees
and expert panels. In this context, let me point out the
relevant results that the high-level review of United
Nations sanctions, which was sponsored by Australia,
Germany, Greece, Finland and Sweden, has identified.
Secondly, Germany has supported the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects since its inception. In the
Group of States Interested in Practical Disarmament
Measures, we facilitate the dialogue between countries
requesting assistance and potential donors.
Thirdly, Germany’s focus is on small arms and light
weapons activities in Africa. We chose the extended
Sahel region for a new pilot project on improving control
coordination together with the African Union, as part of
our Group of Seven (G-7) presidency. One main lesson
learned is that close cooperation and coordination
among the numerous national and international actors
are crucial.
Fourthly, the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) represents a
major success and has the potential to exert a significant
positive influence on small arms control globally.
It complements other regimes and draws a clear link
between the international arms trade and human rights
violations. Germany supports the implementation of the
ATT with several projects worldwide, including via the
United Nations Trust Facility Supporting Cooperation
on Arms Regulation.

15-1395551/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

Fifthly and lastly, small arms control policy and
regulations need to keep track of new technological
developments. The increasing use of new materials
poses a challenge to marking, registering and tracing,
as stipulated in the International Tracing Instrument
and the Firearms Protocol, possibly demanding
clarifications or amendments.
In conclusion, we have achieved a lot, but much
more still needs to be done to put an end to the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and its human cost. One of the several important
challenges pointed out is improved coordination
among Member States, international organizations
and non-governmental organizations. Germany pays
particular attention to this within the framework of
its current G-7 presidency and will continue to do so
during our presidency of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe next year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): While aligning myself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union, I would like to offer some remarks on
a national basis.
At the outset, I wish to express Italy’s sincere
appreciation to Lithuania for convening this debate and
all its efforts to ensure an effective follow-up to this
process. I would also like to reiterate Italy’s enduring
commitment to actively participating in multilateral
efforts aimed at curbing the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons (SALW), with particular reference to
multilateral forums.
This meeting on the human cost of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of such weapons
further underscores the vital importance of addressing
the problem, since small arms, light weapons and related
ammunition are fuelling current regional conflicts.
Resolution 2117 (2013), which we highly commend,
is but the most recent of many resolutions clearly
highlighting the threat posed by the destabilizing flow
of these weapons to peace and international security.
In that respect, it is worth recalling the regional
dimension of the problem, recognized as crucial from
the very beginning of the process. My country believes
that the countries of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe have progressively developed a
core of common understandings and best practices that
might be of great use in shaping consensus at the global

52/72

13/05/2015

level — hence, the pivotal role played by regional and
subregional organizations, as stressed in the same
resolution.
Furthermore, Italy welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2195 (2014) on the fight against transnational
threats, including terrorism, organized crime and the
trafficking of weapons. Such threats were recently
addressed by the Assistance Strategy Committee,
which, under the auspices of the Roma-Lyon Group
on Counterterrorism and Anti-Crime, adopted a West
Africa strategic assistance framework in November
2014. This strategic framework aims to better coordinate
donor assistance against serious and organized crime.
Italy is ready to contribute to this endeavour in the
framework of a regional conference with States and
regional organizations in the Sahel and other parts of
sub-Saharan Africa.
Africa is particularly affected by armed violence
fuelled by the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons. We have witnessed with great concern
that the proliferation of conventional arms stemming
from Libyan arsenals has largely contributed to the
destabilization of the wider region. One of the biggest
accumulation in recent times of small arms and light
weapons, as well as man-portable air defence system
stocks, is now occurring in Libya, which is estimated
to be the largest for a non-producing country in the
world. Arms originating from this country have been
identified throughout the region. The primary motive
for such stockpiling is business rather than use. The
illicit flow of weapons, drugs and migrants has indeed
clustered around certain hubs in Libya and is exerting
socioeconomic effects, as well as security ones. Given
the cross-border nature of the accumulation of such
weapons and ammunition, Italy believes that the only
way forward is to secure arms, provide capacitybuilding to border guards and the police, and increase
regional cooperation. We stand ready to assist Libya,
as well as other African States, in implementing their
border security and weapons control capacity.
Italy has been active within the European Union
in elaborating ways of curbing the destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of SALW and their
ammunition. I can assure the Council that my country,
along with its European Union partners, will continue
to offer its cooperation to interested States, taking into
consideration the role of up-to-date technology and best
practices in physical security and stockpile management,
as well as in marking and tracing weapons. We indeed

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

S/PV.7442

consider the tracing of illicit SALW in conflict zones
to be a fundamental prerequisite for finding ways
to tackle the illicit flows of such weapons to areas
affected by armed conflict or instability. The patterns
of illicit trade and diversion that become visible through
tracing can be used to enhance the effectiveness of law
enforcement and arms control measures designed to
fight illicit proliferation.

would also like to express my delegation’s appreciation
to you for convening today’s open debate and providing
us with a detailed concept note (S/2015/306, annex) to
guide the debate. I am also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their detailed briefings on the matter.
I also wish to thank all the previous speakers for their
insightful remarks.

Moreover, greater clarity and uniformity are
required if we wish to effectively combat illicit
trafficking while not harming legal commercial
interests and legal trade, consistent with national and
international obligations. The Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) is in this regard a balanced and broad-based text,
the result of comprehensive and inclusive negotiations,
in which all Member States’ views have been reflected.
We believe that the Treaty has the potential to contribute
significantly to international peace and security by
regulating the international trade in conventional
arms, making it more responsible and transparent, and
eradicating illicit arms trafficking. Furthermore, the
inclusion of the prevention of gender-based violence in
the ATT can make a dramatic difference for women,
who are among the most vulnerable victims of armed
violence and conflicts.

My delegation has taken note with appreciation of
the Council’s continued attention to small arms and light
weapons as a threat to international peace and security
through its various resolutions, high-level meetings, the
Arms Trade Treaty of 2014 and other thematic efforts
to address the destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons, particularly during
armed conflict. In that regard, we wish to reiterate our
support for presidential statement S/PRST/2007/24 and
for resolution 2117 (2013) and its recommendations.
Kenya has taken important measures to fully implement
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons. My delegation looks forward
to participating fully in the United Nations Open-ended
Meeting of Governmental Experts on Small Arms and
light weapons in June 2015.

Finally, I wish to underline the importance of keeping
the process — national coordination activities, regional
seminars and United Nations conferences — open to the
participation of all potentially concerned constituencies.
Non-governmental organizations and private industries
are precious partners in our endeavour. Their active
presence in our meetings would provide us with
comments, analysis and proposals that are extremely
useful, as they lead us to consider relevant issues from
perspectives that are complementary to the ones of
national administrations. Ultimately, they remarkably
help us develop a more focused and comprehensive
understanding of the problems we are faced with and
their possible solutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Andambi (Kenya): Kenya aligns its statement
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
African Union.
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of May. I and applaud the manner
in which you have steered the Council as President. I

The effects of the availability and misuse of small
arms have long been felt throughout Kenyan society. By
virtue of its geographical location, Kenya has suffered
immensely from the effects of the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons, which have caused
monumental human suffering. This is evident from the
various terrorist attacks that have been witnessed in the
country in recent times. Similarly, unprecedented high
levels of illicit small arms and light weapons among
the pastoralist communities in northern parts of the
country have been associated with persistent insecurity
and such criminal activities as cattle rustling, poaching
and armed robberies.
Kenya continues to strengthen its policy and
legislative measures to address loopholes in the law
that make it difficult for the Government to deal with
insecurity. In 2014, we passed the Security Amendment
Act, which amends 22 pieces of legislation aimed at
enhancing the security of the country. The Firearms
Act is one of the pieces of legislation that was amended
to tighten controls on flows of small arms and light
weapons and the costs of non-compliance. However,
national policies alone will not suffice unless stability
in the Horn of Africa, particularly Somalia, is fully
restored. This informs Kenya’s deep involvement in

15-1395553/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

regional peace and stabilization efforts, including
being an integral part of the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia and the mediation effort for
South Sudan led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development.
My delegation recognizes that the proper
management of national stockpiles of small arms and
light weapons is essential to reducing the risk of the
diversion of weapons to the illicit trade — illegal
armed groups, including terrorist organizations.
Kenya continues to destroy recovered illicit weapons
in order to prevent the risk of diversion and is now
in the process of initiating the marking of civilianlicensed weapons. However, we strongly believes that
marking at the point of manufacture can have a huge
impact in improving the traceability of the weapons.
To strengthen the implementation of the International
Tracing Instrument, Kenya is taking measures to
improve national marking, equipment acquisition,
coordination, record keeping and training capacities of
entities involved in the interdiction of small arms and
light weapons.
Kenya is keen to foster regional cooperation with
its neighbours to reduce the continued transfer and
misuse of small arms and light weapons in the region,
particularly by criminal groups and other illegal armed
groups. In that respect, we are actively involved and
progressively cooperating with various United Nations
agencies, the Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, the East African Police Chiefs Cooperation
Organization, the East African Community and other
regional efforts and programmes to deal with the
menace, including stockpile management and tracing
programmes. My country has been at the forefront
of initiatives to enhance information exchanges and
intelligence-sharing with neighbouring States on illicit
activities and the actors involved. Similarly, Kenya
has been conducting maritime operations to curtail
trafficking in illicit small arms and light weapons.
Despite the measures taken and the achievements
highlighted, Kenya faces challenges in implementing
its national programme of action on small arms and
light weapons. Instability in Somalia and South Sudan,
and lately in Yemen, continues to pose the risk of
undermining current efforts. Kenya’s long and porous
borders with Somalia predisposes it to illicit inflows of
small arms and light weapons irrespective of current
efforts and initiatives to mark the deployed national
stockpiles. The country also has limited forensic and

54/72

13/05/2015

ballistic technological capacity to profile weapons,
which has impeded its ability to effectively monitor
the use of small arms and light weapons in criminal
activities.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council of my
delegation’s continued commitment to support the
implementation of measures and efforts to eradicate
the proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons,
for the best benefit of the global community and in the
interest of maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Paraguay.
Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2015/289), I also
thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
Mr. Karamoko Diakité from Côte d’Ivoire for their
respective briefings. On behalf of the Republic of
Paraguay, allow me also to congratulate you, Madam,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, making possible this open debate on an issue
that is currently of crucial importance to many societies
around the world.
For us, the fact that the Security Council has decided
to organize an open debate on this matter clearly indicates
that there is a need to complement and coordinate
efforts with initiatives being taken by Member States
in this high-level political decision-making forum, and
to link it with other, broader areas, such as the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.
The serious scourges that are devastating a number
of countries around the world — such as terrorism, drug
trafficking and organized crime, among others — are
closely linked to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Therefore, the mechanisms established under
the United Nations Programme of Action and other
complementary mechanisms are of crucial importance
in efforts to counter that threat in a timely manner and
to facilitate cooperation among States.
The biennial report of the Secretary-General
on small arms and light weapons (S/2015/289) is a
commendable effort to synthesize the joint efforts
taken by the international community to progressively
eradicate the illicit trafficking in those weapons. While
there are various examples of progress towards the

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

gradual elimination of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, Paraguay believes that it is necessary
to redouble efforts in the control of transfers, marking
and tracing, the regulation of brokering and trafficking
in border areas. In that regard, role of international
cooperation and assistance is vital, as is the setting
up of a mechanism to build trust between States and
cooperating entities.
In addition, special mention should be given to
the recent entry into force, in December 2014, of the
Arms Trade Treaty, to which my country is one of the
almost 70 States parties. In our view, recognition of this
instrument by States is a sign of commitment in the
area of disarmament, and in particular, the elimination
of illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
serious consequences of their use.
There is virtually no disagreement among
members of the international community on the tragic
consequences of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. There is also a high level of agreement on the
predominant role that these weapons play in eroding
and destroying societies. They increase armed violence
and they undermine respect for human rights in general,
and international humanitarian law in particular. The
figure of over half a million deaths per year as a result
of violent acts — many of them cases in which small
arms and light weapons play a role — could continue to
grow if corrective measures are not taken.
Paraguay therefore considers it important
to improve stockpile security systems as well as
warehousing for firearms, ammunition and explosives
in accordance with international standards. We also
believe that existing mechanisms should be enhanced to
encourage the destruction of obsolete and confiscated
weapons and ammunition, for which it is necessary to
have technical assistance from specific organizations
and cooperating countries.
In conclusion, we must remember that most of the
victims related to small arms and light weapons come
more from situations in which ordinary, everyday acts
of violence are committed than from war situations,
which makes us once again urge the international
community to focus not only on conflict and postconflict situations, but on the causes that allow
significant sectors of our societies have access to a huge
variety of small arms and light weapons with the tragic
consequences that affect our citizens on a daily basis.

S/PV.7442

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s important
meeting. We highly appreciate Lithuania’s contribution
to efforts to address the diverse challenges posed by
small arms and light weapons.
Small arms and light weapons are the predominantly
used weapons in a vast majority of armed conflicts
today. The flows of small arms into conflict zones have
fuelled violence, undermined peacebuilding efforts
and have had a catastrophic humanitarian impact on
civilians, especially women and children.
Building upon a number of initiatives, including
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons, the international community
recently took a momentous step in efforts to address
this challenge by adopting and bringing into force
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). This landmark treaty
establishes, for the first time, a comprehensive norm
to prevent arms transfers that lead to serious violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
We believe that the faithful implementation of the ATT
will help curb the irresponsible flow of small arms to
conflict zones and perpetrators of war crimes and other
atrocities. The Republic of Korea is taking steps to
ratify the Treaty at the earliest possible time.
While States have the primary responsibility to
tackle this challenge, the Security Council also has a
vital role to play in addressing both the supply- and
demand-driven aspects of arms transfers. With its
legally binding arms embargoes, the Security Council
can contribute to the prevention of arms flows to
conflict regions. The Council can strengthen the role of
peacekeeping missions in monitoring arms embargoes
on the ground. Examples like the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, where dedicated armsembargo monitoring units were established, offers a
good precedent. Improving information-sharing among
States, sanctions committees and peace missions will
also contribute to the effective implementation of these
embargoes. On the demand side of illicit arms transfers,
an equally urgent task is to better secure these weapons
from the risk of diversion by strengthening national
stockpile security and management.
The Security Council should continue to mandate
peacekeeping missions to assist host countries in

15-1395555/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

their management of arms stockpiles, as well as their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts.
States’ stockpile management capacity should be taken
into account when the Security Council considers the
termination of an arms embargo.
Two years ago, the Security Council set an
important milestone by adopting resolution 2117
(2013), the first-ever Council resolution to address the
challenges posed by small arms. The resolution paved
the way for an enhanced role by the Council in tackling
this issue. We should continue in our united efforts to
stem the scourge of illicit arms transfer and misuse that
undermine our security, human rights and development
goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): Let me first thank Lithuania
for convening this important Security Council meeting.
Small arms and light weapons are the most
frequently used weapons in armed conflicts today.
They pose a continuous threat to international peace
and security. Their uncontrolled and illicit proliferation
cause significant loss of life and contribute to instability
and insecurity. They also fuel conflicts and have various
negative impacts on human rights, humanitarian law
and development. The misuse of small arms and light
weapons can also have a disproportionate impact on
women and girls. These weapons also threaten stable
post-conflict peace and security.
We have to be mindful that parties to armed conflict
bear the primary responsibility to take all feasible steps
to ensure the protection of civilians. Equally, States also
bear the primary responsibility to respect and ensure
the protection of the human rights of all individuals.
Through its disarmament and arms control measures,
the Security Council can make a valuable contribution
to ensuring the protection of civilians.
Finland welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Small arms and light weapons”
(S/2015/289). It outlines pressing issues that need to be
tackled if we are to combat the challenges of misuse of
small arms and light weapons. In addition, the findings
of the high-level review of sanctions will provide useful
guidance to the United Nations system and States for
strengthening the effectiveness of arms embargoes.
Effective physical security and the management of
stockpiles of small arms, light weapons and ammunition

56/72

13/05/2015

are crucial in order to prevent their illicit transfer and
misuse. Finland is committed to continuing to support
the efforts to prevent diversion and illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons through such mechanisms
as the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the United
Nations Trust Facility Supporting Cooperation on
Arms Regulation.
Finland wishes to highlight the links between
different small arms processes and the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT). The main objectives of the ATT are to
regulate the international legal arms trade and reduce
the illegal trade and diversion of small arms and light
weapons. The ATT is also expected to strengthen
the arms embargoes and sanctions regimes, enhance
the performance of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
operations and improve the protection of human rights
and living conditions of men, women and children. We
therefore need to work towards the universalization
of the Treaty and assist States in effective national
implementation, if needed.
The ATT includes the highest possible international
standards for arms transfers we can agree on today.
However, this does not exclude the possibility for
agreeing on even higher standards tomorrow. Finland
encourages all States that have not signed or acceded to
the ATT to do so at their earliest convenience, with the
aim of a more secure world for all of us and for future
generations.
We encourage the Council to adopt the new small
arms draft resolution under negotiation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important debate and for preparing an
excellent concept note (S/2015/306, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his biennial report on
the issue (S/2015/289).
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Head of the Delegation of the European Union. I
would now like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
In our view, the proliferation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons represents a grave threat to
global and regional peace and security. We commend

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

the Council’s sustained attention on this matter. We
hope that the Council will continue to build on the
momentum achieved with the adoption of the resolution
2117 (2013) and, in that context, we warmly welcome
the new draft resolution proposed by the presidency on
this topic.
The issue of the control of small arms and light
weapons (SALW) is of great importance. Our own
conflict and post-conflict experience have made
us aware of the grave threat posed by the excessive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons in both
legal and illegal possession. For Croatia, the issue of
SALW control is not merely one of safety; we see it in
the wider context of human security, development and
human rights. Over the years, Croatia has led the Less
Arms, Less Tragedies campaign to raise awareness and
collect arms, which is conducted jointly by the United
Nations Development Programme Office in Croatia
and our Ministry of Interior. The campaign is aimed at
raising public awareness about the dangers of weapons,
especially those illegally owned by citizens. It also
seeks to inform people about ways to return weapons
anonymously and without legal consequences, and
thereby to encourage citizens to voluntarily surrender
their weapons. The United Nations has rated this
campaign as one of the most successful of its kind
globally, based on the criteria of citizen participation
and the final number of small arms and light weapons
collected.
We believe that national efforts are of the utmost
importance in tackling the issue of SALW. However,
some problems cannot be dealt with by countries alone
and need to be addressed at the regional and global
levels. Croatia attaches great importance to regional
cooperation in this field and strongly supports and
participates in regional efforts. We have played an
active, pioneering role in the Stability Pact for Southeast
Europe. As a result of those efforts, our region has
developed and implemented innovative solutions
for tackling that issue through information-sharing,
knowledge transfers and the harmonization of
approaches.
A telling example of such regional cooperation is the
Regional Arms Control Verification, Implementation
and Assistance Centre for Security Cooperation, which
is located in Zagreb and fully operational. Regional
cooperation was crucial in achieving significant
progress in reducing the number of unwanted and
surplus light weapons and ammunition in the countries

S/PV.7442

of South-East Europe. We believe that this success in
our region can set a good example for other regions of
the world.
At the global level, Croatia is a State party to all
relevant existing mechanisms, including the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT). We recognize the ATT as a major
milestone in controlling the use of conventional arms
and small arms and light weapons, which cause the death
of hundreds of thousands of people every year. Croatia
was among the first countries to ratify the Arms Trade
Treaty, thereby demonstrating our firm commitment
to arms control in a wider context. We attach the
highest priority to the Treaty’s full implementation,
both regionally and globally. Our experts, who have
extensive national and regional experience in postconflict arms control efforts, will actively participate
in European Union outreach activities.
Croatia also attaches great importance to applying
a gender perspective to the matter of small arms. The
illicit transfer, misuse and accumulation of SALW can
have a disproportionate effect on women and girls. We
stress the role that women can and should play in peace
processes. The political empowerment of women and
their full, equal and effective participation in all stages
of peace processes are crucial for building sustainable
peace and security, ensuring gender equality and
protecting human rights. Finally, Croatia would also
like to recognize and welcome the role of civil society
in dealing with that issue.
Every day we see the human costs of the
widespread availability and misuse of small arms and
light weapons. We therefore hope that today’s debate
will provide further impetus to our collective efforts to
strengthen the fight against the illicit transfer, misuse
and accumulation of small arms and light weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Lupan (Moldova): Despite the fact that
Moldova is a country affected by small arms and light
weapons and has a frozen conflict on its territory,
due to time limitations and the fact that my country
has aligned itself with the statement made on behalf
of the European Union, it is my honour to address the
Council exclusively in my capacity as Chair-designate
of the second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental
Experts under the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,

15-1395557/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

which will take place from 1 to 5 June at United Nations
Headquarters in New York.
Taken together, the United Nations Programme
of Action and the International Tracing Instrument
constitute an important global framework that enables
us to tackle the complex issue of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. It is therefore heartening
that the Security Council has continually recognized
the significance of the United Nations Programme of
Action during its debates on the issue, as well as in its
presidential statements and its first resolution on small
arms and light weapons adopted in 2013 (resolution
2117 (2013).
At the forthcoming Meeting of Governmental
Experts under the Programme of Action, it is anticipated
that States will focus on recent developments in small
arms and light weapons technology. Recent trends in
such technologies have important implications for how
the issue of small arms and light weapons should be
addressed in the future. Modular weapons now exist that
can be fitted with different components, making their
marking and tracing more complex. Weapons can now
be printed using three-dimensional printing technology
and, although its reliability is not yet high, it still can
potentially lead to placing undetectable weapons in the
wrong hands. Metals can increasingly be replaced by
polymers, which can also hamper detection.
Such trends present new challenges and complicate
efforts with respect to the tracing of illicit weapons.
However, on the positive side, new technologies, such
as biometric or radio frequency identification, could
enhance stockpile management and capabilities in the
marking, recordkeeping and tracing of weapons. A
number of States have specifically indicated the need to
discuss, at the second Open-ended Meeting, the outflow
of small arms and light weapons into illegal circulation,
including into the hands of terrorists, non-State actors or
unrecognized entities. The need to ensure appropriate
action and control by States over small arms and light
weapons and their marking, transfer and tracing, as
well as over brokering activities, inter alia, has also
been identified.
Taking into account the fact that the focus of this
year’s second Open-ended Meeting is on recent trends
in marking and tracing small arms and light weapons,
the opportunity to discuss those and other related
issues will allow us to thoroughly consider how we can
ensure that the United Nations Programme of Action

58/72

13/05/2015

and its International Tracing Instrument stay up to
date and to guarantee their continued full and effective
implementation. The upcoming Meeting will also
provide a platform for all States to discuss needs and
good practices, which may feed into concrete results at
the Programme of Action’s review conference in 2018.
Resolution 2117 (2013) stresses the need to make
real progress in preventing, combating and eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Real progress is what we need in order to save lives
from carnage and destruction and to ensure stable
and sustainable development around the world, now
and post-2015. There can be no development without
security, without respect for international law and
without respect for human lives. Real progress in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons is what all United
Nations Member States must work together to achieve
at every forum, including the Security Council and
at the forthcoming second Meeting of Governmental
Experts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): As today’s meeting has heard,
the human cost of the illicit transfer, accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons is horrific and
widespread. In conflict and other situations of armed
violence, civilians consistently suffer the most. Civilians
are deliberately targeted by rebel groups, terrorists,
gangs and rogue Governments using these weapons.
Women and girls suffer disproportionately. In postconflict situations these weapons perpetuate a vicious
cycle of insecurity and violence, which undermines
reconciliation, investment and development.
Given the importance and the complexity of
this issue, we need an international response that is
comprehensive, coordinated and collaborative. Within
the United Nations, the Security Council could do more
by designing and monitoring peacekeeping and special
political mission mandates to address small arms
challenges, including by making better use of police
components. The Council’s mandates should integrate
arms embargo implementation, stockpile security,
surplus disposal, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and security sector reform. The
participation of women should be addressed across all
of these components.

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

As a practical example, arms embargo
cells — such as that in the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire — and the active use of the International
Small Arms Control Standards play a useful role in
improving coordination. The Council can also take
concrete steps to improve the effectiveness of its arms
embargoes.
First, the Council should consistently mandate
sanctions expert groups to investigate and collect
information on arms-trafficking routes, patterns and
key players in the arms trade. Expert groups need the
cooperation of all United Nations agencies and all
States.
Secondly, the Sanctions Committees must be
mandated and should act quickly to designate arms
traffickers and their facilitators.
Thirdly, the United Nations system should be
better positioned to mobilize capacity-building for the
host Government, as well as neighbouring States, to
stop arms and ammunition from reaching the conflict.
Targeted travel and financial sanctions can play an
important role in implementing arms embargoes. The
final report of the high-level review of sanctions will
be published soon. We expect that it will provide useful
guidance to the United Nations system and States in
order to strengthen the effectiveness of arms embargoes.
All States have a responsibility to prevent arms
transfers to illicit users, abide by arms embargoes,
strengthen legislation, and improve cooperation among
law enforcement agencies, including through regional
and international organizations such as INTERPOL.
As resolution 2117 (2013) makes clear, the
misuse of small arms and light weapons has resulted
in the commission of serious international crimes.
The responsible and transparent regulation of the
international trade in conventional arms is essential to
meeting our shared responsibility to protect populations
from the most devastating international crimes,
including mass atrocities. The Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) will help us meet this shared responsibility, and
we urge States that have not already done so to ratify or
accede to the Treaty.
Finally, we call on the Council to regularly review
the implementation of resolution 2117 (2013) and the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/289). We need vigilance and momentum if
we are to alleviate the heavy toll of human suffering
caused by small arms.

S/PV.7442

The President: I give the floor now to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate Lithuania on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and welcome the
timely choice of the topic for this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/289) and
for the recommendations contained therein.
The concept note (S/2015/306, annex) prepared by
the Lithuanian presidency raises a number of questions
that prompt in-depth consideration of the trafficking
of small arms and their nefarious impact on the peace
and security of States. We hope that today’s debate will
provide a concrete follow-up to the high-level debate
organized by the Australian presidency in September
2013 (see S/PV.7036), which resulted in the adoption of
resolution 2117 (2013).
There is global consensus on the destructive effects
of the proliferation and destabilizing accumulation
of small arms and light weapons. This scourge is the
greatest cause of the loss of human lives, the destruction
of economic capacities, and the threat to the security,
stability and national unity of States, as well as their
territorial integrity. The illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons prolongs conflict, exacerbates
armed violence, and weakens respect for international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Furthermore, the close connection
between terrorism, transnational organized crime, and
the traffic in drugs, human beings and natural resources
is overwhelmingly clear.
The African continent has unfortunately been the
most heavily hit by the horrors resulting from this evil.
In this respect, the Sahel-Saharan region has become
the epicentre of the recent association among illicit
arms trafficking, terrorist and separatist groups, and
criminal networks. At the same time, threats related to
security, the scope of which exceeds the Sahel region,
have been exacerbated by the circulation of weapons,
whose number has grown in recent years, in particular
those from the arsenals of the former Libyan regime
of Al-Qadhafi. Those weapons contribute significantly
to the destabilization of the region by empowering
terrorist and criminal groups operating in the SaheloSaharan region.
Therefore, in order to end this scourge, it is
essential to promote international and subregional
multidimensional cooperation aimed at strengthening

15-1395559/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

the capacities of States, in particular in intelligence
gathering and border protection. In this framework, I
recall the high-level meeting on the counter-terrorism
strategy in the Sahel region, organized by the SecretaryGeneral, and the special meeting organized by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, under the chairmanship
of Morocco, on cooperation and assistance to countries
in the Sahel region, with a view to strengthening their
counter-terrorism capacities.
International consensus is being built on the need
to strengthen global coordination mechanisms to
ensure an effective struggle against the illicit trade
of small arms and light weapons and to seek the best
ways to addressing the resulting challenges. To that
end, the Kingdom of Morocco emphasizes the extreme
importance of the the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts
and Components and Ammunition, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
The Kingdom of Morocco also reiterates its
support for the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and
and its International Tracing Instrument. Morocco calls
for their effective implementation at the international,
regional and national levels, based on the Action Plan
adopted at the second United Nations Conference
to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action. Furthermore, Morocco
hopes that the Arms Trade Treaty, which entered into
force in December 2014, will continue to strengthen
international efforts to end the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons.
To that end, in 2006 the Kingdom of Morocco
signed the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence
and Development. Morocco participated in its launch
alongside Switzerland and 41 other States members
of the United Nations Development Programme and
non-governmental organizations active in the field
of development. This initiative, now backed by 109
signatory States, is focused on helping countries
affected by armed violence in order to eliminate
this scourge and contribute to the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals by integrating
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into
their national development policies.
We further recall that international efforts to fight
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must
60/72

13/05/2015

comply with the provisions of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, including the right of all
States to import and manufacture small arms and light
weapons for their legitimate national defence needs and
to maintain their territorial integrity.
Finally, Morocco hopes that this meeting will lend
new momentum to regional and subregional cooperation
in order to prevent illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, and to prevent the merchants of death
from profiting at the expense of innocent victims. We
underscore the importance of information-exchange
and intelligence mechanisms and the need to step up
cooperation and international assistance, particularly
in capacity-building, which are extremely important
to the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action and all international commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me start
by thanking Lithuania for taking the initiative to
organize this very important open debate and also
for the excellent concept note that has been circulated
(S/2015/306, annex). It provides valuable guidance for
our debate today.
In the view of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
the availability and uncontrolled spread of small
arms and light weapons constitutes a threat to peace,
justice and development in many regions around the
world. Therefore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes this open debate and would like to encourage
the Council to adopt the draft resolution that is under
consideration.
We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union. In view of time
constraints, I will limit myself to a shortened version of
this speech. The full text will be available on Twitter. I
would like to make three points concerning the human
cost, the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), and the need for a
comprehensive approach.
First, we all know that the human cost of the illicit
trade, accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons is tremendous. Small arms and light weapons
are the most deadly weapons worldwide. They are truly
a global public ill. The proliferation of small arms
and light weapons increases the risk that both smaller
and larger conflicts will give rise to mass atrocities.
The misuse of these weapons results in grave crimes
and thereby poses a threat to international peace and
15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

security. We see a direct link with the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Secondly, let me stress the great importance of
the ATT. Its entry into force in December 2014 was
a great step forward, especially its obligation for the
States party to the Treaty to set up export control
systems. The inclusion of ammunition in the Treaty,
of course, was vital, as it enables the weapons to be
used. We are proud to have been an active participant
in the drafting of the Treaty. The current challenge is
to effectively implement the ATT and work towards its
universalization. We call on all States Members of the
United Nations to ratify the Treaty, as well as on the
current signatories and States parties to the Treaty to
make the first conference of State parties in Mexico
City a success. Together we must implement the ATT.
My third point is on the need for a comprehensive
approach to address small arms and light weapons
issues. Such a comprehensive approach is of the utmost
importance, as the effects of illegal small arms and light
weapons touch on many different policy areas. The
availability and uncontrolled spread of small arms and
light weapons feed political instability and conflicts.
They threaten the conditions for social, economic
and human development, and the presence of large
quantities of such weapons in societies, especially in
fragile States and under-governed areas, causes social
tensions and fuels violence.
Therefore, in our view, small arms and light weapons
issues should be approached in a comprehensive,
integrated manner, addressing good governance,
strengthening the rule of law and providing alternative
livelihood initiatives. This issue should also be part
of broader security programs, such as security sector
reform, as well as United Nations peace operations.
As our Moroccan colleague, who preceded me, also
mentioned, we see a direct link with anti-terrorism
efforts. We pay tribute here to the cooperation the
Kingdom of the Netherlands enjoys with the Kingdom
of Morocco on anti-terrorism efforts. Together we are
going to chair the Global Counter-terrorism Forum.
In conclusion, in 2001 Secretary-General Koffi
Annan stated the following while addressing the
Security Council:
“Small arms are easy to buy, easy to use, easy
to transport and easy to conceal. Their proliferation

S/PV.7442

exacerbates conflict, sparks refugee flows,
undermines the rule of law and spawns a culture of
violence and impunity. This is not just a question
of disarmament; it is also an issue of development,
democracy, human rights and human security.”
(S/PV.4355, p. 4).
Let those words serve as a rallying point for
action on our behalf. For our part, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands looks forward to continued work with our
partners for peace, justice and development. Together,
let us end the devastating effects of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons for peoples and societies worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Armenia thanks the
Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for
initiating this open debate, and the Secretary-General
for his briefing and recent comprehensive report on the
subject matter dated 27 April 2015 (S/2015/289). We
also thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for his detailed overview.
The excessive accumulation, uncontrolled spread
and illicit trafficking of small arms in all its aspects
pose a serious threat to peace and undermines efforts
to ensure an indivisible and comprehensive security.
In that vein, Armenia remains committed to the full
and effective implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which outlines a number
of important steps including measures pertaining
to regional cooperation. We are convinced that the
further development of regional and subregional small
arms control mechanisms, with the participation of all
stakeholders and interested parties on a status-neutral
basis, could promote better control of small arms and
light weapons (SALW).
Armenia also acknowledges the important
contributions made by civil society to the implementation
of the Programme of Action, and encourages
cooperation with a broader participation of civil
society in that process. We support the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) initiatives aimed at promoting
the implementation of SALW-related commitments.
Armenia submits information on international SALW
transfers to the United Nations Office for Disarmament

15-1395561/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

Affairs and to the OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre
annually.
It is noteworthy that last year OSCE adopted
a decision on voluntary guidelines for compiling
national reports on SALW exports. We believe that
such a voluntary guide could also be useful to other
United Nations Member States in their efforts to
implement international agreements on SALW. We
are of the opinion that a standardized reporting form
may encourage greater transparency on SALW exports
and imports, especially in our region. Dialogue
and goal-oriented cooperation among international
organizations are essential to better address the issue
while avoiding the duplication of activities.
When SALW fall into the wrong hands, they
exacerbate violence, prolongs conflicts, undermine the
security of States, increase the activities of transnational
organized crime, and allow for terrorism. They affect all
levels of society, economically and socially, causing a
great degree of human suffering. Therefore, combating
the threat of the uncontrolled and illicit spread of
SALW is crucial in order to strengthen transparency
in military matters and build a climate of trust and
confidence between all stakeholders, particularly in the
regions where the threat perception is real.
It is also important to take necessary steps to
prevent the export of SALW to countries where there is
a clear risk that force might be used for the violation or
suppression of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including that of the right to self-determination. In that
regard, Member States should ensure that they have
adopted relevant laws, regulations and/or necessary
administrative procedures to exercise control over the
legal possessions of SALW and their transfer in order to
prevent illicit trafficking.
At the international level, Armenia continues
to support efforts aimed at the regulation of SALWrelated matters. In that regard, we stress the importance
of financial and technical assistance in building the
capacity of Member States to implement such controls.
We are pleased to inform the Council that, jointly with
the United Nations and the OSCE, a round table on the
implementation of SALW commitments, which was
aimed at supporting Armenia in the elaboration of a
national strategy on SALW control, was organized in
October last year in Yerevan. The United Nations-OSCE
team of experts recently presented recommendations
based on the results of the discussions.

62/72

13/05/2015

We are currently working on the organizational
modalities of the second round table, entitled Effective
Stockpile Management and Security, and Destruction
of SALW and Conventional Ammunition, which
will be held in Yerevan in July with the participation
of relevant stakeholders including the Ministry of
Defence, the police, national security service, and
International Criminal Police Organization National
Central Bureau. The purpose of the round table is to
raise awareness of the international commitments,
examine best practices related to stockpile management
and security, the destruction of SALW and conventional
ammunition, as well as, where appropriate, to consider
the review of national procedures on handling SALW
and conventional ammunition.
In conclusion, we are confident that the Security
Council will continue to pay particular attention to
SALW-related issues.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Bila (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important and timely open debate, which we believe
will make a valuable contribution in addressing the
issue of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons (SALW).
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union earlier today. However,
we would like to make some additional comments in
our national capacity.
While Ukraine recognizes that weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and their proliferation is a real
threat to humankind as a whole in 2015, we must admit
that the possibility of the use of WMDs depends on a
number of factors. In that regard, SALW also have a
powerful virulent effect. In particular, the instability
caused by the proliferation of SALW and their use
could serve as a real precondition to a nuclear conflict.
Therefore, today we must tackle the issue of the illicit
transfer, stockpiling and misuse of SALW with the
utmost responsibility.
In that respect, we welcome the entry into force
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), in December 2014,
which includes SALW in its scope, contains provisions
on the stockpiling of ammunition and further raises
the level of attention and scrutiny given to controls of
SALW. Ukraine was among the sponsors of the General
Assembly resolutions on the ATT and signed the
15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

document in 2014. The harmonization of its provisions
with the national legislation of signatory countries
would be an important step in reaching the ATT
objectives, particularly in preventing and eradicating
the illicit trade in conventional arms and preventing
their diversion. However, until the key arms-exporting
States become signatories to the Treaty, we can not
speak about the comprehensive nature of the ATT. We
therefore call upon all the States to become a part of
this important process.
The human cost of illicit SALW proliferation
is extremely perturbing. It is not a secret that in my
country SALW-related challenges emerged mostly after
the Russian aggression against Ukraine undertaken in
2014 and 2015. But the first steps in that regard were
made earlier. Long before the occupation started, the
Russian Federation made numerous supplies of arms,
including SALW, into the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea. It is clear that those weapons showed up
during the so-called referendum in Crimea in 2014. As
a result, since then this part of Ukraine is occupied by
the Russian Federation.
During 2014 and 2015, the illegal pro-Russian
armed groups — the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic — in close
coordination with Russian troops, have gained and
continue to control those respective segments of the
Russian-Ukrainian border. In that way, a deadly route
for the illicit transfers of SALW to the territory Ukraine
has been opened. The continuous flows of sophisticated
weapons and ammunition from the Russian Federation
to Crimea and the eastern part of Ukraine have had a
disastrous and destabilizing effect. The most cynical
thing in that regard is that large amounts of SALW are
moved to the Donetsk and Lugansk regions of Ukraine
from Russian territory under the guise of the so-called
humanitarian convoys. These problems have been
regularly reported to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine. Numerous items of documentary evidence
have been presented to the members of the Mission.
Without delving into the technical details, I would
like to draw the Council’s attention to one example
of the evidence of weaponry supplies through the
Ukrainian-Russian border segment. A week ago, during
the neutralization of a subversive group in the Donetsk
region, a model 34 under-barrel grenade launcher
(UBGL-34), which is in the inventory of Russian army,
was confiscated. It is easy to verify that the UBGL-34

S/PV.7442

model is not in the inventory of the Ukrainian armed
forces. We have many similar examples with relevant
documentation and photos. The UBGL-34 and other
SALW have a strong destabilizing effect in the heart
of Europe, killing hundreds of peaceful Ukrainians.
The conclusion is the following: we have no right to be
blind with regard to the illicit supplies of conventional
weapons, including SALW, from the Russian Federation
to Ukraine.
In the wider context, after the brutal occupation
of Crimea by Russian military forces with the use,
or threat of use, of conventional weapons, including
SALW, we heard statements by Russian officials about
their right to deploy nuclear weapons on the Crimean
Peninsula. Such acts would constitute a direct security
threat, both at the regional and global level. We should
keep an eye on every such action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate your delegation,
Madam, on your assumption of the Security Council
presidency for the month of May. I also appreciate the
convening of this open debate.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
as a result of the illicit trade and irresponsible transfers
presents an enormous challenge to international peace
and security. Argentina believes that the international
community is duty-bound and has an inexorable
responsibility to step up efforts in order to eradicate this
proliferation through greater control and transparency
in the stockpiling of weapons and by strengthening
international cooperation through the exchange of
information, the establishment of confidence-building
measures and cooperation in order to strengthen the
capacities of States to establish effective arms control
and regulatory measures.
We know that throughout the world violent actions
in conflict and post-conflict situations is carried
out, for the most part, with conventional weapons, in
particular with small arms and light weapons, which
allow those who use them to drastically increase
their ability to project power. In those situations, the
proliferation of weapons has a devastating impact on
civilians, especially on women and children. In conflict
zones, the constant flow of weapons and ammunition
exacerbate violence, they generate flows of refugees
and prolong the duration of hostilities.

15-1395563/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

In addition, the stockpiling and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons have severe implications for
human development, sustainable economic growth and
peace, because they tear the social fabric of communities,
divert investment away from infrastructure, health and
education, foster legal insecurity, increase crime and
generate a climate of political instability and impunity.
That is why small arms and light weapons are both
a symptom of insecurity and a factor that fuels that
insecurity.
The excellent concept note (S/2015/306, annex),
Madam President, that your delegation drafted to guide
our statements during this debate notes that there are
approximately 900 million small arms in circulation
around the world. Of those weapons, a major part are
accounted for by illicit trade, a very lucrative business
that makes it possible, through the diversion of weapons,
for terrorist groups, rebels, pirates and other criminal
organizations to gain the capacity to exponentially
multiply their power.
That is why Argentina considers it a priority to
strengthen the existing mechanisms to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, such as the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. The premise on which we base our position is
that the fight against the proliferation of, and the illicit
trafficking in, weapons depends as much on the policies
that countries are willing to adopt domestically, as on
the periodic review of the measures on export control
and the regulation and adequate controls at the regional
and international levels.
In that context, the effective implementation of
the sanctions imposed by the Council is essential.
The sanctions are not an end in themselves, but their
strict compliance by all Member States, in particular
countries that produce and export weapons, is an
essential factor to reduce the availability of weapons in
conflict zones.
As the Secretary-General recognizes in his report,
“If the weapons situation is not consistently dealt
with, exacerbation or relapse into renewed fighting
remains a paramount risk” (S/2015/289, summary).
A common denominator of all situations considered by
the Security Council is that the availability, ownership
and use of arms and ammunitions determine to a large
extent the dynamics of a crisis. A significant share
64/72

13/05/2015

of small arms and light weapons available in conflict
zones do not come from illicit trade, but are rather the
result of legitimate transfers to countries in conflict or
to places where they could be used to commit violations
of international humanitarian law or of human rights.
Each authorized transfer of arms implies a huge
responsibility at the international level. That is why the
entry into force in December 2014 of the Arms Trade
Treaty, which covers small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition, will provide an essential additional
tool to reduce the availability of arms in areas of
conflict. States will have an obligation to evaluate the
impact of each transfer prior to authorizing it. Just as
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross reminded us when the Council considered
the same topic in September 2013 (see S/PV.7036),
at three of the International Conferences of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent held in the past 10 years,
the States parties to the Geneva Convention of 1949
acknowledged their obligation to uphold international
humanitarian law and to adopt appropriate measures
to control the availability of weapons. Both those
obligations remind us that it is easier to avoid the flow
of weapons to conflict areas rather than to try to remedy
the devastating consequences of their irresponsible
transfer and illicit trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Madam President, on the assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
May and to thank you for convening this important
meeting to discuss a topic that is of great concern to the
international community.
Today, the international community clearly
views the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons (SALW) as a challenge that continues to
sustain conflict and to fuel terrorism, extremism and
illegal non-State armed groups, and to aid in human
trafficking and the trafficking of drugs. In that regard,
I take this opportunity to highlight the multiple dangers
associated with the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons to terrorist and extremist groups, especially
those operating in the Middle East and Africa.
We have all seen the gruesome effects of the
groups’ activities in our region. In Egypt, we are
engaged in large-scale counter-terrorism operations in
the northern Sinai peninsula against terrorist groups

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

associated with Daesh, Al-Qaida and others. In Syria,
extremist and terrorist groups have taken large swathes
of the country, and the same has occurred in Iraq
and Libya. In Yemen, non-State actors, in defiance
of the international community, have obstructed the
political transition there by taking over cities and State
institutions. In Africa, we have seen increasingly bloody
and gruesome attacks by groups such as Boko Haram in
Nigeria and Al-Shabaab in Kenya and Somalia.
While the illicit trade in SALW is not the only
reason behind those terrorist activities, there is no doubt
that illicit trade has also been a massive enabling factor
contributing to the intensity of terrorist activities, to
the human and security costs to the affected countries,
and to the many destabilizing effects on international
peace and security. It is vital that the international
community undertake robust efforts to deal with the
threat of terrorism and the illicit proliferation of SALW
through, inter alia, the following measures.
First, there must be strict implementation of all
relevant Security Council sanctions aimed at combating
terrorism and preventing extremist and terrorist groups
and non-State actors from acquiring arms, including
SALW. In that regard, I emphasize the particular
importance of the implementation of resolutions 2214
(2015) regarding Libya and 2216 (2015) regarding
Yemen.
Secondly, attention should be given to the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat, and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in SALW in All Its Aspects. Egypt is fully
committed to the effective implementation of the
Programme of Action, which we believe is the only
universal reference in that regard. Egypt has consistently
played an active role in furthering the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action, including
through assuming the role of facilitator for the review,
in two cycles, of the implementation of the International
Tracing Instrument.
Thirdly, we must consider increasing international
support to the States most affected by both terrorism
and the illicit trade of SALW. In that regard, it is
important to highlight that development efforts and
combatting the illicit proliferation of SALW go hand
in hand. Investment in development, post-conflict
rehabilitation, capacity-building and the establishment
of strong State institutions are all vital factors in
combating the spread of illicit SALW. Furthermore,
we believe that disarmament, demobilization and

S/PV.7442

reintegration programmes should be an important
element in United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, especially in post-conflict
environments. That is vital to ensuring that SALW in
those areas do not contribute to conflict relapse, and
to preventing their transfer to other States, potentially
fuelling conflict elsewhere. Such assistance should
include the transfer of technology and the provision of
equipment under preferential and concessional terms
as an effective means to enhance the capability of
developing countries in combating the illicit trade in
SALW. The upcoming meetings of the Group of Experts
of the Programme next month, in June, will provide an
exceptional opportunity to develop concrete proposals
in support of developing countries.
Fourthly, we must provide support to Governments
engaged in the fight against terrorism and the illicit
trade in SALW. Governments remain the first line
of defence against those two closely related threats.
Hence, the international community must never allow
the Government of a State facing those severe threats to
be in a position of disadvantage vis-à-vis terrorist and
criminal adversaries.
In conclusion, the threat posed by the illicit transfer
of SALW requires concerted action by the international
community, building on existing frameworks, such
as the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Programme of Action, consistent with international law
and in accordance with our common responsibility to
combat terrorism, extremism and criminal activities in
all their shapes and forms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): First, allow me to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this very
important meeting.
My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered by observer of the European Union (EU). I
would like, however, to take this opportunity to inform
the Council briefly about some of Serbia’s activities in
the field of preventing, combating and eradicating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons (SALW) in
all its aspects.
Serbia is a State party to major international
instruments in this field, including the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects, the Firearms Protocol and the

15-1395565/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

International Tracing Instrument. It has also adopted the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
as well as OSCE decisions in this area, notably on the
storage of conventional arms, standard elements of enduser certificates, verification procedures and brokering
control. Serbia also signed and ratified the Arms Trade
Treaty and has taken extensive legislative, regulatory
and practical measures at the national level for the
implementation of the obligations it has assumed.
In May 2010, the Government of Serbia adopted its
national strategy on the control of small arms and light
weapons for the period 2010-2015. The strategy, a major
accomplishment of the Serbian institutions in their
efforts to formulate a holistic approach towards SALW
control on the basis of the best international practices,
provides a framework for the activities of relevant
governmental and non-governmental actors to prevent
and combat the unlawful production, possession and
trade in SALW. Its overall goal is to establish a national
system of effective control of SALW, thereby ensuring
the reduction of weapons in illegal possession as well
as the number of abuses of legal weapons.
The Strategy has also provided a basis for setting up
a council for SALW as an ad hoc working body headed
by the SALW National Coordinator and comprised
of the representatives of the competent governmental
institutions with the relevant professional knowledge
in the field. The Council, established in December
2011, was mandated to propose measures for the
implementation and coordination of the Strategy. It
developed an action plan for the implementation of
the Strategy on SALW control, which was adopted
by the Government in 2013. The action plan regulates
the coordination of the activities and allocation of
necessary resources, ensures the harmonization of
national legislation with United Nations, OSCE and EU
regulations and standards, coordinates the work of the
relevant agencies in preparing reports under Serbia’s
international obligations, submits periodic reports to
the Government on the progress made in the fulfilment
of the objectives of the strategy and the action plan
and initiates and contributes to the establishment of a
unique national SALW tracing database.
As for arms exports control, all the criteria of the
EU code of conduct are incorporated in Serbia’s new
law on the export and import of arms and military
equipment. Adopted by the Serbian National Assembly
in October 2014, the law is fully in line with the relevant

66/72

13/05/2015

EU and OSCE standards and, together with enhanced
border and customs control measures, plays a pivotal
role in strengthening surveillance and combating the
illicit arms trade. It is also an indispensable instrument
for preventing the destabilizing accumulation of SALW
and reducing the ability of unauthorized non-State
actors to acquire exported arms illegally.
On 24 February, the Assembly of the Republic of
Serbia adopted a new law on arms and ammunition.
Fully harmonized with EU rules and regulations,
the law entered into force on 4 March and its
implementation — except for article 51, providing for
arms legalization — is expected to begin on 4 March
2016. Currently, a campaign is under way in Serbia
to legalize arms and ammunition. Begun on 4 March,
it will last until 4 June. According to the data of the
Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia, 2,251
pieces of weapons were diverted from illegal to legal
flows in the first 2 months ending on 4 May.
My country attaches great importance to the
Programme of Action and remains strongly committed
to its full implementation. In addition to the necessary
political will, effective implementation of the
Programme of Action requires appropriate capacities.
Bearing that in mind, Serbia recognizes the important
role of international cooperation and assistance in the
area of capacity-building. There is no doubt that the
sharing of relevant information, national experiences
and lessons learned, as well as appropriate international
financial, expert and technical assistance, can vitally
contribute to the consolidation and strengthening of
institutional capacities and practices for the suppression
and eradication of the illicit trade in SALW.
International, regional and subregional organizations
and civil society can make a significant contribution
in that regard as well, for example, through developing
model legislation, practical guidelines and coherent
regional implementation standards, assisting States in
assessing their needs or conducting training, regional
meetings and similar activities. In that context, let me
mention that the South Eastern and Eastern Europe
Clearinghouse for the Control of the Small Arms and
Light Weapons, the regional organization mandated by
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Regional Cooperation Council, is headquartered in
Belgrade.
Although we have witnessed some important
developments in this field, much remains to be done

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

if we are to address the challenges we face in a
comprehensive and effective way. It is Serbia’s strong
conviction that international cooperation is the key to
achieving progress in resolving the issues of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. Occurring in all
parts of the globe, it sparks and fuels armed conflicts,
violence and organized crime, causing death to civilians
and hindering rebuilding and development.
Serbia supports the activities conducted by the
United Nations in this field and uses its current OSCE
Chairmanship-in-Office to highlight the importance
of the issue. It will intensify its efforts at national,
regional and international levels and stands ready to
further engage in all initiatives aimed at preventing and
stopping this plague of the modern-day world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): First of all,
allow me to join others in congratulating you,
Madam President, and Lithuania, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would like to also express my appreciation for the
thoughtful presentations and briefings this morning.
Thailand shares the concern that the illicit trade
and transfer, proliferation, trafficking and misuse of
small arms and light weapons pose a serious threat to
peace, security stability and development. It is both a
cause and a catalyst of violence and crime, resulting
in countless deaths and injuries among civilians and
entailing devastating humanitarian and socioeconomic
costs, more than any other type of weapon. It is therefore
in the interests of all parties to address the matter in a
more concrete and collective manner.
Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/289) and its recommendations. Allow me to
address some of the key important points in that respect.
First, our particular concern lies in the fact that
women and children often disproportionately fall
victims in situations of armed conflict as well as in
post-conflict settings. To address that problem, gendersensitive data must always be taken into consideration in
both geographical and thematic issues on the Council’s
agenda, especially in the framework of the protection of
civilians, which is one of its core mandates.
At the same time, women must be encouraged
and allowed to participate fully in planning and
implementing measures to combat the illicit trade,

S/PV.7442

transfer and misuse of small arms and light weapons. In
particular, the role of women should be recognized as
change agents and conciliators, in line with the women
and peace and security agenda.
Secondly, given the multifaceted nature of the
causes and adverse consequences of small arms and
light weapons, we need to strengthen collaboration and
coordination under the various multilateral frameworks
aimed at curbing the proliferation of small arms and
promoting responsible actions by States in order to help
in preventing the spread of those illicit weapons.
Thailand is pleased with the increased efforts on the
part of the international community towards tackling
the issue over the past few years, such as the discussion
within the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) and
the adoption of resolution 2117 (2013), the first standalone Council resolution that addresses the question of
small arms and light weapons.
The entry into force of the ATT, in December last
year, will undoubtedly reinforce the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects in tackling that challenge more efficiently,
in particular by increasing transparency of the trade in
small arms and the submission of ATT State parties’
annual reports.
The Treaty’s universalization and full implementation
are key to its success. Thailand signed the ATT and is
undertaking the necessary domestic procedures to ratify
the Treaty in the near future. However, measures in the
ATT and the Programme of Action should complement
each other. Duplication of work and the imposition of
unnecessary burdens on small States that are neither
major arms producers nor importers should be avoided.
Thirdly, apart from preventing the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, civilian firearms should
also be strictly regulated, both through the registration
process and with regard to transfers, for the purpose
of effective control and tracing, as those weapons also
exacerbate violence and crime at community level.
Fourthly, a people-centred approach should be the
core principle of any attempt to address the challenge
related to small arms and light weapons. Awareness
regarding the serious nature and urgency of the matter
should be raised among the public and civil society.
Fifthly, Thailand is heartened by the scientific
research and inventions of new technologies that have

15-1395567/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

led to new possibilities in regulating and tracing the
use of small arms and light weapons. It is our hope that
such technologies will be applied to the manufacturing
of all small arms as widely as possible so as to decrease
the adverse consequences that we know too well.
Sixthly, my last point is that it is important for
countries to have effective mechanisms to enable the
full implementation of their obligations. Each country
needs to strive to exercise effective control over the
transfer of such weapons. However, certain challenges
remain. New possibilities of illicit arms trade routes,
such as trafficking through maritime transportation,
have emerged. Therefore, information-sharing among
the authorities concerned and capacity-building
measures remain instrumental in cross-border control
and improved implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and other multilateral instruments.
Thailand realizes the importance of capacitybuilding for experts, and we would like to emphasize
the important role the United Nations Regional Centres
for Peace and Disarmament can play in strengthening
capacity through regional or country training
programmes customized for the specific needs of each
region and country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Ivezaj (Montenegro): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s debate on the human
cost of the illicit transfer and destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons. We
commend Lithuania’s strong commitment to the issue,
as well as the outstanding concept note (S/2015/306,
annex). We also thank today’s briefers for their valuable
presentations.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. However, I would like to highlight some points
of particular importance to my country.
Today, we are all aware of the agonizing impact of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons (SALW).
The uncontrolled availability of small arms and their
illicit trafficking exact an alarming cost from each of
the three main pillars of the United Nations — peace,
development and human rights. They pose a serious
threat to peace and reconciliation processes and lead
to a vast range of human rights violations. They will
also undermine our work to achieve sustainable

68/72

13/05/2015

development and realize the new set of sustainable
development goals.
Over the past decades, the efforts of the international
community to prevent and reduce violent conflict have
increased and been strengthened. However, for many
countries, conflicts and instability remain intractable
problems, fuelled by the unregulated and irresponsible
trade in SALW. We believe that steps taken to tackle
the problem of small arms and light weapons must be
practical, effective and comprehensive. This is essential
in order to reduce the devastating and long-lasting
impact of the widespread availability and misuse of
SALW. The most effective way to prevent their misuse
is through imposing strict import and export controls,
enacting strong brokering laws and, as mentioned in the
report of the Secretary General (S/2015/289), urgently
addressing stockpile security and management.
Peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding
missions also play a role in addressing this challenge.
They can contribute by providing assistance with
stockpile management and with the collection and
destruction of weapons. The adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) last year is a step in the right
direction that will help prevent destabilizing arms
flows to conflict areas and to illicit users. It shows how
much we can achieve if we work together. The Arms
Trade Treaty will complement and strengthen a number
of existing international instruments, with its ability to
adapt.
Montenegro is proud to have ratified the ATT
in August 2014, thus being in the group of the first
50 countries to do so. That, in turn, made possible
the entry into force of the ATT in December of that
year. Our ratification is yet another illustration of
my country’s firm commitment to the ATT and to
promoting responsible arms trading throughout the
world. Now that the ATT has entered into force, we
expect the instrument to be decisive in putting an
end to an uncontrolled arms trade that fuels armed
conflicts, with its ability to change the lives of the most
affected people. Montenegro will be devoted to the full
and effective implementation of the ATT as well as to
upholding the principles and standards enshrined by
the Treaty on a global scale. Our efforts will continue in
order to ensure that the Treaty truly becomes universal,
with as broad and effective application as possible.
Each year, over half a million men, women and
children die as a result of armed violence and easy

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

access to portable weapons, too often used by children.
Civilians suffer the most, particularly the poor. It is
encouraging that national legislation has improved in
a number of countries, although there is much work
ahead, since many States lack the capacity to exercise
effective control over small arms and light weapons and
to stem the flow of illicit weapons across their borders.
Montenegro has developed a solid legislative
framework regarding small arms and light weapons, in
line with European Union standards and supported by
the relevant strategic documents. It has done so with
a view to ensuring full compliance with international
obligations and commitments, in particular restrictive
measures and mechanisms adopted by the Security
Council and the European Union, as well as the human
rights situation in the country concerned. It is the best
way to stop weapons falling into the wrong hands
across the world, as a sustained process that requires
the commitment of all of us. We stand ready to work
closely with the international community and forge
a global partnership to prevent the future misuse of
SALW by developing common standards for arms
transfer control.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
country’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and, at the same time, to express
my gratitude for inviting me to take part in the debate
on the human cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons, a topic that is of paramount importance to my
country, Benin.
My delegation welcomes the maintenance of the
small arms issue on the agenda of the Council. Like the
Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons, the theme of today’s debate will increase
international public awareness of the devastating
consequences of the accumulation and illicit circulation
of small arms and light weapons, as well as of the urgent
need to work in a coordinated and integrated manner to
end them.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2015/289), of which my delegation has taken
note. I would also like to express my great appreciation
to Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for his contribution

S/PV.7442

to the debate, and to welcome Mr. Karamoko Diakité,
President of the Côte d’Ivoire chapter of the West Africa
Action Network on Small Arms.
Trafficking in small arms and light weapons in
Africa in general, and in the West Africa subregion
in particular, constitutes a major challenge to peace
and security. Such an uncontrolled epidemic carries a
significant human cost. Some 90 per cent of victims
of the hundreds of millions of light weapons and small
arms circulating in West Africa consist of able-bodied
people, women and children, all of whom indisputably
constitute human factors of development.
According to data collected by the UNICEF,
the use of small arms and light weapons in conflicts
maims and traumatizes whole generations of children,
both physically and psychologically. Long after peace
agreements are concluded, the number of small arms
and light weapons that remain in post-conflict societies
helps perpetuate a culture of violence. Some veterans
also consider their weapon a means of economic
survival. Women and children are exposed to the
dangers of those weapons, sometimes even within
their households, creating a vicious cycle of crime and
violence.
According to recent studies, over half a billion
small arms are in circulation worldwide, and 1 in
12 people carries a generally inexpensive light weapon.
Research has shown that in some places around the
world, an AK-47 or Kalashnikov assault rifle costs less
than a bag of corn or rice, facilitating their acquisition
by criminal networks and drug traffickers and thus
fomenting internal conflicts, crime, violence, assaults
of all kinds, burglaries, robberies and rapes.
The international community must intensify efforts
to stem the flow of weapons and destroy illicit stocks.
In that regard, I welcome the mechanisms and ongoing
programmes aimed at developing national, subregional
and regional expertise and capacity in order to limit the
availability of such weapons and to improve transfer
controls. The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, the International Tracing
Instrument, the Firearms Protocol and the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms are essential
tools for enhancing regional and international security,
which have recently been strengthened by the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty. We welcome its entry into
force.

15-1395569/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

A major challenge in the immediate future will be
establishing a system designed to harmonize the Arms
Trade Treaty with various projects and programmes
relating to existing mechanisms, particularly the
Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument. The reality is that very few States in
West Africa, including Benin, have mastered what the
Tracing Instrument involves, including weapons tracing
techniques, not to mention simply maintaining the
registry. We should focus more on active cooperation
and effective help with building national capacity
and competence in using the International Tracing
Instrument, the Programme of Action and the Arms
Trade Treaty. To achieve that, our view is that the
various forthcoming international conferences, such
as the second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental
Experts, the Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
Implementation of the Programme of Action and the
first Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade
Treaty, should be utilized to make a comprehensive
assessment of current international approaches on
small arms and light weapons.
There should be special emphasis on cooperation
and assistance to developing countries in the areas
of registration, keeping records of weapons and
ammunition, border control, arms and ammunition
transfers, tracing techniques and stockpile management,
since ineffective and poor management are at the heart
of the illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. In Benin’s view, given the scale, impact and
devastating human cost of this phenomenon, only a
global approach founded on the shared responsibility
of importers, exporters and arms manufacturers,
supported by international cooperation and assistance
and effective exchanges of information, will enable us
to put an end to the problem and respond decisively
while respecting the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union. I would also like to make the following
statement in my national capacity.
Ireland heartily welcomes the opportunity to debate
in this forum the question of the human cost of the illicit
transfer, accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons. We would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for giving us the
70/72

13/05/2015

opportunity to discuss the significant concerns about
human security raised by the issue.
We were pleased to welcome the adoption the year
before last of resolution 2117 (2013), which we saw as
a very encouraging step on the road to combating the
scourge of the illegal proliferation and accumulation of
small arms and light weapons. We also welcomed the
adoption of the consensus outcome document of the fifth
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider Implementation
of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
As the concept note (S/2015/306, annex) clearly
sets out, in our world the majority of deaths in conflict
are caused by the use of small arms. More humanrights abuses are committed with small arms than
any other weapon, and armed insecurity is one of
the major impediments to development everywhere.
Ireland therefore strongly supports the measures set out
in resolution 2117 (2013), in particular the integrated
approach to tackling the significant problems posed
by the illicit accumulation and proliferation of such
weapons. An integrated approach is essential if the
international community is to adequately address
the challenges posed by these weapons — whose
contribution to conflict, post-conflict violence and
gender-based violence is rightly acknowledged in the
concept note — as well as the dangers they pose for
humanitarian and peacekeeping interventions. Ireland
therefore welcomes the inclusion of issues related
to small arms and light weapons when peacekeeping
mandates are under consideration. We strongly support
current projects and efforts to make arms embargoes
more effective, including through the development of
international tracing procedures. We firmly believe that
ammunition must also be included in the international
community’s control systems for such weapons. We
look forward to the second Open-ended Meeting of
Governmental Experts, to be held next month, and to
further consideration of practical control measures in
respect to these weapons.
Ireland recognizes that women continue to be a
powerful force for change in relation to disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms-control affairs, and we
welcome the renewed focus on women’s empowerment
and the gender impact of illicit arms proliferation that
today’s debate has highlighted. We are pleased that
the global study of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), currently under way, will also address the

15-13955

13/05/2015

Small arms

impact of small arms on women affected by conflict,
and we look forward to exchanging views with the lead
author of the study on those and other points soon.
Resolution 2117 (2013) is an important instrument
for improving recognition of the inter-relationship
between the misuse of small arms and light weapons,
the issue of women and peace and security, and humanrights questions. The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which
entered into force on 24 December, has also been
ground-breaking in recognizing, for the first time in an
international treaty, the link between international arms
transfers and gender-based violence. We look forward
to continuing that vital work along with Member States
and civil society, with a view to making women more
visible in the disarmament debate. We welcome today’s
discussion as another step in the right direction.
The Arms Trade Treaty is of course a major step
forward in the international community’s efforts
to regulate the international trade in conventional
weapons. As the first legally binding instrument in
that regard, it also has strong potential for assisting us
greatly in our efforts to control small arms and light
weapons. As the ATT enters the final implementation
phase before its first Conference of States Parties, to
be held in Mexico in August, Ireland is working with
States parties and civil society to ensure that the Treaty,
which represents a rare and inspiring success for the
international disarmament community, will put in place
strong and resilient implementation measures that will
enable us to carry out its ambitious provisions, not least
in relation to small arms and light weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this important and
timely meeting. We are also grateful for the structured
concept note (S/2015/306), annex for this open debate,
and to the Secretary-General for his biennial report on
small arms and light weapons (SALW) (S/2015/289),
which contains valuable information and important
recommendations.
The global issue of small arms and light weapons
has long been on the agenda of the United Nations,
and the Security Council has taken action to address
it many times. The relevant Council resolutions and
presidential statements, particularly resolution 2117
(2013), constitute a sound basis that outlines the
principal directions for action to deal with the growing

S/PV.7442

consequences of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of such weapons.
Without prejudice to the legitimate right of
Member States to self-defence, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, Turkey believes that
the illicit trade in, and excessive accumulation of,
small arms and light weapons constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security. We share
the concerns that have been expressed in the Council
today about the destabilizing role such weapons play
in protracted conflicts, terrorism and organized crime,
including human and drug trafficking. Cognizant of
the significant threat such weapons pose to human
lives and their devastating effects on the social and
economic development of many countries, Turkey
strongly supports comprehensive efforts to eradicate
the problem of small arms and light weapons at both
the international and national levels.
To that end, we pursue policies and strategies
that are compatible with international law, including
international humanitarian law and human-rights law,
and fully comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and other legally binding international
obligations based on the conventions and other
legal instruments that Turkey is party to. Turkey
also cooperates with the relevant Security Council
sanctions committees and incorporates the necessary
measures into its national legislation with regard to
the production, export and transfer of small arms and
light weapons. With regard to international regulations
on the arms trade and transfers, I would like to point
out that Turkey has signed the Arms Trade Treaty and
intends to ratify it as soon as possible.
Turkey believes that the complementary and
mutually reinforcing actions taken by the Security
Council and the General Assembly on this issue are clear
indications of the international community’s resolve to
solve this problem. Accordingly, Turkey attaches great
importance to the fulfilment of the objectives set forth
by the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and its implementation
mechanism, the International Tracing Instrument.
Combined, they provide a comprehensive framework
for global action to fight against the illicit trade in
SALW, which has recorded much progress since 2001.
Turkey is firmly convinced that international
cooperation is crucial to attain the desired ends in

15-1395571/72

S/PV.7442

Small arms

13/05/2015

curbing the illicit trade and excessive accumulation
of SALW and preventing their misuse. We believe
that transparency and information-sharing would help
promote consistency in the implementation of agreed
multilateral standards.

particular the political portion. We must not forget the
primary fact that the Ukrainian authorities are using
the weapons at their disposal to carry out attacks in
Donbas, which are leading to the deaths of civilians and
the destruction of civilian infrastructure.

Increasing capacity-building is another issue
that we need to vigorously address. Turkey believes
that increased cooperation and assistance is crucial
to improving the capacity of Member States to
pursue successful disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes to prevent their diversion
through effective marking, record-keeping and tracing,
and to better manage stockpiles and the disposal of
surplus SALW and ammunition. Furthermore, Turkey
strongly believes that cooperation between national and
international law enforcement and customs agencies,
hand in hand with industry and non-governmental
organizations, plays a key role in our efforts.

The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We do not want to extend our discussion with
the representative of Ukraine, but it is clear that the
Ukrainian delegation is using any excuse to disseminate
its insinuations and accusations in order to detract from
opinions about Kyiv’s intention to not implement the
Minsk agreements and the measures set out therein, in

72/72

Ms. Bila (Ukraine): I would like to reply to
underscore the fact that Ukraine has fully complied
with the Minsk agreements, which is absolutely not
the case with the Russian Federation and the forces it
supports. However, that is not the issue we are dealing
with in this forum, where we are discussing small arms
and light weapons and their illegal transfer, including
to the territory of Ukraine. If anybody needs evidence
of this, the Ukrainian delegation is willing to provide
all the necessary photo evidence of the weapons that
were transferred to Ukraine from the stockpiles of the
Russian Federation. This is evidence of the Russian
Federation’s influence and constant participation in the
conflict.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

15-13955
