General Assembly ~- íhirl)-eighth Session

250

1. Takcs note with concern of the reports submitted to
the General Assembly by the Secretary-General on behalf
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, ,-,
which show a continuing neglect of the observance of thc
principies related to respect for the privileges and immunities of olficials of the Unitcd Nations and the specialized
agencies and related organi ✓ ations:
2. Exprcssc.1 partirnlar conccrn at thc dctention of a
grcat number of officials of the United Nations Relicf and
Works Agcncy for Palcstinc Rcfugccs in thc Ncar East and
about the cases in which full cxercise of the right of functional protcction was impossiblc. as mentioncd in thc
rcports of the Sccretary-General: 57
3. Rcaf/irms thc abow-mcntioncd rcsolutions:
4. Wclcomcs the mcasurcs alrcady taken by thc Secretary-General to enhance the safety and protcction of intcrnational civil scrvants. as outlincd in paragraph 7 of bis
rcport; 58
5. Ca/Is u¡¡on the Sccretary-Gcneral, as chief administrati ve officer of thc Organization. to continue personally
to act as thc focal point in promoting and ensuring the
observan ce of the pri vilcgcs and immunitics of ofücials of
thc U nitcd Nations and thc specialized agencies ami
rclated organizations by using such means as are availahlc
to him:
6. Wclco111cs thc designation hy the Secretary-Gcneral
of officials to takc on spccial rcsponsihilitics for the sccurity and protection of thc Organization's pcrsonncl and
propcrty:
7. Urges thc Sccretary-Cicneral to give priority through
his designatcd olficials, as mentioned in annex III to bis
rcport. 58 to thc rcporting and prompt follow-up of cases of
arres!, dctcntion and possiblc other mattcrs rclating to the
sccurity of officials of thc Unitcd Nations and the specialized agencies and rclatcd organizations:
8. Cafls upon thc staff ofthc Unitcd Nations to comply
with thc obligations arising from the Staff Regulations of
thc Unitcd Nations, in particular regulation 1.8:
9. Requcsts the Secrctary-<iencral, as Chairman of the
Administrativc Committce on Co-ordination. to suggest in
bis annual rcport to be submittcd to the General Assembly
at its thirty-ninth session furthcr mcasures to be taken
with regard to thc safctv and protcction of international
civil servants.
I 041 h plcnary meeting
:!O Dcccmhcr /983

38/231.

Composition of the Secretariat

Thc (icncral :lsscmhlr.
Reaf/irming its prcvious resolutions on pcrsonncl policy

and in particular resolutions 33/ 143 of 20 December 1978,
35/210 of 17 Decembcr 1980 and 37/235 of21 Deccmber
1982,
Noting that sorne limited progress has bcen made with
respect to thc situation of unrcpresented and underreprcscntcd Member Statcs and towards a balanced and cquitablc geographical distribution of staff in the Secretariat.
Conccrned by the lack of progrcss, especially in thc past
ycar, towards increasing the proportion of women in the
Sccretariat and, in particular. the failure to reach the target
set in section 111 ofresolution 331143.
Rccogni=ing the central role of thc Otlice of Personncl
Services in the implcmcntation of personncl policics.
57 A/C.5!J8/l 7 and Corr. l and •\dd 1 \ ( .5 18 1X
5SA/C.5/38;\7 and ( orr 1
5'l .\/181347 and Con 1

1. Takes note llf thc rcport of the Sccrctary-( icneral on
thc composition of the Secretariat: '''
1
( ·a/Is upon thc Secretary-Gencral to continuL' to
make cvcrv effort to cnsure thc implcrnrntation ofthc provisions o(thc previous rcsolutions of the General Assemhly, in particular of resolutinns 33/ 143. 35/2 1O and 3 7
235:
3. Rcqucsts the Sccrctary-Gcneral to make spccial
cfforts to mect tlw goals and ohjectivcs establishcd with
rc,pcct to:
(a) Thc situat1on of unrepresented and undcrrcprcsentcd Mcmhcr States:
(h) Thc recn11trncnt. carcn dcvelopmcnt and promotlon of women:
(e) Thc achicwment of a balanced and equitable geographical distrihution of staff throughout the Secretaria!:
4. Rcqucsrs tlw Secretary-General to strcngthen thc
role of the Office of Pcrsonnel Scrvices of the Departrnent
of Administration and Managemcnt in ali personnel matters throughout the Secrctariat:
5. Rcaftirms il.1 rcqucst to thc Sccrctary-General in paragraph 8 of resolution 3 7/235 A to report to the General
Assemhly at its thirty-ninth session on progress made in
the implementation of ali aspects of personnel polic}
reform.
!04rh ¡1/cnarr 111ccri11g
:!O /)ffcmhcr I 983

38/232.

llnited Nations common system: report of
the International Civil Sen-ice Commission

Fhc ( icncral . l1sc111hf1·.
llal'ing constdcrcd 1rith apprcciation the report of the
lnternational Ci,il Service Commission for the year
1983. 60
Reaf/inning thc central role of the Commission within
thc United Nations common systcm in the devclopment
of a single unified international civil service through thc
application of common pcrsonnel standards and arrangcmcnts.
Rcaf/inning thc importancc of rcspcct for thesc common
standards and arrangements hy ali organÍlations membcrs
of the common ,ystem.

1. l 'rgcs ali organi1.ations conccrned to implemcnt the
dccisions of the lntcrnatlonal Civil Servicc ( 'ommissinn
and to act positively on thc rccommcndations ofthc Commission in accordancc with its statutc:
2. Urges thc executivc heads of organi1.ations conccrned. after consultation with thc Commission, to report
to their respcctiw governing bodies such dccisions or proposals as would modify thc rccommendations of the Commission:
3. Caf/s upon ali organirntions of thc llnitcd Nations
common system to bring to thc attention of thc Commission ali matters relating to salaries, allowances, beneht~
and other conditions of employment so as to ensure their
uniform application throughout the common systcm;
4. Reaf/irms the principies embodied in the statute of
thc Commission as approvcd in General Assembly rcsolution 3357 (XXIX) of 18 Decemher 1974. in particular arti)f/tt'!ul Rt't'ord\ , 1 ' rhe t
l '>\t'mh/1·, I h1rt1·-c1i,:hrli
,u,·nt 'i11 3111A: J8 111). and A _,s ,o Add. l
Ml

(

H'!llTa/

\nHon .

.

'iu¡1f'/,·

VIII.

ele 6 thereof, and requests Governments. secrctariats and
staff associations to co-opcrate in this regard;
5. Approves the development of the special indcx for
pensioners as recommendcd by the Commission in paragraph 15 (a) of its report; 61
6. Takes note of the currcnt status of thc margin
between the remuneration of the United States federal
civil service and that of the United Nations systcm;
7. Requests the Commission to complete. in close consultation with the United States authorities concerned, thc
study ofthe equivalency betwcen the highcr grade levcls of
the United Nations system and the Senior Executive Service ofthe United States federal civil service and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session;
8. Notes the progress made to date concerning thc
comparison of total compensation bascd on 11011expatriate benefits applicable on both sidcs and rcqucsts
the Commission to inform the General Assembly. on an
annual basis, of the margin between the remuneration of
United Nations employees and those of the U nited Sta tes
federal civil service on this total compensation basis;

II
l. Expresses concern that the Intemational Civil Service Commission was unable to makc corrections in the
current post adjustment classification at certain duty stations in spite of the fact that the post adjustmcnts were
found to be higher than those which the results of the new
cost-of-living survey could justify:
2. Notes the efforts by the Commission to improve the
post adjustment system and requests the Commission in
this regard to expedite, in particular, the application of the
revised methodology for cost-of-living mcasurement.
called for in General Assembly resolution 34/ 165 of 17
December 1979, in order to improve the mechanism for
adjusting United Nations remuneration to reflect more
accurately the differences in cost of living at various duty
stations;
3. Calls upan the executive heads and the staff of
organizations of the United Nations common system to
co-operate fully with the Commission in thc application of
the post adjustment system;
4. Notes the introduction by thc Commission. with
effect from 1 April 1983, of a renta] subsidy scheme for
staffin the Professional and higher catcgories at Headquarters and other duty stations not previously covcred by a
subsidy scheme;
5. Requests the Commission to monitor this renta]
subsidy scheme with a view to ensuring both its equity and
its effectiveness;

IIl
1. Recalls its resolution 2480 B (XXIII) of 21 December 1968 concerning language incentives in thc United
Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to thc
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a report on
the status of the linguistic skills of United Nations stafl:
including the effects of the languagc incentive programmc,
and to propose, if necessary, further measures to improve
the present situation;
3. Decides that:
(a) The education grant for eligible staffmembers shall
be set ata leve] of 75 per cent of the cost of attendance at
6 1 Jhid.. Supp/ement No. J/1 (A/38,J0¡.

62 /bid., paras. 59, 60 and 62.

251

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Commillee

an educational institut1on in respect of expenses up to a
maximum of $6,000 per ycar. with a maximum reimbursement of $4,500 per child per ycar:
(/,) Thc reimbursement rate for disablcd children shall
be set at 100 per cent of a maximum of $6.000 for
expenses at an educational institution:
(e) The limit of allowablc boarding costs within the
overall maximum allowable cxpcnditure of$6.000 shall be
raised to $1.500 per year:
(d) Provision shall be made to use a currency floor for
this grant. using cxchange rates effecti, e I March 1983. to
ensure the maintenanrc of equitahle reimbursement of
education costs among duty stations;
4. Requcsts the lntemational Civil Service Commission to conducta study of the education grant. the purpose
of which was to facilitate a child's reassimilation in the
staff mem ber's home country, and to rcport on thc results
of the study to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
SCSSllHJ:

IV
1. Takcs note of thc dccision of thc lntematíonal Civil
Service Commission 6 ~ to modify. with effect from I September 1983, thc non-rcsident's allowance provísions to
makc the allowance payable for a fixed duration of five
years at designated duty stations and to make it nonpcnsionable. subject to thc protection of acquired rights as
set out 111 paragraph 63 of the rcport of the Commíssion;
'
Rcqucs/s thc United Nations .loint Staff Pension
Board to review articlc 54 (a) of thc Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in the light ofthc
Commission's decision and to makc appropriate recommcndations to thc General Asscmbl~ at its thirty-ninth
scss10n:
3. /)ccidcs that. in the mcantime. the moditicd nonrcsidcnt's allowance shall not be pensionablc:
V

1. Requcs/s thc ln!L'rnational Civil Servicc Commission to undcrtake a comprehensivc rcview of after-service
hcalth-care coverage with particular attention to locally
recruited ficld staff:
'
Approves the Commission's recommendation 63 that
the prcsent non-contributory system of death-grant benefits be continued inasmuch as it provides bcnefits in the
most cost-effectivc manner:
VI
l. Rccal/s section IV of its resolution 37 /126 of 17
Deccmber 1982 and reaffirms its support for the overall
approach envisaged by the Intemational Civil Service
Commission. which aims at the development of policies
for an integrated personnel management system. based on
human resources planning. to assist organizations in
achieving their programme objectives in an efficient manncr, while providing improvcd conditions for career development;
2. Welcomcs the decision taken by the Commission to
establish job classification standard s. under article 13 of its
statute. for locally recruited staff in f1eld offices where severa] of the organizations employ staff in common areas of
work:
3. Exprcsses ils sulisfaction that job classification
standards have been dcvclopcd for thc General Service
and rdatcd categories 111 Ncw York and requests the
03 //,,d..

para 1 1O.

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

252

organizations concemed to co-ordinate their implementation of these standards in order to utilize fully the opportunities they provide for improved job design, recruitment,
career planning and training;
4. Welcomes the Commission's efforts to develop a
common approach to skills inventories on an interorganizational basis:
5. Recommends that the organizations normally dispense with the requirement for a probationary appointment as a prerequisite for a career appointment following a
period of five years' satisfactory service on fixed-term contracts;
6. Again requests the Commission to pursue its mandate under article 14 of its statute, in consultation with
organizations and staff, with regard to the development of
common training, recruitment and promotion policies for
the organizations and to report thereon to the General
Assembly as each phase of its studies is completed;
Vil

Notes the progress made to date by the Intemational
Civil Service Commission in its review of conditions of
service in the field and requests the Commission to keep
the General Assembly informed of further developments
in its review;
VIII

Requests the Intemational Civil Service Commission to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session
on the question oflongevity and merit steps in the various
grade levels.
104th plenary meeting
20 December 1983

38/233. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board 64
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board for 1983 to the General Assembly and to the member organizations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, 65 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 6~
Welcoming the improvement in the actuaria! situation
of the Fund as a result of the economy measures applied
with effect from 1 January 1983,
Concerned at the continuing actuaria! imbalance of the
Fund and the mounting cost of the pension system,
Desirous ofbringing about a further improvement in the
actuaria! situation of the Fund,
Concerned at the different evolution over the years of
the levels of pensiona ble remuneration for staff in the Professional and higher categories and those of the comparator civil service,
Recalling its resolutions 3526 (XXX) of 16 December
1975, 31/196 of22 December 1976, 33/120 of 19 December 1978, 34/221 of 20 December 1979, 35/215 of 17
December 1980, 36/118 of 10 December 1981 and 37/131
of 17 December 1982,
64 See also sect. X.B.6. decision 38/45~.
65 Otficial Record.,· o('rhc General Asse,11/,/r, Thirry-c1gh1h Scssion. Supplc-

ment No. 9 (A/38/9 and Corr.2): and A/38/9/ Add. l and Corr. l and 2.

Bearing in mind earlier General Assembly resolutions
which stated, inter alia, that changes in the pension adjustment system should not lead to increases in the liabilities
of Member States,
Conscious that a number of factors have combined to
make necessary the consideration and adoption of significant remedia! actions on the problem of the actuaria!
imbalance, including the raising of the rate of contributions hereinafter referred to,
Mindful of the social aspects of the pension system,
Aware that a co-operative effort by member organizations, participan ts and beneficiaries is required if the actuaria! imbalance is to be reduced or eliminated, thereby
securing an adequate leve\ of benefits under the Fund,

ÁMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS JOINT STAFF PENSION FUND

1. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1984, the
rate ofcontributions shall be raised from 21 to 21.75 per
cent of pensionable remuneration, of which the employing
member organization shall pay 14.5 per cent and the participant 7.25 per cent;
2. Amends the Regulations ofthe United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund, without retroactive effect, as set forth
in the annex to the present resolution;
11
MEASURES TO IMPROVE THE ACTUARIAL BALANCE
OF THE FuNo

Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board,
with the assistance of the Committee of Actuaries, to consider, early in 1984, the various proposals discussed at the
thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly with a view
to reducing or eliminating the actuaria! imbalance of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund. including the
following measures:
(a) Increasing to a realistic leve! the interest rate used
to calculate the amount of the lump-sum commutation;
(b) Determination of the lump sum in net equivalent
terms, subject to the reimbursement of any taxes payable
thereon:
(e) Re-examination of the early retirement provisions,
taking into account, ínter afia, the observations made by
the Committee of Actuaries;
(d) Imposition of a ceiling on the highest levels of pens10ns;
(e) Review of the two-track system followed to determine the initial amount of the pension and its subsequent
adjustment:
(/) Re-examination of the survivor benefits under the
Regulations ofthe Fund, together with altemative ways of
financing them;
and to submit its findings and recommendations thereon
and on such other measures as may be deemed appropriate, through the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session;
66 A/381547
