S/PV.8296

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8296th meeting

Wednesday, 27 June 2018, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Dah
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the review of United Nations cross-border
operations (S/2018/617)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/619)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-19952 (E)
*1819952*

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the review
of United Nations cross-border operations
(S/2018/617)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018)
(S/2018/619)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr. John
Ging, Director of the Coordination and Response
Division, United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.
Mr. De Mistura is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Geneva.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to participate in
today’s meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/617, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the review of United Nations
cross-border operations, and document S/2018/619,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332
(2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018).
I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to address the members of the Security Council. When
I last addressed the Council on 16 May (see S/PV.8260),
I spoke of three bottom-line priorities: de-escalation,
reviving the political process, and bridging the gaps
between different groups of international stakeholders
2/26

27/06/2018

through high-level diplomacy because it is now time
for high-level diplomacy. I would now like to report on
where we stand on each of these elements.
First, with regard to de-escalation, I regret to say
that I have very little to report, or rather, very little
positive to report. In fact, I am gravely concerned at the
turn of events, particularly in the south-west of Syria.
In that area, now, while we are talking, we are seeing
a full-scale ground offensive in aerial bombardment
and exchanges of fire from both sides. I want to
believe that the Security Council will not allow this
to become another eastern Ghouta or another eastern
Aleppo or Aleppo in general, where so many civilians
were sacrificed and died. Yet I see things moving in
this direction.
Let us be aware of what it would mean if the southwest were to see a full-scale battle to the end. It could
be like Aleppo and eastern Ghouta combined in terms
of the population in the areas that might be affected.
Some 45,000 — almost 50,000, I hear — have already
been displaced owing to fighting, mostly from eastern
Dar’a governorate to areas near the Jordanian border.
This year alone, more than 900,000 people in Syria have
been displaced nationwide. It is unimaginable what the
situation would be if we added to that number all those
who are presently in the eastern Dar’a governorate. My
colleague John Ging, whom I see is in the Chamber
today, will brief the Council on these issues in greater
depth in due course.
We must also think of the regional implications. As
Secretary-General António Guterres himself has said,
escalation in the south-west poses significant risks to
regional security and stability, which is a point I myself
have constantly underscored. In fact, regional tensions
continue. Just to give Council members one example,
on Monday of this week air strikes on Damascus airport
were reported, which Syrian State media attributed
to Israel. We are not in a position to independently
confirm this, nor has Israel made any statement on the
matter, but we are concerned that a full-scale battle
in the south-west could only add fuel to this type of
tensions. Our position on Aleppo, on Ghouta and on
other places in Syria has always been to put the sanctity
of human — civilian — life above all else.
We have seen months of intensified back-andforth regional dialogue on the south-west, and we
looked at it with interest because we saw and believed
that there was some progress. I therefore urge all
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

parties — the Syrian Government, the armed groups
and all interested parties — to draw on the lessons
that we all learned from eastern Ghouta, from Ghouta,
from Aleppo and elsewhere, and use the channels that
already exist — and we know they exist and we know
where they are — and work on arrangements that could
prevent further human suffering, protect civilians and
provide an exit from the potential for a further tragedy
in this cruel seven-year-old conflict. I hope we will
have an opportunity in private consultations to discuss
this issue because we are indeed concerned.
With regard to the constitutional committee, we are
beginning to see some movement towards a political
process. That is why we are so concerned that military
escalation could have the potential to compromise the
progress that we are seeing on the political front. During
the last month, we have intensified our efforts to find
a way ahead for the implementation of the Sochi final
statement for the establishment of a Syrian-led, Syrianowned, United Nations-facilitated constitutional
committee within the framework of the Geneva process
and in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Four and a half months after the Sochi declaration,
on 28 May the Syrian Government provided a catalyst
when it conveyed to my office in Damascus 50 names
for its Government list. I expressed appreciation to the
Syrian Government for this important step. I have also
expressed my appreciation to the Russian Federation
and the Islamic Republic of Iran, with which I know the
Syrian Government has discussed this list and whose
encouragement has helped to produce this movement.
After receiving the list, I decided to consult key
regional partners in Istanbul, Tehran, Cairo and
elsewhere, and I saw senior officials of the countries
where those capitals are located, including President Al
Sisi of Egypt, as well as officials of the Arab League
and opposition leaders. I was in contact with the
Russian Federation at several levels, the United States
and European countries. On the basis of these useful
discussions, I determined that it was now time to take
advantage of this initiative of the Syrian Government,
step up consultations and go deeper. On 19 June,
therefore, I held formal joint consultations at a very
senior level in Geneva with the Russian Federation, the
Republic of Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
We discussed the best way to implement the Sochi
final statement to establish a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned
constitutional committee under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva.

S/PV. 8296

I must say it was a constructive meeting. Much
of the discussion concerned the composition of the
committee as well as such issues as decision-making
and how to avoid deadlocks. The aim was to seek some
preliminary understandings. Participants exchanged
opinions on these matters in a very interactive and
constructive way. Some common ground actually
emerged — preliminary, but it emerged. Overall, a spirit
of productive negotiation and potential compromise
emerged because all three countries recognized the
need for a constitutional committee that is credible in
the eyes of the international community.
On 22 June I met with an official from the
European Union, who provided sound advice, and I
will meet shortly with High Representative Mogherini
on these issues tomorrow. On 25 June I hosted joint
consultations in Geneva with, in alphabetical order,
France, Germany, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States. We discussed the de-escalation
arrangements in depth, a key element, obviously, that
underpins progress on the political front. Views were
exchanged on the importance of diplomatic bridging
between different groups on Syria and prospects for
progress on the constitutional track.
There was a clear expectation on the part of
those countries — and let me be frank: they have an
interest and a stake in the process and also are the
ones who could be important players in any potential
reconstruction — that any constitutional committee
must be credible and internationally legitimate, it
must contain a diverse and representative spectrum of
Syrians, including those mentioned in the Sochi final
statement, such as independence, civil society, experts
and women.
Based on my consultations with many stakeholders,
I intend to maintain my prerogative to contribute
to adjusting the committee so as to ensure, first, its
credibility and secondly, international legitimacy. In
terms of women, let me underscore my own expectation
that any constitutional committee must include a
minimum of 30 per cent women. In this connection,
I noted with pleasure that 26 per cent of those on the
Government list of 50 names provided to us were
women, which is not enough, because we are aiming
for 30 per cent, but it is a very good signal. I will
certainly not be impressed by the argument that others
may raise that there are not enough Syrian women who
are competent on constitutional issues. Just yesterday,

18-199523/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

for instance, more than 200 Syrian women from
diverse backgrounds met in Beirut for a conference
organized by UN-Women. Despite their differences,
they agreed on many points, including on women’s
equal participation in decision-making, including in
any constitutional committee. I also take note of the
recent letter of support for women’s full and effective
participation, with at least 30 per cent representation, in
the constitutional committee, which was sent to us by
the representatives of members of the Security Council
Peru, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
We now await an opposition list of names, which we
hope will be forthcoming shortly. I know that serious
work on this issue is being conducted even as we speak.
I will be proceeding also to facilitate the process of
bridging independence experts, tribal leaders, civil
society and women, as indicated in the Sochi declaration,
and, frankly, in many of our common deliberations. I
should add that both meetings in Geneva underscored
one important point that I, too, will underscore: the
support of key countries for the role of the United
Nations in facilitating the political process in Geneva,
including the constitutional committee.
Overall, these consultations represent a cautious
step forward, and I have to be cautious, having seen
how sometimes we took one step forward and two
back. But let me be clear: this is a package, and that
is something that we have discussed with everyone:
nothing is agreed until everything has been agreed.
That is why it is a work in progress. I am also aware that
this process will require the consent and engagement of
the Syrian Government and parties, with full respect
for their concerns and sensitivities — the Government,
the opposition and civil society.

27/06/2018

and frankly I even heard a great deal about this from
neighbouring countries such as Lebanon.
We also urge concrete action on the issue of
detainees. Today, even as we speak, a technical team
from my office is in Ankara for a meeting of the
Working Group on the release of detainees/abductees
and handover of the bodies as well as the identification
of missing persons, of which the United Nations is a
member, together with Iran, the Russian Federation
and Turkey.
As the Council is aware, so far the outcome has
been zero. However, we are not giving up. Today’s
meeting is already the third meeting of the Working
Group, which deals with a key humanitarian issue that
affects thousands and thousands of Syrian people. What
is necessary now and what we and the Syrian people
expect are some concrete steps and results to alleviate
the suffering of those affected by this tragic situation.
Members of my team who are present in Ankara today
will continue proactively to support the Working Group,
which was established in Astana. I hope that all actors
involved will demonstrate the political will required to
produce some results in this field.

For my part, I will continue to facilitate further
movement in this direction to seek the support, counsel
and advice of many, which is why I anticipate inviting
the Sochi co-conveners back to Geneva in the coming
weeks, as well as the six countries I saw Monday and
others and then report back to the Security Council.

In the meantime, we continue to seek ways to
bridge different groups of international stakeholders
through high-level diplomacy. That is my bottom line,
and we have seen that taking place. Serious, robust and
sustainable dialogue is vital to underpin de-escalation,
which is very much needed now, and the political
process in general. I discussed this issue with President
Al Sisi in Cairo when I was there, and he gave me
some constructive ideas in this regard. I believe that
we are already seeing an emerging web of high-level
international discussions on Syria: frequent contacts
between the United States and the Russian Federation,
for instance, at many different levels; communications
at a very high level between President Putin and
President Macron and President Putin and Chancellor
Merkel; and intensified talks between the United States
and Turkey over various issues.

Let me also flag that if we are to move forward
with a constitutional process towards what everyone
in Syria tells us they want, a safe, calm and neutral
environment, it will be important to start to see steps
that could restore trust and confidence in social peace.
That is why we are concerned when we see unilateral
legislative acts such as Law Number 10, which we
understand many refugees were very worried about,

All that we can build on. I have shuttled around
all relevant capitals recently, so I can say with some
authority and confidence that there is some common
ground to build upon that could provide a solid basis
for some concrete understandings. Many countries are
not that far apart on issues that are, frankly, easy to
resolve or address, such as national sovereignty, unity
and many others, and we have been working on it.

4/26

18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Let me reiterate once again that the United Nations
stands ready to use its own good offices, competence
and experience — and we have a whole team working
on this — in the bridging of commonalities to contribute
to facilitating international dialogue in the quest for
such commonalities.
In conclusion, we are moving cautiously in the right
direction on the political front. I ask for the support of
all present, including of the Syrian Government, whose
representatives are sitting in the Chamber, in facilitating
this effort. Ultimately, this effort must be Syrian led
and Syrian owned, because no country or organization
can simply impose a fait accompli on the Syrian people.
We know that, but we need to move forward.
My second message is that currently we are gravely
concerned by the battlefield developments and their
potential to expand into regional tensions. Therefore,
we urge the Council and all interested parties to help
find an arrangement or a solution in the south-west
that will spare civilian suffering and large movements
of displaced people and reduce the potential tension so
that we do not see once again seven years afterwards,
perhaps when we are getting closer to the end of the
conflict, a repetition of what we saw sadly in Aleppo
and eastern Ghouta.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: Today I will provide the Council with
an update on behalf of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock.
I would like to start with the alarming developments
in southern Syria where violence has escalated sharply
last week and heavy artillery and aerial shelling is under
way. To date, an estimated 45,000 to 50,000 people
have been displaced owing to this fighting, most from
eastern Dar’a governorate to areas near the Jordanian
border. A number of villages either impacted or fearful
of the proximity of the fighting have been almost totally
abandoned. According to the World Food Programme,
“the number of displaced people could nearly double
if violence continues to escalate”. Dozens of civilians
have reportedly been killed, including children, and
many more have been injured.
Attacks have also hit civilian infrastructure causing
widespread damage, including an air strike yesterday

S/PV. 8296

that rendered a hospital supported by Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF) in Al-Hirak city inoperable.
According to MSF, that hospital supported 90,000
people and provided more than 15,700 emergency
room consultations in the past year alone. Another
hospital in eastern Ghariyeh had to suspend operations
owing to insecurity. In eastern Maliha, the local
health centre and local council building were also both
rendered inoperable.
This morning media reports announced that air
strikes struck yet another health facility — this time
in the town of Jizeh, east of Dar’a city. In addition,
Naseeb hospital declared the suspension of its services
and the Dar’a Education Directorate announced the
adjournment of all classes and examinations. Some
100,000 people in Dar’a city and surrounding villages
have been impacted by a complete electricity blackout,
which occurred yesterday when Government forces
launched an assault on the divided southern city.
Despite the hostilities, the United Nations and
its partners continue to provide food, health care,
nutrition, education and core relief items to more
than 400,000 people in need in southern Syria from
across the border in Jordan. Humanitarian partners
supporting cross-border operations have been actively
planning for such an escalation since the first quarter
of the year and supplies are prepositioned in Dar’a and
Quneitra governorates. Any further escalation will
significantly increase the number of displacements
and jeopardize the United Nations capacity to conduct
further humanitarian operations. Today, the United
Nations cross-border convoy, for example, had to be
postponed owing to the bombardments that took place
within kilometres of the Jordanian border. I recall in
that regard the Secretary-General’s own statement last
week, underscoring “the fragile situation of civilians
in southern Syria” and calling “for an immediate end
to the current military escalation”. I also call on all
stakeholders to ensure that cross-border humanitarian
deliveries continue in a sustained, safe and unimpeded
manner to reach all those in need, including the newly
displaced people.
In north-west Syria, particularly in Idlib, the
humanitarian situation is increasingly dire. This is
linked to the massive new displacements since late
last year. More than half a million people have been
displaced to and within Idlib in these past six months,
whether from eastern Ghouta, northern rural Homs,
Yarmouk or other parts of Idlib itself. There is a

18-199525/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

growing concern around military escalation with 60
people reportedly killed by air strikes between 7 and
10 June alone, and armed clashes in the vicinity of
the two most recently besieged communities in Syria,
namely, Fo’ah and Kefraya. Moreover, improvised
explosives have been detonating regularly throughout
the area, with over 20 incidents reported in May and two
recent incidents in Idlib city itself on 21 June, killing
eight people and wounding another 40. In addition, a
number of abductions for ransom of medical and health
professionals was reported in June, which led local
authorities to suspend non-emergency activities for
several days.
In Raqqa city, the United Nations Department
of Safety and Security and the United Nations Mine
Action Service conducted an assessment mission on
13 and 14 June. While the United Nations remains
concerned that contamination of explosive hazards
makes the city unsafe for returns, an estimated 138,000
people have already returned to the city since the
withdrawal of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
October 2017. Most returnees have settled in areas with
comparatively less infrastructure and less explosive
hazard contamination. There has been a reduction in the
average number of blast-related casualties reported by
health facilities from over 170 per month in November
and December 2017, to an estimated 43 in April. That is
the most recent data that we have.
Access to basic services within Raqqa city
continues to gradually improve with hospitals
reopening and electricity re-established in rural areas
to the north of the city, as well as other infrastructure
sites. The rehabilitation of the water network within
Raqqa city continues at too slow a pace. Only 50 per
cent of the city is reportedly receiving water through
the network, and it is often in insufficient quantities. In
neighbourhoods that do have access, the water network
supply is often intermittent with concerns about poor
water quality contributing to health risks. The United
Nations and its implementing partners continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to those in Raqqa city
and throughout Raqqa governorate, reaching nearly
300,000 people every month.
Further to the west, 136,000 individuals are
estimated to remain in Afrin district, including
over 40,000 people in Afrin city. Another 134,000
individuals from Afrin district remain displaced in
the Tell Rifaat subdistrict, Nubul and Zahra towns and
the surrounding communities. Some limited return
6/26

27/06/2018

movements to Afrin district took place in May when
some 3,000 to 5,000 individuals reportedly returned to
that district.
The humanitarian access situation in Afrin district
continues to improve, and while Turkey and the Turkish
authorities provide the majority of the response in
those areas, the United Nations — through its crossborder humanitarian partners — is also contributing to
life-saving services and activities in the district. Based
on a recent multisectoral rapid assessment conducted
by humanitarian partners in May, needs are considered
to remain very high, with most health facilities in rural
areas closed, many service providers having fled the
area and a large proportion of schools, markets and
bakeries not yet functional, owing again to the presence
of explosive remnants of war and the continued absence
of staff, workers and tradespeople.
In Tell Rifaat and the surrounding areas, the United
Nations continues to provide humanitarian assistance to
the displaced populations mainly from its warehouses
in Aleppo. However, additional assistance and services
are required, particularly for the people in the rural
areas and the internally displaced persons sites.
In eastern Ghouta, close to 16,000 people are
reported to have moved back as of early June. Estimates
indicate that there are currently 125,000 people 1iving
inside the enclave. The United Nations has largely
been unable to access eastern Ghouta since the change
in control in March. A visit to Saqba and Kafr Batna
took place on 14 May, but a full assessment of needs
is yet to be authorized by the Government of Syria.
Assistance is being provided through the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent (SARC) and other local partners.
A SARC convoy delivered United Nations assistance
including, wheat flour for 60,000 people and food for
45,000 people, in Douma on 10 June. United Nations
personnel were not permitted to accompany the convoy
or conduct a needs assessment, despite the convoy being
implemented under the agreed bimonthly inter-agency
convoy plan. Moreover, two inter-agency convoys were
deployed in May, namely, to the hard-to-reach locations
of Talbiseh, in northern rural Homs, and Tlul Elhomor,
in southern Hamah. As was the case for the convoy to
Douma, United Nations personnel were not permitted
to participate in the two convoys. The Syrian Arab Red
Crescent delivered the United Nations multisectoral
assistance for 92,750 people in Talbiseh, as well as
food assistance for 12,000 in nearby Al-Jabriya village.
Yesterday multisectoral assistance was delivered to
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

107,500 people in Al-Rastan, in northern rural Homs.
Initially United Nations personnel were not authorized
to accompany that convoy. However, following intense
negotiations, including with the help of the Russian
Federation, the Syrian authorities amended their
decision to allow a United Nations presence, as well as
the delivery of all medical and health items.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has
documented reports of nearly 700 attacks on health
facilities in Syria since early 2014, with 112 confirmed
attacks already this year. We are now at par with the
number of attacks registered for all of last year. That
is more than 16 per month — one attack every other
day, on average. Syria now accounts for nearly 70 per
cent of all reported attacks on health-care facilities
documented by the World Health Organization
worldwide. According to WHO, it is “the deadliest
place in the world for health workers”. Let me highlight
our efforts to prevent such attacks from occurring.
Since March, the United Nations has deconflicted
more than 500 humanitarian premises and sites with
the Russian Federation, the United States-led coalition
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and
Turkey. Those sites were deconflicted in an effort
to prevent them from being targeted by mistake or
incidentally. Yet four of those deconflicted sites — all of
them health facilities — were hit, in eastern Ghouta and
northern rural Homs on 20 March, 6 April and 29 April.
That is four too many. We must all ensure that none of
our deconflicted sites is hit or damaged unlawfully.
Late last year, the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to conduct a written review of United Nations
humanitarian cross-border operations. A report
(S/2018/617) was issued this past week. I will not go
through all of its details and findings, but will make a
few points on the impact of our cross-border operations
on the people in need in Syria.
As the Council knows, nearly 5 million people are
in need in areas that are more accessible via crossborder operations than from within Syria. Of those,
2.67 million people are in areas solely accessible via
cross-border operations. Those are people without
access to assistance from within Syria. From July
2014 to April of this year, a net total of 3.7 million
people received food assistance, many of them on a
monthly basis; 4.7 million people received sanitation
and hygiene assistance; education supplies were
delivered to 946,000 people; and nutrition assistance

S/PV. 8296

was provided to 611,000 people. Some 21.1 million
medical treatments and procedures were conducted in
82 hospitals and 70 mobile clinics, which are operational
and supported by medical supplies provided by the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners through
cross-border operations.
The year 2018 has seen a rapid evolution of the
conflict, with shifts in control of territory, mass
movements of people and nearly an additional 1 million
people displaced. While geographical space for
operations has shrunk as areas in the south-east of Idlib
have transitioned in control, the size of the population
being supported by United Nations cross-border
operations has actually increased and the needs of
people have become even more acute. For example, in
2014, when resolution 2165 (2014) was adopted, Idlib’s
population was estimated at 1.9 million. Today it stands
at 2.5 million, with half of that number representing
displaced people. Resolution 2165 (2014) was adopted
out of a dire humanitarian need and imperative, with
millions of people in need of assistance who were
inaccessible from within Syria. As long as people
remain inaccessible from within Syria, which remains
the case today, cross-border humanitarian deliveries
continue to be the indispensable lifeline for those
millions of Syrians dependent on humanitarian
assistance to survive.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Ging
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura and Director Ging for their
briefings this morning.
We are no closer to peace in Syria and no closer
to addressing any of the Security Council’s concerns
about the Al-Assad regime’s denials of humanitarian
access. The situation in the south-west de-escalation
zone has become extremely serious. On Monday during
the Council’s meeting on threats to international
peace and security in the Middle East, the Russian
representative said,
“No one has done more than Russia ... [to] reduce
the level of violence” (S/PV.8293, p. 28).
That is just not true. The United States is deeply
concerned about the Syrian regime’s new offensive
in the south-west, with direct support from Russia,

18-199527/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

where ongoing air strikes and barrel-bomb, artillery
and rocket attacks are taking a significant toll on the
civilian population. That is a part of the country that
had enjoyed relative calm for almost a year because
all parties were abiding by the de-escalation zone. But
at least 45,000 people are now confirmed to have fled
their homes in southern Syria since the beginning of
the offensive, just 12 days ago. We are now hearing that
that number might be as high as 70,000.
It is deeply alarming that we see are seeing an
additional escalation in the south-west despite formal
arrangements to keep that area calm. When Jordan,
Russia and the United States established the south-west
de-escalation zone last year, the terms were clear. Above
all, there was to be a ceasefire that would allow the
parties to engage in combating extremist and terrorist
groups designated as such by the Security Council. The
arrangement remains in place, and the United States
and Jordan have upheld our commitments in good faith,
but now the situation is changing. Once again, Russia is
justifying a military offensive by the Al-Assad regime
by saying that more than half of the de-escalation zone
is controlled by terrorists. That is just not true. The
predominant armed opposition groups operating in the
de-escalation zone belong to the moderate Free Syrian
Army. The de-escalation arrangement does not allow
for military operations against its members. Rather,
it only allows for combating the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups as designated by the Council.
For years, the Al-Assad regime and Russia have
justified brutal assaults on civilian populations and
infrastructure, schools, bakeries and hospitals under
the pretext of counter-terrorism. We are now seeing
the same pattern in the south-west. The United States
can confirm that Russia itself launched air strikes in
the south-west de-escalation zone in recent days. To be
clear, the unilateral military operations under way by
the Al-Assad regime and Russia in south-west Syria
represent a violation of the ceasefire arrangement
reaffirmed by President Trump and President Putin.
The United States remains determined to keep its
commitment to the ceasefire. We urge our Russian
partners to also uphold the ceasefire that it helped
establish in partnership with Jordan and the United
States. We further urge Russia to take immediate steps
to de-escalate violence in the south-west and throughout
the whole of Syria consistent with previous Security
Council resolutions.
8/26

27/06/2018

The Council has already witnessed the horrific
suffering of the people of eastern Ghouta during a
ruthless assault by the regime and Russia in which
thousands were killed and displaced. Russia yet
again appears to be choosing a military rather than
a political option It is incumbent upon those sitting
at this table, and the international community more
broadly, to demand that this escalation of violence in
Syria stop immediately. In addition, the offensive in
south-west Syria is threatening the vital Al-Ramtha
border crossing, which the Council has authorized for
cross-border humanitarian deliveries. A closing of the
crossing would inflict untold suffering on civilians who
depend on life-saving assistance.
It is vital that cross-border humanitarian aid
deliveries continue to serve the millions who depend
upon them. In last week’s report on cross-border
humanitarian operations, the Secretary-General
asserted that,
“[t]he full and complementary use of all delivery
options, both from within the country and from
neighbouring countries, is necessary in order
to gain access to people in need” (S/2018/617,
para. 29).
Because the regime routinely fails to facilitate
humanitarian assistance and often removes medical
items and other aid from convoys, it is vital that the
Council use its authority to support the continuation
of cross-border operations. Alternative proposals from
Council members on implementing a new humanitarian
operations mechanism that requires the Syrian regime’s
approval are out of step with reality. Most importantly,
those new proposals will harm the Syrian people. We
cannot put humanitarian assistance and the crossborder mechanism that ensures its delivery in jeopardy.
As always, the need for a political solution to
end this crisis is obvious. The United States urges
that a constitutional committee be formed as quickly
as possible under United Nations auspices. If such a
committee is to work and lead to a lasting settlement,
it must be inclusive. That is why we support the efforts
of the United Nations to include representatives
of civil society, women and the opposition from
the Syrian negotiations committee. The United
Nations must be given a free hand to determine the
committee’s composition, scope of work and schedule.
The statement from Russia’s conference in Sochi in
January makes it clear that the United Nations has
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the authority to make decisions about who sits on the
constitutional committee, and that must be respected.
Lastly, we reiterate our commitment to the Geneva
process and the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). Geneva remains the sole legitimate venue for
a peaceful resolution of the Syrian conflict. Council
members around this table often reiterate that message,
but actions on the ground appear to suggest that some
are hedging their bets and seeking to create alternatives
to Geneva. We must not delay progress on the political
process any further.
The fact that we were able to work with Russia
on a de-escalation arrangement that held for nearly a
year shows that when we have the political will we can
help reduce violence and suffering in Syria. Progress
is possible, and that is why the United States remains
committed to the de-escalation agreement and to
working with the Council to support peace in Syria.
Like Special Envoy de Mistura, we will not give up.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura
for his comprehensive and objective briefing. We
assure him of our full support. I also thank Mr. John
Ging for his instructive briefing on the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Syria.
I will start with our concerns about the situation on
the ground, particularly the ongoing offensive in southwestern Syria. I will then touch on the extremely dire
humanitarian situation. Finally, I will emphasize that
the situation makes it even more essential to launch an
inclusive political process capable of uniting Syrians.
The relentless logic of military operations continues
in Syria. For the past week we have seen the regime
resume its attacks on the opposition in south-western
Syria, in a region inhabited by 700,000 civilians. There
have been several air attacks on the city of Dar’a since
23 June. This relentless strategy, which represents the
worst possible outcome for the civilian population,
is sadly familiar. As in Damascus, Homs, Aleppo or
eastern Ghouta, the goal of the air attacks is to force
the opposition groups to surrender using methods of
war that are contrary to humanitarian law. Another
operation in southern Syria is paving the way for new
sieges that will starve out the population and result
in more forced displacements and restrictions on
humanitarian assistance. Moreover, that offensive is
in an extremely sensitive border area and could have
direct consequences for the security and stability of

S/PV. 8296

Israel and Jordan. In that connection, I would like to
recall France’s commitment to the security of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force, in which the
Blue Helmets operate under difficult conditions in
the Golan Heights, and which should be maintained at
all times. Another wave of refugees could destabilize
neighbouring countries for the long-term, particularly
Jordan, which has already taken in so many Syrians.
These developments are all the more worrying
given that the diversity of the forces present in southwestern Syria presents a real risk of regional escalation.
The territories targeted in the offensive are part of the
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria established
by the United States, Russia and Jordan in July 2017.
France therefore calls on everyone, beginning with the
Russians, to honour their commitments in order to put
an immediate end to the offensive. Russia must honour
the agreement reached a year ago and immediately
ensure the cessation of hostilities.
In this troubling context, the continuing
catastrophic humanitarian situation is deplorable. In
Idlib, eastern Ghouta and elsewhere, the humanitarian
situation continues to be particularly alarming. Very
rarely do convoys have access to the population, while
the needs of the population are immense. The regime
is taking on a particularly grave responsibility in that
regard. The systematic and deliberate obstruction of
humanitarian aid is unacceptable, especially the Syrian
regime’s systematic removal of medical materials
from convoys, including vaccines for children. The
influx of displaced persons renders the situation even
more critical, particularly in Idlib. All the parties
must guarantee total and unhindered humanitarian
access, coordinated by the United Nations, and, finally,
medical infrastructure and personnel, which are still
being attacked, must be protected.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
humanitarian cross-border assistance (S/2018/617 and
S/2018/619). Cross-border assistance continues to play a
vital role in enabling aid to be sent along the most direct
routes. The mechanism is transparent, effective and
fully dedicated to the people in need. The neighbouring
countries have given the mechanism their unequivocal
support and call for it to continue. It is therefore our
responsibility to ensure that it is preserved.
Considering the risk of the fatigue over this
issue that peeps through here and there, we must all
realize that we cannot turn away in the face of the

18-199529/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

continuing military operations and humanitarian
disaster in Syria. We must be particularly careful not
to let the potential next chapter of the Syrian tragedy,
the regional expansion of the conflict, be written.
These problems make launching a credible political
process more urgent and necessary than ever. It may
be too soon for a Syrian Dayton agreement, but we are
seeing the first encouraging signs of a true political
process. The road map is clear. We must fully support
the efforts of the United Nations in Geneva to promote
areas of convergence among the primary parties in the
Syrian crisis.
In that regard, the discussion on 18 June between
Mr. de Mistura and the three Astana guarantors,
followed by another on 25 June with the members of
the Small Group of the Global Coalition, should enable
the launch of a constructive dialogue with a view to
reaching a lasting and credible political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). The short-term
goal is the establishment of a constitutional committee.
We are encouraged by the willingness of the parties
to work constructively for the establishment of such a
committee, composed of one third members designated
by the regime, one third opposition members and one
third independents. This is a modest but necessary stage
that is showing initial progress of a kind we have not
seen for months and that could potentially be a turning
point towards a true political process. We hope that is
the case. That is why we are encouraging the Special
Envoy to continue to work actively on appointing the
50 independent representatives in order to ensure that
neither the regime nor the opposition has a majority.
We urge him to define the modalities of work for the
committee as soon as possible.
The demanding path towards a political solution
based on an intra-Syrian agreement also requires the
holding of free and transparent elections, organized and
monitored by the United Nations, enabling all Syrians,
in Syria and abroad, to have a voice, and with the active
participation of women in the political process. In that
connection, France supports a 30 per cent minimum
participation rate of women in the process.
Those two elements — the constitutional aspect and
the elections — require a neutral, secure and impartial
framework for the Syrians to express themselves freely
that is guaranteed by confidence-building measures.
That is the very aim of the efforts under way by France
and its partners to ensure coordination between the
Small Group of the Global Coalition and the Astana
10/26

27/06/2018

process. Our goal is not to create a process devoid of
substance but to bring together the efforts of the parties
with leverage in Syria to better support the mediation
of the Special Envoy.
During the debate the day before yesterday (see
S/PV.8293), the Russian Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Director of the Middle East and North
Africa Department, Mr. Sergey Vershinin, advocated
a political settlement of the Syrian crisis through
constructive dialogue. Based on the shared conviction
that there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict, let us be mindful of working jointly for a
lasting political solution.
It is high time that we unite behind the United
Nations process in Geneva. That is in the interests of us
all, above all the Syrians. In that regard, France is ready
to engage with the Russian Federation and all actors
with leverage, whether on the ground, on the economic
front or in international bodies, in order for the United
Nations mediation to succeed. We believe that today
that is possible. Let us get to work. There is no time
to lose.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for
their briefings. Through them, allow me once again to
thank their teams on the ground, which are doing good
work in very difficult circumstances.
As there was positive news on the political front
and as we do not often have such news, I would like
to start by talking about that. We are very grateful to
Mr. De Mistura for his leadership and everything that
he has done to drive the political process forward. I
think that the recent meetings of the Astana guarantors
and the Small Group of the Global Coalition in Geneva
underline the centrality and primacy of the United
Nations Geneva process. I fully agree with the French
Ambassador about the United Nations being the
best placed to decide how to take the constitutional
committee forward and to ensure that Syrians from the
full range of political perspectives and civil society are
represented on that committee. It was very welcome to
hear what Mr. De Mistura had to say about women’s
participation in particular. I thank him for referring to
the 30-per-cent minimum that we had put in our letter
with our Peruvian and Swedish colleagues. When I was
posted to the United Nations in Geneva, I in fact met
some of those Syrian women. They are very impressive,
energetic and, for the most part, secular, and they have
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

a contribution to make. That is therefore extremely
good to hear. I think that the committee represents an
important step forward in the political process.
However, as well as addressing fundamental
constitutional questions, we also believe that the process
needs to make real progress towards creating a calm,
safe and neutral environment. That will ultimately be
essential if there are ever to be free and fair elections.
We believe that we should build on emerging areas of
common ground between key international actors. For
our part, we, the United Kingdom, remain committed
to supporting the political process and a pragmatic
political settlement that brings an end to the conflict
and that also ensures regional stability. However, we
are concerned about the fact that developments such
as the recent Law Number 10 casts some doubt on
the willingness of the Syrian authorities to engage
meaningfully. When he speaks, I would be very grateful
to hear an assurance from the Syrian Ambassador about
the commitment to the political process.
I said that the political process had made some
positive steps forward recently. As the two previous
speakers pointed out, that cannot in any way be said of
the situation on the ground or of what Mr. De Mistura
calls battlefield developments and humanitarian access.
We also remain deeply concerned about the escalating
attacks by the Syrian forces, backed by Russian air
strikes, against the de-escalation zone in south-western
Syria. I completely endorse what the United States and
French representatives said about not only the risks
to life inherent in such action but also the significant
risk that it poses to regional stability and security. The
attacks are in flagrant violation of the de-escalation
agreement that was reached between Presidents Trump
and Putin in November 2017. It is disappointing for very
many reasons, but not least because it casts doubt on
the willingness of Russia to abide by its international
commitments. I join France and the United States in
urging Russia to uphold the commitments under that
agreement and to ensure that the Syrian Government
abides by the ceasefire so that we can avert a further
humanitarian crisis and can make a contribution to
regional stability.
Turning to humanitarian access, we also welcome
the thorough report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/617). It is clear that the geographical space for
cross-border operations has shrunk, particularly to the
south-east of Idlib. As areas have transitioned to the
control of the Government of Syria, if I have understood

S/PV. 8296

correctly, humanitarian access has decreased. Actually,
the reverse ought to be true. The fact that the areas
have come under the control of the Syrian authorities
ought to make humanitarian access easier and more
comprehensive. Again, I would therefore be very
grateful if the Syrian Ambassador, and perhaps the
Russian Ambassador, can address some of that in their
remarks, because I would really like to understand
why it is so difficult to allow humanitarian access. We
talked about that in our last round of consultations. It
is still not clear to me why there is an erratic pattern
of some United Nations personnel being allowed in but
not others and some convoys being allowed through
but not others. I therefore really hope that the Security
Council can have some more information about that so
that we can make some proper decisions about how best
we can contribute to the situation on the ground.
In that respect, I would just like to recall that
there are still 2 million Syrians living in hard-to-reach
locations across the country. “Hard to reach” makes it
sound as if one has to forge rivers or climb mountains. It
is not that sort of “hard to reach”. As far as I understand
it, it is an access point. We are therefore back to the
point of needing to understand why access is quite
so difficult.
I would also like to echo what Mr. Ging said about
the attacks on health-care facilities. Those are also
unjustifiable. They are outlawed under international
law. We call for them to stop. It is not right that aid
workers should suffer in that way or that the people
of Syria should be denied the opportunity to access
medical facilities.
In sum, there are three things that the United
Kingdom wishes to call for today. We would like to hear
directly from the Syrians and the Russians about their
sincerity in engaging in the political process. We would
like to hear about the southern de-escalation zone and
what can be done to restore the ceasefire and to grant
humanitarian access. We would like to hear about the
Syrian Government’s policies and practices that are
creating obstacles for vulnerable displaced people to
receive services, food and aid, return home and rebuild
their lives.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I will speak on behalf of
Kuwait later on in the consultations focusing on the
humanitarian situation. However, I wanted to just very
briefly address the dramatic escalation that we see, and
I wanted to do that publicly and to express our very deep

18-1995211/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

concern over the military offensive in southwestern
Syria and its humanitarian consequences. I would like
to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for
their briefings today and for giving us the full picture
of the effects that that has not only on the humanitarian
situation and the population there but also with regard
to the political process.
Some 50,000 people have already been displaced.
The majority of them are moving towards the
Jordanian border. We therefore urge all stakeholders
to respect their obligations under international law and
international humanitarian law, including the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure. I would like to
very strongly reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for
an immediate end to the current military offensive. As
we have already stated today, there is a de-escalation
agreement in place, which has provided relative calm
to south-western Syria over the past year. We call on
the guarantors to uphold their commitments to that end.
The recent escalation in south-western Syria
contravenes resolution 2401 (2018), which was
unanimously adopted by the Council in February.
We call on all parties to respect and comply with
Security Council resolutions and their international
obligations, including to reduce violence, protect
civilians and ensure full humanitarian access. The fullscale offensive that we are now seeing is in complete
contravention of what we in the Council wish to see and
what we had demanded, in particular a de-escalation
and full commitment to and engagement in the political
process. We must redouble our efforts to achieve a
political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and fully endorse, both in word and deed, the efforts
of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura and the
United Nations-led political process. Let us therefore
discuss how we can achieve that solution during our
consultations later today and as we move forward.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for
their briefings and express my deep appreciation for the
work of their teams under difficult circumstances.
I will address two topics today in the Chamber:
first, the escalating violence in south-western Syria, and
secondly, the issue of the need for a political solution.
First, we are deeply concerned about the grave
escalation of violence and atrocities in the southern
de-escalation zone in Dar’a province. We are also
deeply concerned about the massive use of violence by
12/26

27/06/2018

the Syrian regime — supported by its allies — against
its own people. In particular, as one of the guarantor
Powers, the Russian Federation has a grave responsibility
to uphold its commitment to a ceasefire. All relevant
parties must do all in their power to prevent another
humanitarian disaster. In that regard, we also call on
the Russian Federation to exert pressure on the regime
in order to create room for a negotiated solution.
The risk of regional spillover is simply too great
in such a politically sensitive region, as it is close to
Israel, Jordan and the Golan Heights. The hostilities
have already caused major displacement from Busra
al-Hariri and elsewhere. As Mr. Ging mentioned, more
than 45,000 people have had to flee in the direction of
the closed border with Jordan and many more might
follow if the violence continues to escalate. We fear
a repetition of the countless serious violations of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law by the regime and its allies, which we
have seen throughout the war.
Mr. Ging just quoted statistics from the World
Health Organization, which has published shocking
numbers on the attacks on medical facilities throughout
Syria. Let me repeat those statistics. In 2017, 112 attacks
took place, resulting in more than 200 casualties.
Already in the first six months of the year, the same
number of attacks have taken place, causing more than
250 casualties. In Idlib, south-western Syria, such
attacks are ongoing and occur almost daily. Let me be
clear, the Syrian regime attacks its own people, medical
facilities and first responders. All parties must comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law. Attacks against medical facilities and personnel
must stop.
All parties should facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of impartial humanitarian relief to all those
in need, including first responders, such as the White
Helmets, who risk their lives to provide assistance.
We would like to echo the words of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry, whose report on
the siege and recapture of eastern Ghouta (A/HRC/38/
CRP.3) was presented yesterday in the Human Rights
Council. That siege and recapture by the regime was
marked by war crimes and crimes against humanity.
According to that report, the people of eastern Ghouta
saw the longest-running siege in modern history. We
need accountability. The use of the veto has blocked
the Security Council’s referral of the situation to
the International Criminal Court. We will therefore
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

continue our work elsewhere, in the Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
Secondly, there is an ever-increasing need for a
political solution. The current escalation of violence
and the dire humanitarian situation further underscore
the urgent need for a sustainable political solution
to the conflict. We commend the resilience, efforts
and perseverance of Staffan de Mistura in that
regard. Progress on the development of an inclusive
constitutional committee is welcomed and needed.
We call for further engagement in Geneva, under the
guidance of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015). We share the concerns
of the representative of the United Kingdom on Law
Number 10 and its potential implications for the quest
for a political solution.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special Envoy
De Mistura for his insightful update and commend his
exceptional commitment and determination to pursue
peace in Syria. We welcome his multifaceted diplomacy
to resolve the crisis.
Kazakhstan welcomes the consultations held on
18 and19 June in Geneva, with the participation of
the delegations of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Russian Federation and the Republic of Turkey. Such
dialogue is a step in the right direction to implement
the Sochi final declaration and to form a Syrian-owned
constitutional committee to promote the political
process under the auspices of the United Nations and
define its composition and working methods, which are
important tasks. Independent experts in various areas
should also be invited.
I must agree with my colleagues that the United
Nations should be the only platform to move forward
the political process. At the same time we understand
that without the assistance of stakeholders, it is not
realistic. That is why we commend the Special Envoy
on his attempts to involve various States of the Middle
East, the Gulf region and Europe in the process.
Similarly, a revamped regional approach is needed to
support both the Geneva and Astana processes, uphold
the ceasefire and promote the peace process. We would
like to assure Mr. Staffan de Mistura and his team of

S/PV. 8296

our firm support for their efforts to move forward the
political process.
We also thank Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Operational Division at the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
his comprehensive and informative briefing on the
very critical humanitarian situation in Syria. We
have carefully studied the most recent reports of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332
(2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/619) and on
the review of United Nations cross-border operations
(S/2018/617). The humanitarian situation is grave and
deserves our attention. Kazakhstan highly appreciates
the activities of the humanitarian personnel of the
United Nations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the World Health Organization
(WHO), the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Society and
other international humanitarian organizations on
the ground.
We encourage more cross-border deliveries from
Iraq, Jordan and Turkey, in line with all relevant
resolutions on the matter. We learned that in May 440
trucks — 19 consignments — delivered life-saving
assistance to more than 1 million people through crossborder deliveries. Those operations complement the aid
provided by international and Syrian non-governmental
organizations that make services from neighbouring
countries available to millions more. The work of
the Syrian Ministry of Health, in coordination with
WHO, and other organizations, under the umbrella of
the United Nations, has helped to reach a considerable
number of people in need. The Syrian Government
must ensure that it improves the level of humanitarian
access in several areas that recently came under
localized agreements. We also note with satisfaction the
fact that there is a reduction in the number of people in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, as well as a marked
decrease in the besieged locations.
At the same time, special attention must be paid
to Idlib, where nearly half of the population has been
displaced and must be rescued. We underscore that
the freedom of movement of civilians must be ensured
by all parties. All evacuation of civilians must be safe
and voluntary and abide by internationally recognized
protection standards.
Finally, we voice our support for calls by the
United Nations on all parties to safeguard civilian lives

18-1995213/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

and prevent deaths and injuries, as seen in the Dar’a
area. We also support calls for allowing freedom of
movement and for protecting hospitals, clinics and
schools, as required under international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
The hostilities must stop. The delivery of assistance
from across the Jordanian border, thanks to the
outstanding ongoing United Nations-led efforts, should
be sustained, as each month it must reach hundreds of
thousands of people in need.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Envoy De Mistura and Mr. John
Ging for their briefings. We greatly appreciate their
efforts in terms of facilitating the political process and
alleviating the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The international community has been active
recently in advancing the political process in the
country. The Special Envoy has engaged with various
parties to the Syrian question in intensive in-depth
consultations on such issues as the formation of the
constitutional committee and the relaunching of the
Geneva peace talks. Certain progress has been made.
It is hoped that the Astana dialogue will continue to
play a role in maintaining the ceasefire in Syria and in
advancing the Geneva peace talks.
A political settlement is the only way out. The
international community should actively support the
United Nations as the main channel for mediation,
support the Special Envoy in his efforts to restart
the peace talks in Geneva, and push the Syrian
Government and the opposition to move towards the
same goal. The current priority is to move forward the
process of establishing the constitutional committee
so as to a solid foundation as early as possible for a
comprehensive dialogue on such topics as political
governance, elections and counter-terrorism. At the
same time, all the relevant regional actors should bear
in mind regional peace and stability and create a good
environment for the political settlement process.
The sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria should be fully respected. We have
taken note of the recent reports of attacks against
targets in Syria. We call on the parties concerned to
remain calm, act with restraint and avoid taking any
actions that may lead to an escalation of the situation.
The Syrian conflict is now in its eighth year. The
humanitarian situation remains grave. A large number
14/26

27/06/2018

of civilians have been displaced. China has taken
note of the recent report by the Secretary-General on
cross-border humanitarian assistance and operations
(S/2018/617). We express our grave concern about the
suffering of the Syrian people. We will continue to
provide assistance to Syria and its neighbours affected
by the influx of Syrian refugees, within the limits of
our capacities.
We have taken note of the conflicts in parts of
Syria. We express our concern and hope that they will
not lead to harm to innocent civilians.
Attacks by terrorist organizations in Syria continue
to hamper the United Nations humanitarian relief
effort. The international community should strengthen
counter-terrorism cooperation, harmonize standards
and resolutely combat all terrorist organizations listed
by the Security Council. We urge the parties involved
to work together to exert influence and ensure that
resolution 2401 (2018) is effectively implemented. The
United Nations and the international community should
strengthen communication and coordination with the
Syrian Government, provide assistance to all areas in
Syria needing it, support mine-clearance operations
in affected areas and assist people in returning to
their homes.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of today’s meeting and thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for the
important information they have shared with us today.
We would like to stress the significance of the report
of the Secretary-General on cross-border assistance in
Syria (S/2018/617), which has allowed us to learn more
about the functioning of the assistance-distribution
system and the verification mechanism. We emphasize
the need to preserve a system on which the survival of
millions of people depends.
In view of the continuing increase in the number
of displaced persons and those in need of assistance,
Peru believes it is essential that the Security Council be
able to respond to the humanitarian crisis, in keeping
with international humanitarian law, regardless of the
differences and divisions that the conflict in Syria
is generating. We must express our concern about
the continuation of hostilities in south-west Syria,
particularly in Dar’a province, in the light of the
devastating humanitarian consequences it may have for
the more than 750,000 civilians who live there, as well
as its potential destabilizing impact on the region. We
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8296

consider it urgent to address the needs of the thousands
of newly displaced people in that area who are being
sheltered in makeshift camps near the Jordanian border
and remain highly vulnerable. We are also concerned
about the 2.5 million people in Idlib, whose situation
could lead to further tragedy.

solution to the crisis in Syria. As the political situation
is closely linked to the humanitarian crisis prevailing
in the country, we also want to commend the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, under the
leadership of Mr. John Ging, for the enormous task it
has undertaken.

In line with the calls by Secretary-General António
Guterres, we consider it necessary for there to be an
immediate cessation of hostilities and for all parties
to live up to their responsibility to protect the civilian
population and allow for the provision of humanitarian
assistance in a sustained, safe and unhindered
manner throughout Syrian territory. We deeply regret
the continued attacks on medical personnel and
infrastructure in Syrian territory, particularly in Idlib
and more recently in the south-west of the country.

With regard to the recent developments in the
political process, my delegation would like to make the
following clarifications.

We welcome the valuable efforts in Astana of
the working group on detainees and missing persons.
We are confident that positive results will soon be
achieved there.
With respect to the political process, we commend
the efforts of Mr. De Mistura and lend our support
to the establishment of a framework of minimum
understanding, which has allowed for progress to be
made in setting up the constitutional committee, which
was considered at his recent meeting in Geneva with
representatives of the Astana guarantor countries
and other relevant actors. We believe it is important
that the Syrian opposition submit a consensual list of
candidates for membership of the committee as soon
as possible. We emphasize the need to ensure adequate
representativeness in the committee and the importance
of ensuring a 30 per cent level of participation by
women, pursuant to the letter that Peru, as a Chair
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, together with Sweden and the United
Kingdom, addressed to the Secretary-General and
others yesterday.
The setting up and launching of the committee are
undoubtedly complex tasks that require concessions
from all parties. We have great confidence in the
diplomatic skills and tireless efforts of the Special
Envoy, to whom Peru offers its full support.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): As always, it is with great pleasure and
satisfaction that we receive the briefing by Mr. Staffan
de Mistura. We wish to express our gratitude for his
efforts aimed at achieving a political and diplomatic

First, we note with great concern the escalation
of fighting in south-west Syria, especially in Dar’a
province, which, as the violence increases, is leading to
the displacement of hundreds of people and numerous
civilian victims.
It should be remembered that the south-west region
of Syria is an important strategic territory owing to
its proximity to the Jordanian border and the Golan
Heights, which is why it is necessary to guarantee and
respect the zone of détente agreed by the parties in
2017 with a view to reducing violence. In that regard,
in line with the Secretary-General’s press release of
22 June (SG/SM/19099), we call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities in that part of the Syrian
territory and urge the parties concerned to respect their
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure.
In order to put an end to these military offensives,
it is essential that we pool our efforts and create
synergies so as to move forward and give priority to
the political process being facilitated by the United
Nations. In parallel with the Geneva peace talks and the
Astana challenges, the Sochi guarantors must continue
to work towards the establishment of a functioning
representative constitutional committee that brings
together members of the Government and opposition
groups, with the participation of civil society, in
particular women’s organizations.
We very much welcome the meetings hosted
by Mr. Staffan de Mistura on 17, 19 and 25 June
with the Sochi guarantors and the so-called Small
Group, intended to chart a course to allow for the
implementation of the Sochi final declaration and
the establishment of the intra-Syrian constitutional
committee, facilitated by the United Nations within the
framework of the Geneva process and in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).

18-1995215/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

There is no time for a rhetoric of double standards
or for ambiguous or fruitless negotiations. It is time
for a frank dialogue between the parties and actors
involved, giving priority to constructive exchanges
and substantive debates, with a view to finding
common ground.
My Government continues to deplore the worsening
humanitarian crisis, as described in the report of the
Secretary-General dated 20 June (S/2018/619). It is vital
that the parties refrain from hindering humanitarian
access by the United Nations actors, which is key to
assessing the needs on the ground ensure the delivery
of assistance to and the protection of civilians.
We continue to call upon the parties and those who
have influence over them to allow for safe, sustained
and unhindered humanitarian access to those in need,
in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
To conclude, with respect to cross-border operations
carried out by the United Nations, my Government
is of the view that the provision of humanitarian
assistance on a cross-border basis is essential and
must be maintained. We support the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report on the
review of United Nations cross-border humanitarian
assistance (S/2018/617). We are convinced that the
observations of the Secretary-General can help
United Nations humanitarian entities and their partner
agencies further strengthen cross-border operations,
as underscored in the report. Close cooperation among
the various humanitarian actors is essential in order to
ensure that people in need receive such vital assistance.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to express its gratitude to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for their
respective briefings on the political and humanitarian
aspects of the crisis in Syria.
Echoing other delegations that spoke earlier, my
delegation remains deeply concerned by the most recent
developments in Syria, which are characterized as a
fresh resurgence of fighting in the south-west part of
the country, particularly in Dar’a, which has triggered
the flight of some 45,000 people towards the Jordanian
border. We particularly deplore the challenging of the
de-escalation status enjoyed by the city of Dar’a, which
had allowed that city to benefit from relative calm.
It is now seeing an intensification of armed clashes
16/26

27/06/2018

and bombings carried out by the various parties to
the conflict.
My country further deplores the fact that it remains
impossible for the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies to gain access to areas previously under siege
owing to the number of administrative obstacles and
red tape. Côte d’Ivoire wishes once again to call for the
protection of civilians and for respect for international
humanitarian law so as to ensure safe, sustained and
unhindered access of humanitarian assistance, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions, in
particular resolutions 2165 (2014), which established
the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the
cross-border delivery of humanitarian aid in Syria, and
2401 (2018), which called for an immediate cessation
of the fighting and the establishment of a lasting
humanitarian pause in Syria.
My country welcomes the independent review of
United Nations humanitarian cross-border operations,
as called for by resolution 2393 (2017), whose
recommendations will allow us to further strengthen
the Monitoring Mechanism by taking account of the
views of the parties concerned, in particular the Syrian
authorities, neighbouring countries and United Nations
humanitarian agencies.
As the military escalation on the ground continues
unabated, my delegation reiterates the importance of
a political solution aimed at restoring stability and
finding a lasting solution to the humanitarian crisis
in Syria. Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that the
military solution cannot be a solution to the Syrian
conflict and calls once again on the parties involved to
implement a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire and
resume political negotiations for a lasting peace under
the auspices of the United Nations.
In that context, my country welcomes the various
initiatives aimed at relaunching the intra-Syrian
dialogue process and encourages the Special Envoy,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to undertake, within the
framework of the Geneva process, all steps necessary
to establish a constitutional committee for Syria, as
agreed at the Sochi conference.
My delegation welcomes also the consultations that
took place on the establishment of such a constitutional
committee on 18 and 19 June in Geneva, led by the
Special Envoy and bringing together representatives of
the Astana guarantor States on the Syrian negotiations.
It welcomes the holding on 25 June in Geneva of a
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

meeting between the Special Envoy of the United
Nations for Syria and the representatives of the Small
Group of the Global coalition, composed of France,
Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America, where views were
exchanged on constitutional progress and ongoing
diplomatic efforts, in order to create synergy between
international players.
My delegation also welcomes the efforts to
harmonize the positions of the members of the Small
Group and the Astana group within the framework
of the establishment of the constitutional committee,
which is charged with drafting a new constitution for
Syria, and welcomes also the decision of the Syrian
Government to transmit a list of 50 persons to be
considered for membership in the committee.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire continues to call on
the Syrian parties to choose the path of dialogue and
to move the political process forward in order to find
a lasting end to the crisis, in line with the road map
enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015). It calls on the
international community to support the mediation and
good-offices efforts of the Secretary-General and of his
Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, which are aimed
at bringing the Syrian parties back to the negotiating
table in the framework of a constructive dialogue with a
view to finding a lasting solution to the crisis in Syria.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank both
briefers, Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging,
for their comprehensive briefings. I should like in
particular to thank Staffan for having shared with us
what he calls cautious optimism and by bringing hope
to our deliberations. He has our full support.
Allow me to focus on two points: the political
process and the humanitarian situation in Syria.
On the political track, let me once again reiterate
our strong support for the relaunching of a United
Nations-facilitated political process through the
establishment of a constitutional committee. During
the conference hosted in Sochi by Russia along with
Iran and Turkey, it was agreed that the United Nations
would provide assistance with forming a constitutional
committee, including help with defining its mandate,
terms of reference, powers, rules of procedure and the
selection criteria for its composition.
We support an inclusive, Syrian-led and Syrianowned constitutional committee under United Nations

S/PV. 8296

auspices in Geneva. It should be implemented now as
a priority, and further steps should swiftly follow so
as to enable a negotiated political transition process. It
requires the full and constructive engagement of all the
parties to the conflict, especially the Syrian authorities,
to participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions. We welcome the participation of
women in this process as important actors for peace
and mediation.
Unfortunately, military logic continues to drive
developments in Syria. We still face continuous and
widespread violence and violations of international
law, including abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The most striking example of this
are the recent events in the south-west de-escalation
zone, where the Government started a military
offensive earlier this month. Taking into consideration
the recent events in that zone, we strongly condemn the
intensification of military operations and call for an
immediate end to the violence in the south-west.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
critical. Safe and sustainable humanitarian access must
be guaranteed, as called for in resolution 2401 (2018).
Fortunately, after taking control of eastern Ghouta and
Yarmouk, the Government has continued to provide
regular access to United Nations humanitarian actors,
which is necessary in order for needs to be assessed and
for assistance and protection to be scaled up.
The difficult humanitarian situation in the southwest of Syria is exacerbated by the military escalation
there. Military operations by the Government’s forces
with the support of Russia have already displaced
thousands of civilians in the south-west de-escalation
zone, the majority of whom are moving towards
the Jordanian borders. In that context, it should be
emphasized that there are already more than 2 million
people in need in areas accessed through cross-border
operations. Deliveries to those areas remain critical and
should be ensured by all parties, first and foremost by
the Syrian Government.
Humanitarian imperatives should be our primary
priority. We call upon all stakeholders who have
influence on the parties to the conflict to ensure the
implementation of the cessation of hostilities. In that
regard, let me emphasize the importance of protecting
vulnerable groups, especially children, women and the
religious minorities, who are far too often affected by
the conflict in Syria.

18-1995217/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

The recent offensive in the region of Dar’a, in southwest Syria, is also very worrisome. It is taking place
in the de-escalation zone that the Astana guarantors
committed to safeguard. Necessary measures to protect
civilians, as well as safe and sustainable humanitarian
access, need to be ensured.
I would also very briefly like to express our concern
about the so-called Law Number 10. We underline
the need for the Security Council to remain seized of
that matter.
In conclusion, let me stress the need for
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question of
the full implementation across Syria of the Council’s
humanitarian resolution 2401 (2018). Unfortunately, we
are seeing the continuation of a new military offensive.
That worries us, as we may again face an increase
in violence. The adoption of resolution 2401 (2018)
was just the beginning of the process. We call on all
stakeholders with influence on the ground to the take
the steps necessary to ensure that the fighting stops, the
Syrian people are protected and, finally, humanitarian
assistance is delivered.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for
the briefings provided by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). We reiterate our full
support for the work they are doing.
We must once again express our regret that
this conflict has been going on for eight years, and
that we continue to witness the constant siege and
violence suffered by the Syrian people, especially the
most vulnerable populations, women and children.
According to OCHA, more than 13 million people
require humanitarian assistance, more than 1.5 million
people still live in hard-to-reach areas and more than
8,000 live in besieged areas. Also, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, there are more than 6.6 million internally
displaced persons in Syria. We regret that in May alone
more than 130,000 civilians were displaced from the
city of Afrin as a result of the ongoing violence resulting
from military operations.
We also express our concern in the light of the
escalating violence we are seeing in the south-west of
Syria. We call for a cessation of violence, which would
18/26

27/06/2018

allow for the restoration of the previous relative calm that
was seen in the region. By the same token, we condemn
any attack on hospitals or educational facilities, and
we call on the parties to uphold their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We underscore the tireless work being
carried out by various humanitarian agencies and their
staff, who risk their own lives to continue to strive to
deliver much-needed humanitarian access.
My delegation calls for the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018). In that regard, we must highlight
the various initiatives that have led to local evacuation
agreements that have facilitated not only the entry of
humanitarian assistance but also the evacuation of
persons in need, including members of armed groups
and their families. We hope that those agreements
will continue. Furthermore, in the framework of the
various Security Council resolutions, we encourage
the continued deployment of convoys, including crossborder convoys.
We believe it is important to point out that more
than 2,000 requests were approved in the month of May
for food distribution by the World Food Programme,
as well as for first aid and vaccinations for more than
1 million children and mothers. According to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/539), that means that
approximately 2 million people received food assistance
and more than 1 million benefited from water, food,
sanitation and hygiene services. We therefore call on
the Syrian Government to continue to cooperate in that
area and to coordinate more closely and actively with
United Nations agencies and their representatives.
We also draw the Council’s attention to the ongoing
return of civilians to the city of Raqqa — the report
of the Secretary-General indicates that more than
130,000 civilians returned to that city in May alone.
We reiterate that, in addition to having to face a lack
of basic services, those who are returning must also
grapple with the dangers of explosive remnants of
war. Clearing Raqqa and other affected areas in Syria
of such remnants is therefore essential and must be
urgently carried out in order to avoid more deaths and
allow people to resume their daily lives. Similarly, we
reiterate our concern about the need to safeguard the
lives of the thousands of innocent civilians, including
children, who continue to move back to the city of Idlib.
It is essential to prevent a further escalation of violence
in that area.
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Against that backdrop, it is important to reinforce
the Astana agreements, which established key
de-escalation zones, which are among the international
initiatives that have helped to reduce violence in Syria.
We believe that our common approach to this conflict
must focus on adopting measures to reduce violence
on the ground, build confidence among the parties
involved, alleviate the humanitarian situation and
promote efforts to find a peaceful political solution to
the conflict. For that reason, the political process must
be relaunched on the basis of the various initiatives
and meetings that have taken place at different levels
bringing together the different parties involved in
the conflict.
In that regard, we note the information provided
by Mr. De Mistura that he is seeing headway in
the establishment of the constitutional committee.
Therefore, we once again highlight the commitments
made at the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held
in Sochi, which focused on strengthening the political
process lead by the United Nations in the framework
of the road map set out by resolution 2254 (2015).
Those efforts are to be developed through the drafting
of a new constitution and the establishment of the
constitutional committee, which in our view should
be representative and neutral. We hope that the work
of the committee will be active and dynamic and will
include the participation of all necessary stakeholders
in the conflict.
We express our full support for the work being
carried out by the Special Envoy to bring together the
parties involved within the framework of a dialogue
that will enable them to achieve sustained peace in the
medium- and long-term. Similarly, we commend the
good offices of the Secretary-General aimed at working
closely with the members of the Security Council in
finding a peaceful settlement to the conflict.
Lastly, we reject any attempt to foster factiousness,
ethnic divisions or sectarianism in Syria. The Syrian
people must freely decide their future and their political
leadership within the framework of their sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and without
any pressure or foreign interference. We reiterate that
the only option for resolving the conflict is through an
inclusive, consultative and concerted political process
led by and for the Syrian people.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank and commend Mr. Staffan de Mistura

S/PV. 8296

and Mr. John Ging for their comprehensive and detailed
briefings. We reiterate our appreciation for all United
Nations efforts in every facet of the crisis in Syria.
Ambassador Olof Skoog will speak on behalf of
Kuwait and Sweden during the informal consultations
later, as the two countries were the co-penholders on
the resolution on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Nevertheless, I would like to make the following
main points.
First, we welcome the reasons that Mr. De Mistura
just gave to us as to why we should remain cautiously
optimistic about progress made concerning the
establishment of the constitutional committee. If
carried out, that step will be critical to the transitional
political process. In that regard, we stress that there is no
military or humanitarian solution to the crisis in Syria.
The only way to resolve the crisis is through a political
solution, which will require all of us to accelerate ending
the crisis through such a solution to a prolonged crisis
that does not have repercussions only for the Middle
East but far beyond the region. In that connection, I
underscore what my colleague Mr. Skoog said, namely,
that we believe in the importance of committing to
resolution 2401 (2018), which needs to be implemented.
As members we shoulder an important responsibility
to follow up on that consensus resolution and ensure
its implementation. The guarantors of the Astana
agreement also must follow up on its implementation.
We agree with the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2018/617) on cross-border
operations and humanitarian aid. Providing such
assistance is in line with resolution 2393 (2017) and
other previous relevant resolutions, and is part of the
humanitarian response in Syria. As was just said by
Mr. Ging, reliance on such assistance for people in
certain provinces is on the rise. We therefore have to
maintain and find ways to improve it so as to reach
remote and hard-to-reach areas.
Secondly, we share the Secretary-General’s
concern about the recent military escalation in southwest Syria, to which Mr. De Mistura referred, and its
potential humanitarian repercussions. We have already
seen some of its negative consequences in the number
of displaced persons, which, to date, has reached almost
50,000. Concerning the statistics relating to healthcare facilities cited by Mr. Ging in his briefing, we are
deeply concerned about and condemn the targeting of
such facilities, which is a clear violation of the relevant

18-1995219/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council resolutions and most certainly
constitutes war crimes. We urge all parties to respect
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, especially the de-escalation zone
and ceasefire agreement in south-western Syria, which
had been calm over the past year.
Before concluding, it seems wise to remind all of
us that we are only a few days away from the sixth
anniversary of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) of 2012, which serves as the cornerstone for
reaching a solution to the Syrian crisis. It was endorsed
by the Security Council via resolution 2254 (2015) and
enjoys the support of the League of Arab States.
The people of Syria, with their rich culture and
history, are no longer able to bear further humanitarian
suffering. It is incumbent upon us to support the political
track agreed by all segments of society of the brotherly
Syrian people, which would maintain the territorial
integrity, unity, independence and sovereignty of Syria
and meet their legitimate aspirations.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank both Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Director Ging for their
comprehensive briefings.
We all agree that only a comprehensive intra-Syrian
dialogue facilitated by the United Nations, pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015), can end the Syrian crisis. In
that regard, we reiterate our support for the continued
endeavours of the Special Envoy to meaningfully
relaunch the Geneva process, with particular emphasis
on the formation of a constitutional committee based
on the final statement of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi. We commend the Special Envoy for
conducting a series of consultations with all States and
parties concerned. He has indeed been indefatigable in
carrying out his work, and we are encouraged that there
has been some positive movement with regard to the
establishment of the constitutional committee. We took
note of the very significant series of meetings he held
on 19, 22 and 25 June. In that connection, we welcome
the fact that the Syrian Government has submitted to
the Special Envoy a list of 50 names to be included
among the members of the committee. We acknowledge
that the Special Envoy has continued consultations
so that the opposition can also submit its list. That is
very critical because it is imperative to ensure that
the committee be fully inclusive and representative
of the Syrian people. As the Special Envoy said, it is
20/26

27/06/2018

also indispensable that the constitutional committee be
credible and enjoy international legitimacy.
The post-conflict need for support for reconstruction
makes the issue of legitimacy critical. As the Special
Envoy also stressed, it is important that it be Syrianowned, which was also underscored in resolution 2254
(2015). That is also undeniably a principle enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
While the Special Envoy has been working
tirelessly to create common ground with regard to the
political track, there have been serious and worrying
developments on the ground. As the SecretaryGeneral conveyed in press statements issued on the
10 and 22 June (SG/SM/19080 and SG/SM/19099,
respectively) military escalations in south-west Syria
and Idlib are a source of deep concern. As both involve
the de-escalation zones, we call on all parties to respect
the ceasefire arrangements and exercise restraint. We
encourage all guarantors to work together and end
current military escalations, which cause suffering
and displacement among civilians and pose a threat to
regional security. As the Secretary-General stated in
his report of 20 June,
“[t]he creation of a calm, safe and neutral
environment across the Syrian Arab Republic
that will enable all Syrians to express confidence
in a political process is paramount.” (S/2018/619,
para. 45)
In order to protect civilians and civilian facilities,
as well as to create a supportive environment for the
political process, we stress that de-escalation must be a
top priority. De-escalation is obviously also needed to
ensure the quality of humanitarian access for the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners. In that regard,
while the drop in the number of people in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas is a positive development, we
remain concerned about the lack of safe, sustained and
sufficient humanitarian access to all Syrians, based on
the assessment of their humanitarian needs. According
to the latest Secretary-General report, this year has seen
“a collapse in the ability of the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners to reach people
across conflict lines from within the Syrian Arab
Republic.” (ibid., para. 42)
That is why we believe that as long as the humanitarian
needs remain staggering, all parties should facilitate
safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access so that
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

aid can reach those in the greatest need. In addition,
all pledges should be disbursed in order to sustain the
humanitarian programmes. We have taken note of what
Mr. Ging had to say about that, as it is definitely a
source of concern for us as well.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the review of the United Nations cross-border
operations (S/2018/617), based on resolution 2393
(2017), which notes that cross-border aid delivery
remains critical to ensuring that humanitarian
assistance reaches those in need through the most direct
route. While we acknowledge that fact, we encourage
the United Nations and its partners to implement the
recommendations in the report, particularly those that
could further strengthen coordination, transparency
and effectiveness, so that aid goes only to those who
really need it.
Finally, we reiterate our firm position that there can
be no military solution to the protracted Syrian conflict,
and that all Syrian actors should meaningfully engage
with the Special Envoy as he continues his diplomatic
work to relaunch the Geneva intra-Syrian talks. The
Council should also support the Special Envoy’s efforts
at this critical juncture.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Ging for
their briefings.
Throughout most of Syria, which is under the control
of its legitimate Government, civilian life continues to
be restored, including with Russia’s active assistance.
The Syrian authorities are giving major attention to the
liberated areas around Damascus and in northern Homs
province, where residents are returning. The streets
in eastern Ghouta are being cleared of rubble and
residential buildings are being rebuilt. Funds have been
allocated for repairing medical facilities in Nashabiyah,
Harasta, Douma and Maliha. In Rastan and Talbiseh
work has been completed on high-voltage electricity
transmission lines and transformer sub-stations. It
has been announced that rail freight links have been
restored between Tartus and Homs provinces.
Nothing like that is happening in the areas of Syria
that have been occupied, in violation of its sovereignty,
by the so-called coalition, which is making up excuses
to remain on Syrian soil a little longer. Months have

S/PV. 8296

elapsed since Raqqa was liberated from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, but nothing has changed
for the better. The so-called liberators, after reducing
the city to rubble — medical facilities, bakeries,
everything — are doing nothing to improve things and
today have been trying to lecture us about morality. A
difficult situation has developed in the Rukban camp,
which is near the coalition’s Al-Tanf military base, an
area closed to outsiders, and no progress is contemplated
with humanitarian deliveries. On top of that, there
are reports of a corrupt scheme there whereby armed
groups are charging people who want to leave the camp
a steep fee of as much as $500 per family.
It appears that there are delays in getting
international assistance to Syria with mine clearance,
including through the United Nations Mine Action
Service. Meanwhile, a unit from the Russian Armed
Forces’ International Mine Action Centre has conducted
four operations in record time that are unique in
both scale and complexity, two in Palmyra’s historic
architectural complex and in the residential part of the
city, and two in Aleppo and Deir ez-Zor, enabling tens
of thousands of Syrians to return to their homes. Many
priceless world heritage objects have been rescued. I
will not read out the statistics about the quantity of
explosive ordnance that our sappers have defused, but
they are significant.
There is no justification for the hysterics about
the so-called Law Number 10, whose aim, contrary to
what some have tried to suggest, is not to expropriate
property but to protect property rights violated during
the war. The Syrians are not avoiding contact with
United Nations experts on the issue but are clarifying
details and heeding advice.
The pressing issue is restoring areas damaged in the
hostilities, and that requires major help from the entire
international community with the active participation
of the United Nations. Helping Syria rebuild cannot
be conditional on any political demands. One way to
get started would be to start restoring Syria’s healthcare sector and local pharmaceutical industry by
guaranteeing the possibility of buying medicines and
medical equipment from abroad.
The quality of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/617) on the review of cross-border humanitarian
operations is disappointing. There is a gross error on
the very first page, where it claims that cross-border
humanitarian operations are provided for the areas

18-1995221/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

not controlled by the Syrian Government. Where
did that come from? Resolution 2165 (2014), which
established the mechanism, indicates that cross-border
humanitarian deliveries are to be delivered to residents
throughout the country in need of help.
In abstaining in the voting on resolution 2393 (2017),
we sent the clear message that we think it is essential to
work to end the mechanism. In a constructive approach,
we decided to give the United Nations and the other
interested parties time to prepare for the closure of
cross-border operations and to lay the ground for a
dialogue with the authorities in Damascus about new
ways to deliver aid to the entire Syrian population.
However, the United Nations has not made use of that
opportunity. The report fails to take into account the
military and political aspects of the situation on the
ground and does not address the core principles of
providing humanitarian assistance, including respect
for State sovereignty. It is strange that the authors of
the report found not a single flaw in the cross-border
operations. And yet they exist, as we well know. I would
once again like to urge the Secretariat to come up with
ways to provide a gradual and agreed-on withdrawal
from cross-border operations in the near future.
In the past few days a great deal has been said
about escalating tensions in south-western Syria.
Incidentally, I want to note that we, like others, are
not indifferent to Jordan and Israel’s security issues.
We should point out that Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters
frequently organize attacks on Syrian military
personnel and obstruct the achievement of local
ceasefires with armed groups that want to lay down
their weapons and return to normal life. As we know,
the authorities are offering those opportunities within
the framework of Government amnesty. The cities of
Dar’a and Suwayda, as well as villages that have opted
for reconciliation, have been under fire from jihadists’
rocket and artillery shelling.
There are other sources of instability. The situation
around Fo’ah and Kafraya, which according to United
Nations classification is the only blocked area in Syria,
remains very tense, and terrorists have intensified their
shelling of residential areas of Aleppo. Rather than using
their influence to help achieve reconciliation, some
outside stakeholders, on the contrary, are encouraging
their clients to take offensive action, which can hardly
be seen as evidence of being disposed to cooperate
on de-escalation. We should point out that none of
the agreements on a cessation of hostilities provides
22/26

27/06/2018

for pauses in the fight against terrorists. In Syria the
elimination of remnants of terrorist groups continues.
On the night of 17 and 18 June, massive air strikes were
launched simultaneously on positions of the Syrian
army and its allies near the village of Al-Hari, to the
south-east of the town of Abu Kamal in Deir ez-Zor
province. Dozens of people at the forefront of the fight
against terrorism were killed as a result. This is not the
first incident of this kind. What good does it do? Who
wants to give extremists a chance to to hold their heads
high and try to recover their lost positions?
I want Mr. De Mistura to know that Russia is working
for definitive progress towards a political settlement on
an agreed international basis under the auspices of the
United Nations. Mr. De Mistura recently took part in
the high-level consultations with representatives of the
Astana process guarantor countries, so he is well aware
of our firm commitment to an intra-Syrian dialogue.
We have been working consistently with the Syrian
parties to encourage them to implement joint efforts.
At this stage, that is primarily about implementing
the recommendations on establishing a constitutional
committee that were formulated at the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi. The Syrian Government
has submitted its list of delegates. As we understand it,
the opposition camp, whose unity is still doubtful, is in
the process of considering this. Ultimately, of course,
it is the Syrians themselves who will have to agree
on all the necessary details, with the assistance of the
United Nations.
In a broader context, the first order of business is
to restore normality to the relations between Syria and
other States in the region that have been undermined
during the conflict, which would significantly improve
the situation in the Middle East.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I have listened to many opinions and political
and humanitarian assessments today in the Council’s
review of the situation in my country, Syria, on the
issuance of the fifty-second report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/619). I have also heard two briefings,
from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria and the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I noticed a political
maturity and sense of responsibility and objectivity
in some delegations’ statements, while others have
presented a false view by reading the situation in Syria
in a mistaken and distorted way. I will not go into detail
by responding to all the points that have been made,
but I will touch on some of the most important things I
have heard.
First, at the beginning of Special Envoy de Mistura’s
briefing, he described three priorities — de-escalation,
reviving the political process and bridging the gaps
between the various stakeholders through high-level
diplomacy. Of course we have no objection to this.
However, we do have some pertinent comments that the
Special Envoy and the Council should hear. After seven
years of a terrible terrorist war imposed on my country,
and four years of cooperation with the Special Envoy,
he has failed to include combating terrorism in his
list of priorities, despite the fact that we are all aware
that Da’esh is still present in Syria under American
protection, as is the Al-Nusra Front, under the protection
of the Americans, the Israelis and others. There are
also many terrorist armed factions that have refused
to accede to Astana 4, a meeting that was attended by
the Special Envoy, who was there in Astana, and which
created the concept of de-escalation zones. The reason
I bring this up is because one of the provisions of the
Astana 4 agreement includes an exception for armed
groups that refuse to accede to the agreement. This is
not just about Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front, but about
any group that refuses to join the agreement.
Over the past seven years, we have moved from
fighting terrorist proxies to directly combating the
original terrorists themselves. The terrorism situation
is clear now. Two days ago, armed terrorist groups out
of Al-Tanf and the Rukban camp attacked the cities of
Suwayda and Dar’a, as well as other areas where the
Syrian army is stationed. This has been referred to
as southern Syria. Terrorists came from Al-Tanf and
the Rukban camp, which are areas under the control
of United States forces, as we all know. Is it not the
Syrian army’s duty to respond to an attack by terrorists
on two southern towns in order to protect hundreds
of thousands of civilians? I raise this question since it
relates to the priority of combating terrorism, which the
Special Envoy failed to include. I bring it up because we
have agreed that the Geneva agenda has four defined
baskets, one of which is combating terrorism. We

S/PV. 8296

should remind ourselves that the priority of combating
terrorism is on the agenda in Geneva.
Secondly, the Special Envoy made one statement
this morning that is dangerous and extremely worrying
both for us and some others. He said,
“I want to believe that the Security Council will not
allow this [situation in the south-west of Syria] to
become another eastern Ghouta or ... Aleppo”.
Does that fall within the mandate of the Special
Envoy? Is he mandated to tell the Syrian Government
and military how to combat terrorism on the Syrian
territories? This is not about combating terrorism on
the territories of the United States, France, Britain,
Sweden, Poland or Holland. We are talking only about
combating terrorism on our territory. That is part
of our sovereignty, which the Security Council has
underscored in more than 27 resolutions adopted by it.
All those resolutions start with the words: the Council
reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria. If the Council reaffirms our sovereignty, how
can it consider, as was mentioned by one colleague,
the Ambassador of Sweden, that what is happening
in southern Syria is military aggression? When the
Syrian army itself combats terrorism in the south of the
country, can we call that an aggression?
My colleague the Permanent Representative of
France said that we must protect the White Helmets in
the Golan. It is strange to hear such as statement from
a Permanent Representative in the Security Council.
The White Helmets are a terrorist group affiliated
with the Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front. It is spread
over the Golan and other parts and is supported by
Israel. It is part of the problem that we always talk
about. The Permanent Representative of France says
that we must protect the White Helmets in the Golan.
Does the mandate of the Security Council provide for
the protection of the White Helmets or of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF),
which is under the Security Council, located along the
separation line in the Golan? What is the priority of the
Council, to provide protection for the White Helmets
or the UNDOF force? As the members of the Council
know, some elements from the Fiji and Philippines units
were abducted by the White Helmets and the Al-Nusra
Front few years ago, as a result of which many UNDOF
posts were abandoned three years ago.
The Permanent Representative of France also
briefly made a comment — but I think that it caught

18-1995223/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

the Council’s attention — calling for a Syrian Dayton
Agreement. I hope that I was mistaken when I heard
that. He said that we could perhaps reach a Syrian
Dayton. Fortunately, we started today’s meetings by
talking about Serbia (see S/PV.8295) and the situation
of Mr. Mladić and others at the International Criminal
Court. Less than 25 years since the Dayton Agreement
on implementing the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was signed, in 1995, the Security Council
is still looking into minute details of importance related
to the consequences of a Dayton Agreement. Does the
Ambassador of France mean that the internationalization
of the situation in Syria by some must come about, just
like the Dayton Agreement? Of course, my Government
fully rejects that statement.
Mr. Ging talked in detail about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Tell Rifaat and Afrin area.
He is right. However, he did not mention the reason
behind the deterioration of the humanitarian situation
there, as if the Turkish monster did not exist and he had
never come across the Turkish occupation and Turkey’s
military invasion to Afrin and Tell Rifaat. Worse than
that, Mr. Ging praised the role of Turkey for its support
and provision of humanitarian assistance to those two
cities. Is not that shameful? Instead of accusing the
Turkish side of invading part of Syrian territory, leading
to the humanitarian tragedy in the north, we hear the
representative of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs praising the Turks for having
delivered humanitarian assistance to the part of Syria
that was invaded by them.
Today we are considering the fifty-second report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014). The United States of America,
the United Kingdom and France, as well as some
influential parties in the Secretariat, have worked hard
to promote the resolution since the issuance of the first
report on its implementation, in order to harness it to
become a political tool and bring pressure to bear on
the Government of Syria to implement the agendas of
those States. Those agendas consist of interfering in the
internal affairs of Syria and destabilizing its security
and stability. Instead, the objective of the resolution
should have been to assist Syrians to overcome their
suffering due to the unprecedented terrorist war
imposed upon them.
Apart from the propaganda that some strive to
promote, claiming that the Syrian Government is
hindering access to humanitarian assistance, the facts
24/26

27/06/2018

show once again that my Government cooperates with
the United Nations and other international organizations
in Syria to deliver humanitarian assistance to those who
need it. That was demonstrated by paragraph 25 of the
report under consideration. That paragraph states that
last May the Government of Syria approved all requests
submitted by the World Food Programme — and I
repeat all requests, that is, 2,180 such requests. The
Government has also approved all requests submitted
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). I do not know why the World
Food Programme and UNHCR are content to cooperate
with the Government of Syria, while OCHA is not.
That is strange.
What is deplorable is the fact that the drafters of
all 52 reports have turned a blind eye to the details
of the crimes of occupation, aggression and invasion
against Syria and its people — crimes represented by
support for terrorism and the imposition of unilateral
and coercive economic measures against the people of
Syria, which the United Nations time and again annually
stresses that they are unlawful and violate international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and human rights
principles. However, we heard biased testimony about
medicines in Syria, as if those who spoke did not know
that the Turks have in fact dismantled more than 1,441
facilities and factories in Aleppo. They have moved
their components to Turkey and sold them as scrap
metal. Most of the laboratories that were dismantled
in Syria were in fact used to manufacture medicines.
In addition, there are the sanctions, which exacerbate
the situation. However, that is not recognized by the
Secretary-General or by OCHA or anybody else.
It is truly deplorable that the drafters of the report
have ignored the war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed by the United States of America and its
allies in Raqqa. That was mentioned by the President of
the Security Council. Those crimes happened in other
Syrian cities under the pretext of combating terrorism,
ignoring the role of the Governments that sponsor and
finance terrorism, such as Saudi Arabia, Qatar and
Turkey, which strive to incite violence and terrorism and
spread radical ideologies and hatred while supporting
distorted religious ideas. The lack of professionalism
and credibility is truly deplorable. They have reached
unacceptable levels. That was demonstrated by those
who wrote the report, who have doubted the findings of
the United Nations assessment mission in Raqqa. They
made only selective and general references to the report
18-19952

27/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of that mission. They presented it in a distorted way,
ignoring the tragic situation in Raqqa and the suffering
of its people due to the grave crimes committed by the
international coalition and its affiliated militias.
There are hundreds of thousands of mines in Raqqa.
Every month between 50 and 70 returnees die as a result
of mine explosions, an issue that some representatives
here at this international Organization have refused
to address until now. We spent more than six months
trying to reach an agreement with the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS) to demine Raqqa. Six
months have now passed. The operation was recently
halted for two months because UNMAS management
insisted on bringing in a French person who is located in
Gaziantep. That is how the United Nations programme
perceived the situation — without that French person
we could not demine hundreds of thousands of mines
in Raqqa. Six months have passed and neither the Mine
Action Service nor the Secretariat has visited Raqqa to
demine it.
It is deplorable that the authors of the report turned
a blind eye, for the fifty-second time, to the details of the
crimes committed by Israel and its repeated aggression
against the territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic, including its continued support to terrorist
armed groups in the separation zone, first and foremost
Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front. We must condemn the
entire situation because of its repercussions on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. However, that did not
attract the attention of the authors of the report, despite
their professionalism in drafting 52 reports so far. My
Government has submitted an official letter setting its
response to the report under consideration. I would like
to briefly highlight three points.
First, the authors of the report must be held
accountable for their violations of the provisions of
resolutions on combating terrorism. They referred to
Jabhat Al-Nusra, Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham and other
affiliated groups as armed opposition in Idlib. Such
groups have been designated as terrorist entities on the
Security Council’s list of terrorist organizations.
Secondly, the clear politicization by the authors
of the report is no longer acceptable. They make the
Syrian Government fully responsible for violations of
humanitarian law. They turn a blind eye to the real
hurdles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those in need, in particular the lax conduct of OCHA
officials stationed in Damascus, who do not shoulder

S/PV. 8296

their responsibilities or carry out their duties. They
refuse to visit areas that have been liberated or those
where reconciliation has occurred. They are extremely
selective in conducting their work and providing
assistance, which is supposed to be humanitarian
and non-discriminatory. There is also the lack of
funding, and some donors link their funds to political
preconditions that run counter to the principles of
humanitarian work.
Thirdly, since they disregarded the fact that
Turkish aggression on Afrin is the primary reason for
the displacement and suffering of civilians, what is the
objective of the authors of the report?
The supporters and sponsors in the Council of
the terrorist group Jabhat Al-Nusra have used today’s
meeting to spread unfounded and false accusations
against the Government of my country every time the
Syrian Arab Army makes progress against that terrorist
organization in an attempt to boost the morale of the
elements in that criminal organization.
In conclusion, my Government reiterates that it will
continue to be relentless in its fight against terrorism
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We stress our principled
position that the solution to the Syrian crisis is a
political one, based on intra-Syrian dialogue led by the
Syrians, without foreign interference or preconditions.
The President: The representative of Sweden has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I appreciate the fact that all
Council members have spoken. Together with some
colleagues, including Kuwait, I had indicated that we
would like to discuss the political process and have a
conversation with Mr. De Mistura on the way forward.
However, I understand and respect the President’s
decision that that will not be possible today. But I hope
that we can do so very soon.
Having just heard the intervention by the
representative of Syria, I would like to say a few words.
I will not go through the several inaccuracies in his
statement, including a reference to a remark I made.
I would like to say — and I do so on behalf of Kuwait
as well — that we should all support the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
work it conducts on everyone’s behalf.
The following is a joint Sweden-Kuwait. I would
like to make three points on the humanitarian situation.

18-1995225/26

S/PV.8296

The situation in the Middle East

First, as the Secretary-General stated in his report,
we are deeply concerned about the fact that 2018
has seen
“a collapse in the ability of the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners to reach people
across conflict lines from within the Syrian Arab
Republic.” (S/2018/619, para. 42)
Only a fraction of people in need are being reached,
and there is negative trajectory with regard to
humanitarian access in Syria. In their dialogue with
Damascus, we encourage those with influence — and
this is an opportunity to say this directly to the Syrian
representative — to step up to the signing of facilitation
letters for convoys, United Nations regular programming
to areas recently retaken by Government forces and
the approval of visas for United Nations personnel,
including OCHA staff.
Secondly, we condemn the continued attacks
against medical facilities, of which there has been an
increase in 2018. We deplore the continued removal and
rejection of medical items from humanitarian convoys.
Such acts may constitute war crimes.

26/26

27/06/2018

Thirdly, we welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the review of United Nations cross-border
operations (S/2018/617). As cross-line access is almost
non-existent, the cross-border modality continues to
be a crucial part of the humanitarian response. It is a
life-saving modality, as 2.67 million lives depend on
cross-border humanitarian assistance. We note that the
scrutiny of United Nations cross-border operations in
Syria, as well as of the accountability mechanisms in
place, is at a level similar to or higher than that in other
comparable humanitarian operations.
Finally, I would like to commend the United Nations
for its efforts with regard to the humanitarian situation.
We look forward to hearing more in due course about
the work on implementing the recommendations. We
assure Mr. Ging and his staff of our full support.
The President: Of course, we will continue our
dialogue on this issue. From 1 July we will all be in the
able hands of the representative of Sweden.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

18-19952
