A /68/PV.32

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

32nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 9 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/504)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, may I take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Fifth
Committee that is before the Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
when the same draft resolution is considered in a
Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation
should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once,
that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting,
unless that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee. I also remind
delegations that, also in accordance with decision
34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that

we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/5).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda items 14 and 118 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/68/L.4)
The President: Members will recall that under
agenda items 14 and 118, the Assembly adopted
resolution 68/1 at its 2nd plenary meeting, on
20 September. Members are reminded that the debate
on agenda item 14 and agenda item 118 will be held
jointly with item 125, entitled “United Nations reform:
measures and proposals”, on 20 November.
Permit me now to make a statement.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-50522 (E)

*1350522*

A/68/PV.32

It is my pleasure to present for adoption the
outcome document that was endorsed by Heads of
State and Government and heads of delegations at last
week’s special event to follow up efforts made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
At the outset, I wish to highlight that this outcome
document is, first and foremost, a call for action in
the accelerated commitment to address the gaps and
unevenness in the MDG process and to respond to the
formidable challenges that remain on the path to their
fulfilment.
Many here will no doubt recall that at the special
event I invited the Secretary-General to compile a
matrix of commitments pledged by Member States,
international organizations, private-sector partners
and civil society associated with the acceleration of the
achievement of the MDGs. The final results will soon
be made available, but initially several billion dollars
have been mobilized, and actions and pledges are
coming from dozens of countries. With some 825 days
to go, we must remain vigilant in our collective quest to
fulfil the MDGs.
The document before the Assembly for adoption
also sets the initial signposts to define an ambitious and
inclusive post-2015 development agenda. Our collective
commitment to this text should catalyse a final push to
create real and meaningful change by making further
progress on the MDGs and defining the contours of
a development agenda with the potential to have an
impact on the trajectory of sustainable development for
decades to come.
Such an agreement required a collective sense
of partnership by all parties. I pay special tribute to
participants’ collective efforts under the able leadership
of the Permanent Representatives of Ireland and South
Africa, whom I wish to commend today for their
tireless efforts. I wish also to highlight the invaluable
stewardship of our Secretary-General and his dedicated
team for their efforts aimed at ensuring a systemic
commitment to an integrated development framework.
I readily acknowledge the fact that this outcome
document, however significant, represents just a first
step in a series of efforts that will require us to work
collectively between now and 2015 if we are to achieve
the dual goals of fulfilling the remaining MDGs and
launching a successor arrangement that is the post-2015
development agenda.

2/26

09/10/2013

Today more than ever the depth, breadth and
scope of these twin challenges require our concerted
efforts and collective action. That means that new
levels of support, collaboration and partnership will
be needed from all stakeholders. Earlier this week we
heard how reliable financing will be critical in driving
this dual-track process. Countries will need to make
every effort to mobilize domestic resources, yet at
the same time there is a vital role and need for donor
countries to meet their official development assistance
commitments, including through the provision of
reliable and timely financial resources.
During this session of the General Assembly, a
number of ongoing processes will begin to converge
in preparation for consideration and, ultimately,
negotiations at the start of the sixty-ninth session.
The outcome document speaks to these processes,
emphasizing the need to achieve meaningful, balanced
and forward-looking arrangements and results within
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals, the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts
on Sustainable Development Financing, and in the
process to develop options for a mechanism facilitating
the transfer of technology. My team and I stand ready
to provide assistance in this collective quest as the
Assembly makes progress in all these areas.
The document also underscores that the preparation
for the post-2015 development agenda will benefit
from the three high-level events and the three thematic
debates I will convene during the second part of the
sixty-eighth session. My team and I will endeavour to
make them complementary and mutually reinforcing
so as to enable further progress on each and every one
of the priority areas I have identified, all of which are
reflected in the outcome document.
While there is much to be done, we can now say that
we have begun the intergovernmental process aimed at
putting in place a post-2015 development agenda, which
will require sustained and committed work from each
and every member. This is indeed an exciting time for
our United Nations. I welcome the adoption of this
resolution, and I look forward to setting the stage for
the post-2015 development agenda together with all in
the Assembly.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.4, entitled “Outcome document of the special
event to follow up efforts made towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals”. In connection

13-50522

09/10/2013

with the draft resolution, I shall give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/68/L.4, entitled “Outcome document of
the special event to follow up efforts made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals”, I wish
to put on record, on behalf of the Secretary-General,
the following statement on the financial implications,
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
In operative paragraph 26 of the draft resolution,
the General Assembly would request the President
of the General Assembly to convene, in a timely
manner, intergovernmental consultations to achieve
agreement on organizational modalities for a summit
for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
Under the terms of paragraph 26, the decision on the
organizational aspects and the dates of the summit
are yet to be determined. Therefore, in the absence
of modalities for meetings and documentation of the
summit, it is not possible at present to determine the
conference servicing requirements. Thus, as soon
as specific decisions on the dates, format, scope and
modalities are determined, the matter will be reported
to the Assembly in accordance with rule 153 of its rules
of procedure.
The date of the meeting will have to be determined in
consultation with the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management. Should the Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/68/L.4, the Secretary-General
will submit details of the financial implications, if
applicable, in accordance with established procedures
when the modalities of the meeting are determined.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.4, entitled
“Outcome document of the special event to follow
up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/68/L.4 was adopted (resolution
68/6).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.

A/68/PV.32

Mr. Thomson (Fiji): I have the honour to make this
statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. The
Group welcomes the adoption of resolution 68/6.
First let me express the Group’s appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for submitting the outcome document
of the special event to follow up efforts made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
and for its adoption today by the General Assembly.
I wish also to convey the Group’s appreciation to the
co-facilitators of the consultation process for this
outcome document — the Permanent Representatives
of South Africa and Ireland, whose tireless efforts
and commitment have ensured that we have arrived
successfully at this important occasion today. We wish
to underscore the importance of this outcome document
to us, as the Group of 77 (G-77) and China, and to the
General Assembly in capturing our collective will as
we move forward steadfastly towards achieving our
development aspirations for this millennium.
While the Millennium Development Goals were
focused on developing countries, what has been outlined
in the outcome document is intended to result in the
formulation of a post-2015 development agenda that is
applicable to all. The road map set out in the document
ensures that the international community as a whole
is involved and engaged throughout in a transparent
intergovernmental process to
“craft a strong post-2015 development agenda,
that will build on the foundations laid by the
Millennium Development goals, complete the
unfinished business and respond to new challenges”
(resolution 68/6, para. 16).
During the special event, our leaders expressed
the view that we should take advantage of this historic
opportunity to reaffirm our collective political
commitment and redouble our efforts to accelerate the
achievement of the MDGs with a sense of urgency and
determination.
As we set our sights on the framework that will
take us beyond 2015, it is important that we reaffirm
our resolve that our work must remain guided by the
principles and values enshrined in the Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2), the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (resolution 66/288, annex), and the
outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social and related fields.

13-505223/26

A/68/PV.32

We wish also to reiterate that the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities is of paramount
importance as a guiding principle in crafting the
future development agenda. As developing countries,
we reaffirm our conviction that the new development
agenda must take into account our differing national
circumstances and development priorities.
In line with the request reflected in paragraph
26 of the outcome document — that the President of
the General Assembly convene, in a timely manner,
intergovernmental consultations to achieve agreement
on organizational modalities for the development
summit in 2015 — I wish to express the readiness of the
G-77 and China to work with you, Sir, and our partners
in making that a reality.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I make these remarks
on behalf of both co-facilitators of the special event.
It was a great honour and privilege for me and for
my predecessor, Anne Anderson, to be appointed
co-facilitator of the special event, along with my
colleague, Ambassador Mamabolo of South Africa.
I am therefore particularly pleased to be present for
the formal adoption of the outcome document of the
Millennium Development Goals special event as
resolution 68/6, following its endorsement by our Heads
of State and Government and heads of delegations on
25 September.
We would like to take this opportunity to warmly
thank colleagues for their hard work over many months
in coming to an agreement on this important consensus
outcome document. It is one that we can be very pleased
with. It makes very clear the urgency of accelerating
progress towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) in all developing countries,
and particularly in those countries most lagging behind.
It calls for particular attention to be paid to the most
off-track MDGs and to those who are most vulnerable
and disadvantaged. It highlights the central role of
the strengthened global partnership for development.
It sets out the contours of the post-2015 development
agenda and a road map to 2015, which will help to guide
our work over the coming two years, culminating in a
summit in September 2015 for the adoption of the post2015 development agenda.
We have much to do in these two years. We are
in agreement that we must achieve the promise of the
MDGs. In addition, we will be working to craft an
ambitious post-2015 agenda. We firmly believe that the

4/26

09/10/2013

MDGs special event and its outcome will help us in this
important endeavour.
In closing, on behalf of Ambassador Mamabolo
and myself, may I thank you, Sir, and your predecessor
Mr. Jeremić for your leadership, and the Secretariat’s
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, conference
services and others in the United Nations system for
their assistance. Finally, once again, I thank colleagues
for their advice, assistance and hard work in agreeing
the outcome document that we have just adopted.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): On behalf
of the European Union and its member States, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way in which
you chaired the special event. Let me also congratulate
you on your decision to place the subjects that were on
the agenda of the special event and the whole post-2015
issue at the heart of your presidency.
I should also like to thank the two co-facilitators,
the Permanent Representatives of South Africa and
Ireland, for their tireless efforts. Their work is greatly
appreciated.
We welcome the adoption of the outcome document
(resolution 68/6), which represents a key step forward
and a good balance between the positions expressed
over months of consultations. We welcome the fact that
it captures in a concise manner key messages both on
the final push towards the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in the run-up to 2015, and on charting the
way forward post-2015. The document is particularly
valuable in underscoring that we face common
challenges and have a shared agenda. It paves the way
for a more sustainable, equitable and prosperous world
for all, a world free of poverty.
We welcome the resolve to target the most offtrack MDGs and that among and within developing
countries, those that have been left furthest behind
require our most urgent attention and support. We
welcome the emphasis on the Monterrey/Doha
framework on financing for development as a key
reference point. National ownership, with each country
bearing the primary responsibility for its development,
and the mobilization of all resources, public and
private, domestic and international, and their effective
and innovative use will be crucial to implementing the
future framework.

13-50522

09/10/2013

With respect to the road map to the post-2015
framework, we appreciate that key elements have
been agreed and are included in the final text, notably
the need for a coherent approach that integrates in a
balanced manner the three dimensions of sustainable
development, working towards a single universal
framework and set of goals, and the reference to peace
and security, gender equality, human rights, the rule of
law and democratic governance.
We will continue to be guided by the values and
principles enshrined in previously agreed texts and
reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, including, inter alia, the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
as set out in principle 7 of the Rio Declaration.
We wish to restate our views on this matter. We
underline that principle 7 is explicitly related to global
environmental degradation and the respective pressures.
Agreeing on the continuous relevance of this principle
cannot be interpreted as its extension to the entirety
of issues to be addressed in the post-2015 development
agenda. The world has changed dramatically over the
last decades, including the nature and magnitude of
our global challenges, their cause and effects, and our
respective capabilities to address them. The post-2015
development agenda needs to respond to these evolving
dynamics. The European Union and its member States
are committed to addressing these evolving realities
and responsibilities, and acknowledge the particular
situation and concerns of the most vulnerable countries.
All Member States must play their part in support of
countries most lagging behind.
We will engage constructively in all upcoming
processes whose outputs will feed into the preparation
of the September 2015 summit. We still have a long
way to go. The stakes have never been so high, the
challenges never so great. But business as usual is not
an option.
Ms. Robl (United States of America): We are very
pleased to adopt this outcome document (resolution 68/6)
of the special event on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). The outcome document reflects the
strength of our collective commitment to fight poverty,
accelerate the achievement of the MDGs, and unite
around a common vision for the future. We would like
to express our particular appreciation for the excellent
facilitation provided by the Permanent Representatives
of South Africa and Ireland, as well as for your own
role, Mr. President.

A/68/PV.32

Our consensus demonstrates the determination of
Member States to reach common ground on topics that
are difficult yet critical for the post-2015 development
agenda. This will provide a strong foundation for
our work going forward. As we engage in follow-on
discussions we should be mindful of staying within the
overall budget allocations for 2014 and 2015.
Mr. Ueda (Japan): My delegation also welcomes
the adoption of resolution 68/6 today. The special event
on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) held
two weeks ago was a great success. In that regard, I
would like to express our sincere appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to the co-facilitators, the
Ambassadors of Ireland and South Africa, as well as
their team, and the Secretariat for their hard work and
tremendous efforts to lead us to adopt the resolution in
the General Assembly today.
The special event and its outcome document provide
a great opportunity to renew our political commitment
to achieving the MDGs by the end of 2015. The special
event also succeeded in laying out a clear work plan to
integrate various mediation processes on the post-2015
development agenda with a view to working towards a
single framework and set of goals.
We think that such a process is very important to
formulate an ambitious post-2015 development agenda.
We therefore look forward to fruitful intergovernmental
consultations, including on an agreement on
organizational modalities for the summit guided by
you, Mr. President, and we will constructively engage.
In this regard, my delegation hopes that the modalities
of the summit to be negotiated and decided will be the
most efficient and cost-effective.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I should like to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and registering our
appreciation of the excellent work done by the two
co-facilitators, the representatives of Ireland and South
Africa.
I wish to associate my remarks with the statement
and observations delivered earlier by the Permanent
Representative of Fiji on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of the outcome
document and joins the consensus in that regard. In this
context, I would like to stress the following points.
Poverty eradication is the greatest global challenge
facing the world today. Eradicating poverty is an

13-505225/26

A/68/PV.32

indispensable requirement for sustainable development.
That was reaffirmed at the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development after extensive negotiations
and was finally adopted at the level of Heads of State
and Government at the Conference. We believe that this
balance should be preserved and not altered.
The world has undergone far-reaching changes in the
past two decades. Significant progress has been made in
many important fields of development through national
and international efforts. Yet developing countries
are still facing serious problems in advancing their
level of development and changing the unfavourable
international economic environment. The number of
people living in absolute poverty has increased in many
developing countries. In facing these challenges, the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
as well as the right to development, remain crucial as
a foundation of current and future global development
efforts, in particular for promoting the implementation
of the global partnership for development.
My delegation understands that the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities will
continue to guide our work with respect to developing
the post-2015 development agenda.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 14 and
118.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization (A/68/1)
The President: Members will recall that the
Secretary-General presented his annual report,
document A/68/1, to the General Assembly at its 5th
plenary meeting, on 24 September.
Mr. Ismail (Brunei Darussalam): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10 members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN):
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
At the outset, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the work
of the Organization (A/68/1). The report provides a
comprehensive and detailed overview of the challenges
and opportunities for this Organization. Indeed, there
is a need for the United Nations constantly to keep up

6/26

09/10/2013

and adapt to changing trends as well as to anticipate
and address emerging and new challenges accordingly.
ASEAN greatly values its cooperation with the
United Nations. The adoption of the Joint Declaration on
Comprehensive Partnership between the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the United Nations in 2011
affirmed the mutual commitment to further advance
and intensify the level of cooperation and to strengthen
the framework of cooperation between ASEAN and the
United Nations. In this connection, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 67/110, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations”. It identifies important points
of cooperation that will help us to address global issues
of mutual concern, including peace and security,
sustainable growth and development, human rights and
the rule of law.
ASEAN looks forward to the upcoming ASEANUnited Nations summit to be held on 10 October 2013 in
Brunei Darussalam to review ASEAN-United Nations
relations and to discuss its future direction as well as
to exchange views on regional and international issues.
We view this summit as an effective tool to strengthen
the partnership between both organizations.
The theme for ASEAN this year “Our People, Our
Future Together” is intended to highlight the important
role that the people of ASEAN play in its communitybuilding efforts to help ensure the region’s future.
ASEAN believes that each member State can prosper
from the success of its neighbours, and at the same
time individual and collective achievements will also
contribute to the global development process. In this
connection, during the recent Summit of the Group of
20 in St. Petersburg, Brunei Darussalam, as ASEAN
Chair, affirmed the importance of achieving inclusive
and sustainable growth. That very much remains a core
ASEAN goal.
ASEAN also remains committed to establishing
the ASEAN Economic Community by 2015. In this
regard, we will continue to implement cooperation
initiatives and measures that will support the free
flow of trade, investment and people in the region,
narrow development gaps and enhance ASEAN’s
competitiveness.
To achieve such inclusive and sustainable growth
and the Millennium Development Goals and to move
forward the post-2015 development agenda, ASEAN
has also adopted the Bandar Seri Begawan Declaration

13-50522

09/10/2013

A/68/PV.32

on Youth Volunteerism and Entrepreneurship. That
Declaration calls on young professionals to offer
voluntary community services in areas such as rural
development and poverty eradication, disaster relief,
health, education and the environment, while at the
same time supporting vulnerable groups and fostering
entrepreneurial skills. In this regard, ASEAN notes
the efforts of the Secretary-General in launching the
“Global Education First Initiative” and the appointment
of the first Envoy on Youth.

Additionally, ASEAN held the ASEAN Regional
Forum Disaster Relief Exercise 2013, co-hosted by
Thailand and the Republic of Korea from 7 to 11 May.
That was one of the largest civilian-military exercises
of its kind in the region. Besides that, we welcomed the
Mentawai Megathrust Exercise 2013-2014 in Indonesia,
which involved the East Asia Summit participating
countries, from 20 to 26 April. The regional ASEAN
Disaster Emergency Response Simulation Exercise will
be held sometime this month in Viet Nam.

On security matters, ASEAN will continue to
remain a net contributor to international peace and
security based on the rule of law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. ASEAN upholds the Treaty of
Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia as an essential
instrument for governing stable relations between and
among parties within and outside the region. ASEAN
welcomed Norway’s accession to the Treaty in July
2013.

On peacekeeping, the second meeting of the
ADMM-Plus Experts Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations was held in Manila in June 2012, co-chaired by
the Philippines and New Zealand. The meeting resulted
in an initial database of profiles of the peacekeepingrelated capabilities of participating States. With that
database, areas of complementarity and cooperation can
now be identified to help further boost the capacities
of participating States, including in the efficient
generation of forces for peacekeeping deployment.
While the diversity of current peacekeeping operations
capacity is a challenging reality, peacekeeping offers
rich potential for furthering cooperation among States
within and outside ASEAN.

ASEAN supports international disarmament efforts,
particularly towards achieving a nuclear-weapon-free
world. ASEAN will continue its engagement with
nuclear-weapon States in accordance with the
objectives and principles of the Treaty on the Southeast
Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone and the ASEAN
Charter, particularly with regard to their signing of the
Protocol to the Treaty without reservations and as early
as possible. We also encourage further cooperation in
line with the ASEAN Plan of Action to Strengthen the
Implementation of the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (2013-2017).
In addition, various seminars and workshops were
also held in cooperation with the United Nations, in
particular on conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy
and counter-terrorism.
On disaster-management and humanitarian
assistance efforts, ASEAN established landmark
cooperation among the defence forces of the ASEAN
Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus)
countries. This is to enhance confidence-building,
regional capacity and coordination through the ADMMPlus Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief and
Military Medicine Exercise, held in Brunei Darussalam
from 16 to 20 June this year. That large-scale exercise,
involving more than 3,000 personnel, enhanced practical
cooperation in the area of humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief and built trust and confidence among the
ADMM-Plus militaries.

On human rights, ASEAN adopted the ASEAN
Human Rights Declaration on 18 November 2012 in
Phnom Penh and acknowledged that that Declaration
was a milestone in the Association’s efforts to promote
and protect human rights in the region. We also
welcomed the outcome of the international workshop
on enhancing cooperation between United Nations and
regional mechanisms for the promotion and protection
of human rights, held from 12 to 14 December 2012
in Geneva, as well as the outcome of the Intensive
Learning Workshop on Women’s Human Rights for the
Regional and National Secretariats to ASEAN Human
Rights Bodies, held from 18 to 21 March 2013 in Bali,
Indonesia.
To conclude, we very much hope that the collective
efforts of ASEAN will contribute towards the United
Nations own work in promoting peace, security and
stability, as well as inclusive and sustainable growth for
all. It remains fully resolved to work closely to achieve
those ends.
Mr. Misra (India): I am privileged to address the
General Assembly today. Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your election to the presidency of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.

13-505227/26

A/68/PV.32

I thank the Secretary-General for his annual report
on the work of the Organization. It covers a wide
spectrum of issues and provides information on the
activities of the United Nations. It also underscores
the global and interconnected nature of the challenges
we face and highlights the unfinished agenda of
development and reform. It is important that the
sociopolitical challenges in the West Asian region be
addressed in an inclusive and peaceful manner.
With fewer than 850 days remaining for their
fulfilment, we need to accord the highest priority to
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Substantial progress has been made
in reducing poverty, yet our gains and progress have
been uneven and short on expectations. The SecretaryGeneral’s report points out that almost 1 billion people
will still live in extreme poverty in 2015. The eradication
of poverty therefore must remain the core, overarching
objective of the post-2015 development agenda,
including under the sustainable development goals. The
quest for sustainability will ring hollow as long as deep
imbalances in the consumption of natural resources and
carbon-intensive lifestyles in the developed world exist.
The fact still remains that the richest billion people
consume two thirds of the Earth’s resources whereas
the bottom billion consume a meagre 1 per cent.
On climate change, India remains fully committed
to crafting an ambitious, balanced and comprehensive
outcome to negotiations in accordance with the principles
and provisions of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. As we embark on the
process of framing sustainable development goals,
crucial issues such as that of resource mobilization, be
it official development assistance, technology transfer,
trade or foreign direct investment, must find appropriate
priority and be enshrined in the principles of common
but differentiated responsibilities and equity. Insofar
as our development partnership initiatives go, we are
resolved to carry forward and expand our multifaceted
and vibrant cooperation with Africa, including through
the framework of the India-Africa Forum Summit.
Similarly, we will continue to build on our
commitments for enhanced cooperation with the
least developed countries, the landlocked developing
countries and the small island developing States within
the overall rubric of South-South cooperation.
Terrorism remains a grave threat to security and
stability everywhere and extracts a heavy toll of innocent
lives throughout the world. From Africa to Asia we
8/26

09/10/2013

have seen several manifestations of this menace. The
international community has long acknowledged the
ever-present and pervasive threat posed by terrorism.
No country, city or region is immune from this global
scourge.
Yet, regrettably, we have failed ourselves by
continuing to procrastinate on concluding the
comprehensive convention against international
terrorism. It is time that Member States summoned the
necessary political will to agree to the comprehensive
convention against international terrorism as a sound
legal framework for the fight against terrorism. We
need concerted global action. Such action should be
predicated on zero tolerance towards terrorism and
aimed at systematically dismantling the infrastructure
of terrorism.
India has had a proud association with United
Nations peacekeeping since its very inception.
More than 150,000 of our uniformed personnel have
participated in this flagship endeavour of the United
Nations. As peacekeeping moves forward, we must
remain mindful of the challenges of operating in
increasingly complex environments. Not only should
the mandates be realistic, but their framing should be
inclusive of all stakeholders in a meaningful manner.
Ambitious mandates require matching resources. We
also need to be mindful of the safety of peacekeepers
while crafting such mandates.
It is also imperative that those who threaten
and attack United Nations peacekeepers be held
accountable. Cases where United Nations peacekeepers
have laid down their lives due to attacks by militias
and non-State actors must be thoroughly investigated
and the perpetrators of such acts brought to justice
expeditiously.
We note with appreciation the initiatives to
modernize and reform the Secretariat, including
through large-scale business transformation projects
such as the new enterprise resource planning system,
Umoja, International Public Sector Accounting
Standards, managed mobility of Secretariat staff,
and the capital master plan. While each involves
considerable investment, we see them as important
drivers in modernizing the United Nations.
However, it is our deep-rooted conviction that the
relevance of the United Nations ultimately hinges on a
more fundamental reform of its governance architecture,
which is frozen in another era that perpetuates the rights

13-50522

09/10/2013

of the “haves” of the mid-1940s. It is only through such
governance reform that the United Nations can truly
invigorate action on issues of pressing global concern,
be it issues of peace and security, climate change,
development, or human rights.
Let me therefore conclude by raising an issue
that inexplicably does not find even a mention in the
Secretary-General’s report, and that is the important issue
of Security Council reform, where intergovernmental
negotiations have not made much progress in spite of a
clear affirmation by an overwhelming majority of the
Member States of the need for expansion in both the
permanent and non-permanent categories.
We need to build on this by immediately
commencing real negotiations based on a negotiating
text, as is the case in all United Nations processes. It is
imperative to impart a sense of urgency and momentum
to this process by pressing for a results-based timeline
to achieve early reforms of the Security Council.
The year 2015, which marks the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations as well as 10 years
since the Millennium Summit Declaration, in which our
Heads of State and Government mandated us to achieve
early reforms of the Security Council, will therefore
be an important occasion to deliver some concrete
results and an expanded Security Council reflecting
contemporary realities.
Mr. Och (Mongolia): First, I wish to extend my
delegation’s deep appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his annual report on the work of the Organization.
I believe that our discussions, based on a thorough
review and assessment of the work of the Organization,
will stimulate new thinking on how we can scale up
our efforts in response to the many challenges that
the world community faces today, and in particular on
ways of accelerating progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and on the process of
defining the post-2015 development agenda. In this
respect, Mongolia welcomes the outcome document
of the special event to follow up efforts made towards
achieving the MDGs just adopted by the Assembly.
As the report states, the MDGs have improved
the lives of billions of people and helped to set global
and national priorities and fuel action on the ground.
However, the report also reveals that unless we take
resolute action, almost 1 billion people will still live in
extreme poverty in 2015. Mothers will die needlessly
in childbirth and children will suffer and die from

A/68/PV.32

preventable diseases. Fifty-seven million children are
not in school, and 73 million young people are out of
work. Therefore we need more concrete action.
I commend the Secretary-General for his important
initiatives, including the launch of the Global Education
First Initiative, which secured more than $1.5 billion in
commitments.
Mongolia makes every effort to contribute to
international endeavours aimed at achieving the
MDGs. Promoting literacy and education are among
our priorities at the national, regional and international
levels. As members are well aware, Mongolia initiated a
United Nations Literacy Decade, which was successfully
observed from 2003 to 2012. It is gratifying to note
that the Decade was marked by steady progress, with
millions of young people and adults becoming literate.
While national Governments were the prime movers
in this regard, development partners played significant
roles. In the positioning of literacy as a human right
and a means to achieve sustainable development in
poverty reduction, United Nations entities provided
various forms of normative and operational support.
I wish to commend them — in particular UNESCO,
the main coordinator and implementing agency for the
Decade — for their dedication and continued effort.
Another initiative put forward by Mongolia at the
United Nations became a General Assembly resolution
on education for democracy (resolution 67/18). The
resolution recognizes that education is key to the
strengthening of democratic institutions, the realization
of human rights and the achievement of all international
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals. It invites Governments, agencies
and organizations of the United Nations system and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to intensify their efforts to promote education for
democracy. I wish to take this opportunity to draw
the attention of Member States to the importance of
implementing that resolution, as we will be reviewing
its implementation at the next session of the General
Assembly.
While accelerating our efforts towards achieving
all the MDGs worldwide, we have started the process
of defining the United Nations development agenda
beyond 2015. My delegation greatly appreciates the steps
undertaken by the Secretary-General in this regard. We
fully share the view that the report of the High-level
Panel of Eminent Persons greatly contributes to the
ongoing process of consultations at various levels.

13-505229/26

A/68/PV.32

We believe that green and sustainable economic
development should be adequately reflected in the
post-2015 development agenda in order to address the
widely shared need to work towards one unified global
development agenda with sustainable development at
its centre.
Like many others, Mongolia is extremely
vulnerable to climate change. The country faces serious
environmental problems such as desertification,
pasture degradation, natural disasters, droughts, waterand forest-resource depletion and air and soil pollution.
These issues have a negative impact on the livelihood,
health and well-being of the nomadic herders and
ordinary Mongolians.
Increasing consumption, economic growth
and the rapid growth of the mining sector are
obviously intensifying the pressure on nature and the
environment. Both sound policies and joint efforts are
essential to solve this challenge. Continuing efforts are
being made to address the environmental challenges
by establishing and expanding the necessary legal
frameworks, organizing various meetings, holding
round-table discussions and implementing national
programmes and projects. In 2011, the Parliament of
Mongolia adopted a law on reducing air pollution in the
capital city.
Following the Parliament’s adoption of a package
of laws on environmental protection at its 2012 spring
session, today 70 per cent of the country’s territory
comes under the special protection of the State.
More than 25 national programmes on nature and
environment-related issues are being implemented in
Mongolia.
In 2010, the Government started the implementation
of national programmes on water protection and
combating desertification. In 2011, the Parliament
adopted a national programme on climate change.
Nevertheless, more effort will be required in the years
to come. Mongolia fully endorses the recommendations
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development and will be working towards their
implementation. One of the key messages that was
submitted to the Conference was the need for an
integrated approach to water-resource management.
That message remains relevant and must be central
in strategies towards a green economy. It was also
stated that a regular reporting mechanism should be
established for water-resource management that would
assist progress and share information.
10/26

09/10/2013

In line with that thinking, we could look at the
possibility of elaborating a United Nations convention
on water-resource management. That idea was expressed
by the President of Mongolia during the proceedings
of World Environment Day that our country hosted
this year. I hope that it will be given due consideration
as we continue activities to observe this year as the
International Year of Water Cooperation.
The Secretary-General’s report testifies to the fact
that today the role of United Nations peacekeeping is
growing rapidly. Mongolia has pursued an active policy
in this regard, making its contribution to promoting
the noble goals of the United Nations Charter. During
the past decade more than 5,000 peacekeepers from
Mongolia have served in different peacekeeping
operations, including the one in South Sudan. As a
follow-up to the visit of our President to South Sudan
earlier this year, we are focusing our attention on issues
of improving and strengthening our involvement in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Today more than ever, we need concerted action to
further strengthen international peace and security and
to further promote our efforts on disarmament — nuclear
disarmament in particular. I should like to highlight
in this respect the importance of last month’s Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on Nuclear
Disarmament, which has given great impetus to
global endeavours to eliminate those weapons of mass
destruction. We hope that the Nuclear Security Summit
to be held early next year in the Netherlands will also
further facilitate global efforts aimed at nuclear safety
and security. My delegation is of the view that nuclearweapon-free zones greatly contribute to hastening
global and regional peace and security. To address
other goals of nuclear disarmament, we encourage the
establishment of new zones in other regions, including
the Middle East.
As a North Asian country we are keenly interested
in strengthening peace and stability in this region.
We believe that Mongolia’s proposal to start the
Ulaanbaatar dialogue on security in North-East Asia
would contribute to achieving this noble goal, and
I wish to appeal to other countries of the region to
consider that proposal favourably.
Recent days have been full of important meetings
and events at the United Nations. I should like to draw
attention to the fact that, during this year’s treaty
event, Mongolia signed two important agreements,
one of which was the Arms Trade Treaty — a historic
13-50522

09/10/2013

achievement of the United Nations in recent years in
the field of disarmament. In this way, we are trying to
make our modest contribution to achieving our common
goals.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
strong resolve to work together with other Member
States towards strengthening the United Nations system,
so that it remains an effective centre for advancing the
development agenda, a valuable tool for maintaining
peace and stability throughout the world.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the report submitted
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the work of
the United Nations (A/68/1). At present, with the
international situation undergoing profound and
complex changes, peace and development remain the
theme of our time. In a multipolar world, economic
globalization and the emergence of the information
society are profoundly transforming the world. Nations
are more closely interconnected. Meanwhile, the
international community is faced with a multitude of
challenges. The underlying consequences caused by the
international financial crisis remain to be eliminated.
The instability and uncertainty of the world economic
situation are still remarkable. The full recovery of the
international economy and its healthy growth still face
grave challenges.
The international security situation is complex
and complicated. General hotspots flare up from time
to time. International terrorism, cybersecurity and
various traditional and non-traditional security threats
are interlinked. We still have a long way to go before we
can maintain international peace and security.
Over the past year, faced with a multitude of
complex threats and challenges, the United Nations
has been working actively to promote multilateral
cooperation, with an emphasis on activities within its
strategic frameworks; has placed economic growth and
sustainable development at its core; and has played an
important role in the fields of promoting sustainable
development, maintaining international peace and
security, promoting African development, protecting
human rights, coordinating humanitarian assistance,
combating terrorism, and promoting disarmament and
non-proliferation.
The United Nations Secretariat has also made
positive progress in improving its transparency,
efficiency and effectiveness. The Chinese delegation

A/68/PV.32

appreciates the hard work carried out by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and the Secretariat. To respond
effectively to the multitude of security challenges and
threats, nations must work together to give a full and
important role to the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations are the bedrock of contemporary
international relations and constitute a guarantee for
international peace. The international community
should continue to adhere to the important principles
of rejecting interference in the internal affairs of a
nation, maintaining peace, opposing power politics and
aggression, and promoting equality.
The question of Syria is the focus of the international
community’s attention. In that connection, China
welcomes the decision adopted by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and Security
Council resolution 2118 (2013). China is ready to send
experts to take part in the relevant work and to provide
support.
A political solution is the only way out on the
question of Syria, and such a solution should proceed
hand in hand with the destruction of Syria’s chemical
weapons. China calls upon the Syrian parties to agree
to an immediate ceasefire and the cessation of violence,
and join the process for a political settlement of the
question. China hopes that the international community
will build a consensus and promote the early convening
of the second Geneva international conference, so
as to end the crisis and start reconstruction through
dialogue. We will continue to support SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi in their good offices. China is ready
to join all other nations in a tireless effort to achieve a
comprehensive, proper and long-term settlement.
Cooperation for international development is at a
critical transitional stage. The United Nations should
continue to play a leading role in development. China
supports the continued implementation of all of the
Millennium Development Goals and the early start of
the intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda, with emphasis on the difficulties
and challenges faced by developing countries, in
particular by African countries, least developed
countries and small island developing countries, so as
to narrow the gap and rectify the imbalance between
North and South.

13-5052211/26

A/68/PV.32

The post-2015 development agenda should continue
to take development as its theme and place the elimination
of poverty and the promotion of development at its heart,
taking into full consideration the particular situation of
nations and their different stages of development, and
should respect the path of development chosen by each
nation independently. That agenda should contribute
to the strengthening of international partnerships for
development, adhere to the principles of common but
differentiated responsibility and fairness, increase
capacity and development financing, promote the
liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment,
and expand official development assistance and
technical support for developing countries, so as to
create an enabling environment for the development
of developing countries and provide a framework for
international development cooperation conducive to
developing countries.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The United Nations is an irreplaceable platform
for maintaining peace, pursuing common development,
increasing cooperation and creating win-win situations.
It is also a community of nations that believe in solidarity
and common progress. Faced with the challenges of
globalization and the changing world situation, the
international community has greater expectations of
the United Nations. China will firmly promote the
continued improvement of global governance and
support the United Nations in its efforts to keep abreast
of our times, respond actively to what is expected of the
Organization and better carry out the functions given
to it by the Charter.
United Nations reform should contribute to
increasing the voice of developing countries in
international affairs and to a bigger role for the United
Nations in coordinating the efforts of nations to deal
with global threats and challenges. The reform should
progress in a balanced manner in the fields of security,
development and human rights, and should contribute in
particular to positive results in the field of development.
China has always advocated, supported and
practised multilateralism. China has supported granting
the United Nations a bigger role in international
affairs and firmly upholds the status and authority
of the United Nations. China will continue firmly
to support the purposes and principles of the United
Nations and is ready to deepen cooperation with the

12/26

09/10/2013

Organization. It will play an even more active part in
the work of the various United Nations bodies and will
promote the United Nations, giving more attention to
the interests of developing countries in order to make a
greater contribution to building lasting peace, common
prosperity, and global harmony.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): First of all, I should like to
begin by congratulating His Excellency Mr. John Ashe
on his assumption of his duties as the President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. Japan
looks forward to his leadership during the current
session in facing the global challenges that the General
Assembly is mandated to discuss, as outlined in the
Charter, and reaffirms its commitment to contribute
to his work. I should further like to convey to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon the deep
appreciation of Japan for his efforts in guiding the
diverse activities of the United Nations and for his
latest report on the work of the Organization (A/68/1).
The peaceful settlement of international disputes
is a fundamental principle of the international
community enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
My Government is firmly committed to contribute to
establishing the rule of law at the international level
through, inter alia, its support to international courts
and tribunals, as well as at the national level through
its assistance aimed at strengthening domestic legal
systems and human resources in developing countries.
Furthermore, it is our strong belief that the idea of the
rule of law is strongly connected with the enhancement
of human rights, which is one of the three pillars of
the United Nations. Japan will continue actively to
contribute to international efforts under the auspices of
the United Nations.
Japan strongly condemns the grave violations of
human rights in places like Syria and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We support the efforts of
the United Nations in that connection, which include
the decision of the Human Rights Council to extend the
mandate of the Commission of Inquiry on Syria. Japan
strongly welcomed the Council’s adoption by consensus
of the resolution on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
the establishment of the Commission of Inquiry on
Human Rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, and supports the activities of the Commission.
Japan cooperated fully with the Commission when
its members visited Japan in August as part of the
investigation.

13-50522

09/10/2013

Japan, along with the European Union, will again
submit a draft resolution on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
order to address the international community’s grave
concern, including with regard to the abductions issue.
As Prime Minister Abe stated in his statement from
this rostrum during the general debate of the General
Assembly (see A/68/PV.12), Japan has recently chosen
a policy promoting a proactive contribution to peace,
which is based on the undeniable record and solid
appraisal of our country, which has endeavoured to
bring peace and prosperity to the world and emphasizes
cooperation with the international community.
The world’s balance of power has been changing
rapidly, and new types of threats have arisen because
of technological innovations. It is now impossible for
any one country, no matter which, to safeguard its own
peace and security acting entirely by itself. Japan will
work to garner the trust of the world as a creator of
added value and a net contributor to regional and world
peace and stability.
Given those circumstances, the role of the United
Nations will become even more important. The
maintenance of international peace and security is
one of the primary tasks of the United Nations. In
that regard, Japan is fully committed to contributing
to United Nations efforts by participating in United
Nations peacekeeping operation missions and extending
assistance to affected areas.
Japan is currently sending an engineering unit
of approximately 330 people to the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. Japan is also
deploying two Japanese Maritime Self-Defence Force
destroyers and two P-3C maritime patrol aircraft in the
Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia as part of
international efforts to combat piracy.
Japan welcomes the work undertaken by the
United Nations in the field of peacebuilding through
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund. We believe stronger emphasis must be placed on
the linkages between peacekeeping and development
operations. Japan remains committed to ensuring
that peacebuilding dividends are felt on the ground
through the work of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
To that end, Japan stresses the importance of
further improving coordination between the relevant

A/68/PV.32

organizations and the donors. In addition, we also
welcome the initiative by the Secretary-General to
strengthen civilian capacities in post-conflict States,
including through the launching of the CAPMATCH
capacity-matching programme last year, in which Japan
takes part.
Turning to the situation in Syria, Japan profoundly
deplores the deaths of more than 100,000 innocent
people. Faced with the scourge of that war, the
international community urgently needs to address
the appalling humanitarian conditions there. Japan
will continue proactively to provide humanitarian
assistance to refugees and to neighbouring countries,
now totalling approximately $280 million, which
includes the additional $60 million pledged by Prime
Minister Abe during the general debate,.
Chemical weapons must never be used again.
Japan strongly urges the Government of Syria to
comply faithfully and fully with the chemical-weapons
elimination programme established under Security
Council resolution 2118 (2013). Japan will provide
extensive support and the greatest possible cooperation
towards the elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons.
Now is the time for the international community
to seize this window of opportunity with a view to
bringing about a political solution. The successful
convening of the so-called Geneva II conference is of
the utmost importance in that regard. I should like to
reiterate Japan’s commitment to working together with
the international community towards an early Syrianled political transition.
The special event on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), held two weeks ago, was a great
opportunity to renew our political commitment to
the achievement of the MDGs and to lay out a clear
work plan so as organically to integrate various related
processes with a view to working towards a single
framework and set of goals.
On the post-2015 development agenda, it is
essential that human security be made its guiding
principle. In that connection, let me stress two points:
universal health coverage and disaster risk reduction.
First, we should aim at satisfying broader health and
medical needs based on a people-centred approach
that seeks to attain universal health coverage and
supplement a disease-centred approach. Measures for
vulnerable people, women in particular, are the key to
realizing universal health coverage. We will contribute

13-5052213/26

A/68/PV.32

to programmes related to universal health coverage
through a multilateral approach.
Secondly, disaster risk reduction should be
mainstreamed in the post-2015 development agenda,
since a disaster can wipe out the hard-won achievements
of years of development efforts in an instant. Having
experienced numerous massive disasters, including
the great East Japan earthquake and tsunami of 2011,
we would like to share with the world our experiences
and lessons learned, as well as various new disaster
reduction technologies and systems. With that in mind,
we will host the third United Nations World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction in the city of Sendai, the
disaster-stricken area of the great East Japan earthquake
and tsunami, in March 2015. I should like to ask all
Members here for their cooperation in regard to that
Conference.
In September last year, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 66/290, on the common understanding
of the notion of human security. That was an important
milestone for addressing widespread and cross-cutting
challenges to the survival, livelihood and dignity
of people. In recognizing that development, human
rights, and peace and security — the three pillars of
the United Nations — are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing, Japan is determined to make further efforts
to mainstream the concept of human security and build
on actions to implement that principle.
During the general debate in September, Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe declared his intention to create
a society in which women shine. Women, peace and
security forms one of three policy priorities of the
Japanese Government. Japan is determined to redouble
its efforts to promote the participation of women at
all stages, including the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and peacebuilding, as well as to safeguard
the rights and physical well-being of women who are
exposed to danger in times of conflict. In that regard,
we will also further strengthen our support for the
activities of UN-Women and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict.
The threat posed by weapons of mass destruction
continues to be one of the most imminent issues that the
United Nations and its Member States need to address.
Japan has been playing a leading role in promoting
the adoption of General Assembly resolutions that call
for united action to achieve a world without nuclear
weapons. In that connection, the Democratic People’s
14/26

09/10/2013

Republic of Korea’s continued development of its
nuclear and missile programmes is a serious threat to
the region and to the entire international community.
Japan strongly urges the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to take concrete steps towards denuclearization
and to fully comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and its commitments under the Joint
Statement of the Six-Party Talks in 2005.
With regard to Iran, Japan continues to cooperate
with the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1737 (2006). Japan strongly believes
that the full implementation of the related Security
Council resolutions is of critical importance, as it
provides a solid basis for the United Nations to promote
international peace and stability.
The establishment of the highest common standards
for regulating the international trade in conventional
arms had been eagerly anticipated. As one of the
original seven co-authors of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), Japan did its utmost to finalize that work, which
culminated in the adoption of the ATT during the sixtyseventh session. Japan strongly urges Member States
to sign and ratify that Treaty at the earliest possible
opportunity, so that the ATT will come into effect as
soon as possible.
It was regrettable that the Security Council failed
to unite and act as one, before the recent adoption of
Council resolution 2118 (2013), concerning the grave
situation in Syria. The malfunctioning of the Security
Council reminds us that reform of the Council is long
overdue and is one of the most urgent tasks to which
Member States should give priority. Based on that
belief, the Foreign Ministers of the Group of Four met
in the margins of the opening of the current session
of the General Assembly. The Ministers reconfirmed
their common vision for reform and stressed the need
to intensify efforts to translate into concrete outcomes,
at the latest by 2015, the commitment by the leaders at
the 2005 World Summit to work for an early reform of
the Security Council. In that context, Japan appreciates
the emphasis Ambassador Ashe put on the matter in his
inaugural address. Japan also welcomes the invaluable
efforts made by the Chairman of the intergovernmental
negotiations, Ambassador Zahir Tanin, and supports
his proposal of a concise working document.
Regarding administrative and budgetary issues,
the Assembly will be dealing with the budget for 20122013, as well as the 2014-2015 budget proposal. In order
to ensure budgetary discipline, Japan will carefully
13-50522

09/10/2013

analyse and judge the appropriateness and affordability
of all potential additional items in the current budget,
as well as the proposed programme budget 2014-2015.
With regard to human resources management,
including the proposed mobility framework and the
common system, those items have a great impact on the
future of the Organization, and Japan will actively and
positively participate in the related negotiations. Japan
expresses its appreciation of the Secretary-General’s
continued strong commitment to better management of
the Secretariat and United Nations facilities.
I will close my statement today by reiterating
Japan’s intention to work closely with the SecretaryGeneral in ensuring a more effective and efficient
United Nations.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I should
like to take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on the work of the
Organization (A/68/1). The report, which covers a wide
range of issues, testifies to the centrality and importance
of the United Nations in addressing the myriad of
challenges that beset the international community.
The challenges are interconnected. While we try to
isolate them in order to conjure up specific remedies,
we must keep in mind that they are interconnected
in so many ways. Malaysia associates itself with the
statement made by Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Allow me also
to present some of Malaysia’s views regarding a few of
the key issues highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report.
As the 2015 deadline looms, Malaysia, together
with the rest of the international community, is making
the final push towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). We wholeheartedly agree
with the Secretary-General that 2015 is not the finish
line in our quest to ensure balanced and inclusive global
development. Rather, we will begin another chapter as
we continue on our journey to build upon the successes
of the MDGs and fill in the gaps where we have fallen
short.
Malaysia is fully supportive of the theme of this
year’s session, “The post-2015 development agenda:
setting the stage”, which is both apt and timely. We
trust that the theme will provoke serious discussion on
the path forward towards international development.
In Rio de Janeiro last year, the global community
reaffirmed its commitment to sustainable development

A/68/PV.32

and adopted a comprehensive framework for action.
With almost one billion people still living in extreme
poverty and with income inequality rising, sustainable
development will need to be inclusive and take special
care of the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable.
The support expressed by all Member States in coming
up with a comprehensive post-2015 development agenda
has been overwhelming. Member States should build on
that momentum and find the best possible development
framework for every one of us.
Malaysia is following closely the progress of the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals as mandated by the outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) “The future we want” (resolution 66/288,
annex). In formulating the sustainable development
goals (SDGs), we should keep in mind the interests of
developing countries, especially the least developed
countries. It is not intended that the developing countries
should undertake the SDGs as a kind of conditionality
or a set of new obligations that apply only to them. The
goals should be universally applicable to all countries,
including developed ones. Hence, the principle of
common but differentiated responsibility enshrined
in the Rio principles must be applied in a holistic way
when formulating the goals. We should also ensure that
the SDG process is coherent with the post-2015 United
Nations development agenda process. The design,
structure and choice of SDGs should go in tandem with
what developing countries aspire to achieve and should
be supported by our partners in the developed countries
through the provision of technology and finance.
We wish to emphasize that the SDGs should not
in any way undermine the achievements of the MDGs
by 2015. We believe that MDGs and SDGs are not
competing concepts. The SDGs, if correctly formulated,
would accelerate the continuation of work begun
under the banner of the MDGs. They should strive for
greater economic and social inclusion and emphasize
integration and balance among economic, social and
environmental aspirations. There should be, therefore,
a unified, people-centred development with sustainable
development at its core and under the umbrella of world
peace.
Economic growth and social development can
only flourish under conditions of peace, security and
stability. Unfortunately, the international community
continues to witness the devastating effects of conflict
and instability on the civilian populations of various

13-5052215/26

A/68/PV.32

countries, including Syria, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia and the occupied Palestinian
territory. We must strive harder to find concrete
solutions to end violent conflicts and create the right
environment for nation-building and peacebuilding
initiatives.
Malaysia reiterates its call for a Syrian-led inclusive
political process to resolve the situation in Syria. We
are against unilateral action to resolve the conflict,
and we support resolute efforts through transparent
dialogue and mutual cooperation. We join our voices
to those of the international community in condemning
without reservation the use of chemical weapons and
call on all stakeholders to intensify their efforts to
explore all possible diplomatic options for peace under
the auspices of the United Nations.
Malaysia regrets that another year has passed
without any resolution for the people of the occupied
Palestinian territory. Day after day, month after month,
year after year, the people of Palestine continue to see
their lands seized to make way for illegal settlements.
They continue to see their families, including their
children, displaced and forced from their homes.
The plight of the people of Palestine must remain a
top priority, and we fervently hope that the recent
resumption of direct talks heralds progress towards a
viable Palestinian State based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We express our strong support for international
mediation efforts in bringing about a just, lasting and
peaceful solution between disputing parties. Malaysia is
a firm believer in resolving conflicts through peaceful
means and has played a lead mediating role in resolving
conflicts and disputes peacefully in our region.
In that connection, Malaysia believes that the
principle of moderation is an important approach
that can be applied in mediation. The application
of moderation can contribute towards bridging
differences, facilitating dialogues and resolving
disputes, as well as towards sustainable development
and stability. Moderation can also create harmonious
relations by calling for mutual respect, tolerance,
understanding, dialogue, compromise and justice. We
believe, therefore, that moderation can be a valuable
tool in conflict resolution, national reconciliation,
peacebuilding and power-sharing arrangements.
Malaysia is also committed to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a member of its

16/26

09/10/2013

Organizational Committee. We fully support United
Nations efforts to pool all available and relevant
resources with a view to assisting countries in their
post-conflict peacebuilding, recovery, reconstruction
and, eventually, development. To that end Malaysia
stands ready to provide capacity-building assistance,
such as through the Malaysian Technical Cooperation
Programme, under which we have trained more than
4,000 participants from 14 post-conflict countries to
date.
Malaysia continues to support the strengthening
of economic development and political governance
in Africa. We commend the efforts made by the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development and its
partners, including the United Nations, in guiding the
socioeconomic transformation of the region. Malaysia
will continue actively to engage and explore potential
partnerships in the African region in forums such as
the Langkawi International Dialogue and the Global
Smart Partnership Dialogue. Malaysia also has strong
trade, investment and capacity-building links with the
African continent and looks forward to enhancing those
ties further in the years to come.
As long as nuclear weapons remain in existence,
our collective safety and well-being hangs in the
balance. I reiterate the call made by our Prime Minister
here on 26 September 2013 for a nuclear-weapon-free
world during the High-level Meeting on Nuclear
Disarmament.
As pointed out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, it is ironic that an issue as prominent and
critical as nuclear disarmament remains at an impasse
in international negotiations in the Conference on
Disarmament. The paralysis must be brought to an
end, and we reiterate the proposals made by our
Prime Minister for new perspectives to be taken into
account in the disarmament discourse, including the
views of academicians, intellectuals, think tanks and
non-governmental organizations.
Malaysia views the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) as a
significant milestone in international efforts to prevent,
combat and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional
arms. The Prime Minister of Malaysia signed the Treaty
on 26 September 2013, cementing our commitment to
binding international standards that would contribute
to reducing armed conflict and the misuse of arms. We
call upon Member States to accede to and ratify the
ATT in order rapidly to bring the Treaty into force.

13-50522

09/10/2013

Malaysia is encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
continued commitment to ensuring that the United
Nations is able to deliver in spite of scarce resources.
We agree that staff members are assets and that their
development would undeniably assist in preparing the
Organization to face the evolving challenges with which
we are confronted in this day and age. Enterprise risk
management, enterprise resource planning, also known
as Umoja, and International Public Sector Accounting
Standards are not mere words or abbreviations for us
to remember. They are important administrative and
management projects that will enhance the management
and efficiency of the Organization as a whole.
My delegation acknowledges that there are limited
human, financial and material resources available to the
Organization because of the world economic situation.
Given those limitations and the ever-increasing
mandate given to the United Nations, Member States
will continue to demand greater transparency and
accountability. In that connection, Malaysia would
like to see the completion of the capital master plan
both on time and within budget. That is important, as
the capital master plan will enhance the coordination
and effectiveness of the United Nations through
modernization in communications and improvements
in the working environment for staff members.
To conclude, it is true that much has changed since
the United Nations was conceived. Despite the changes
and problems that we face, Malaysia remains a firm
believer in multilateralism and consistently subscribes
to the centrality of the United Nations, which has
enabled the evolution of rule-based interaction
among States, thus creating a predictable and stable
international order. We sincerely hope that this session
of the General Assembly will allow all of us to move
forward in a concerted effort to address the various
problems and challenges that are laid upon us. The
Assembly can count on Malaysia’s firm commitment
in that regard.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The Republic of Argentina would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the submission of his report on
the work of the Organization (A/68/1). I should like
to focus my statement on three matters to which the
Secretary-General has devoted a major part of his report:
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the
post-2015 agenda, Syria, and particular developments
regarding peacekeeping operations.

A/68/PV.32

Argentina takes a positive view of the Millennium
Development Goals as a tool for organizing and
promoting national public policy that brings together
efforts to pursue specific, clear and concrete ends.
National Governments have been the major protagonists
in that progress, with the collaboration of the United
Nations system and with the input, although not always
sufficient, provided by international cooperation.
The current debate on the post-2015 agenda is very
timely, since an international and multisectoral dialogue
has been triggered on various aspects that will, no
doubt, feed into the decisions to be taken in 2014-2015.
But that process should not distract our attention from
the pressing work that we must still complete in order
to meet the Millennium Development Goals before the
2015 deadline. Many countries are on course to achieve
them, but when we are talking about development and
human rights, the task is unending and that we must
sustain our efforts over time.
Argentina has shown that with clear ambition and
strategies and inclusive development, major changes
can become reality. Eradicating poverty is, and must
continue to be, our central objective, and we cannot
accept any pretext to avoid adopting that as the main
objective for 2030. The level of poverty in Argentina
declined by 87 per cent between 2003 and 2013, today
standing at 5.4 per cent. The time to permanently
eradicate extreme poverty is now. That will not be
possible unless we reverse the current trend towards
increasing inequality in the world. Deep asymmetries
continue to exist between the developed and developing
countries, asymmetries that the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean has described as
structural gaps that are linked to inequality.
We do not believe that there is a single pattern for
development, either our own or for other people. We
cannot ignore the differences in the responsibilities of
the various countries to work to achieve sustainable
development. Each country’s economic, social and
environmental obligations at the global level should
be seen as consistent with its level of development,
its specific circumstances, and its different historical
responsibilities towards the degradation of the
environment, which means that we must clearly
respect the principle of common but differentiated
responsibility.
Each individual State should therefore work in a
systematic fashion to promote development, beginning

13-5052217/26

A/68/PV.32

by ensuring consistency between its macroeconomic
policies and its policies relating to the generation
of decent work and social inclusion. The access of
developing countries to genuine funding resources,
including official development assistance, varies.
They may be able to obtain increased funding from
multilateral and regional development banks or to
improve their access to markets for exports through
agreements reached at the next Bali round, particularly
in terms of agricultural products. They also differ in
their ability to promote the development of human
resources and adapt to climate change.
The commitments entered into should be broken
down into specific aims and objectives for all, and not
just for the developing countries. The implementation
of Millennium Development Goal 8, which reflects
the commitment of the international community to
supporting the development agenda, has not lived up to
expectations and that is, perhaps, due to the fact that it
was not clearly defined with clear and qualitative goals
to be reached. That is a lesson we must bear in mind
when we formulate the new post-2015 development
agenda.
The States Members of the United Nations must
step up to the challenges that we have to tackle. We
must get to the substance of the discussion — how to
maintain and consolidate progress made through the
MDGs; how to strengthen and complement them for
the new sustainable development agenda, not forgetting
that the task is to obtain results and not just to quantify
them; and how to fund the new agenda and ensure that
each individual State, whatever its development status,
can take ownership of the agenda by adopting realistic
achievable objectives.
Moving on to the Syrian crisis, the SecretaryGeneral’s report has revealed the shortcomings of the
collective security system laid down in the United
Nations Charter and has placed in jeopardy the very
credibility of the Organization. Specifically, a divided
Security Council has failed in its obligation to comply
with the mandate conferred on it by the Charter. A few
days ago, the President of Argentina raised that matter,
placing it in the broader context of the need to reform
the Security Council by removing the right of veto. She
said:
“When dealing with conflict resolution and
management, if one party to the conflict, or an
interested party, has the right of veto, that right

18/26

09/10/2013

necessarily becomes an obstacle to the resolution
of the conflict.” (A/68/PV.7, p. 10)
The Organization has recently made tremendous
efforts to deal with the humanitarian fallout of the
Syrian conflict and the fallout in neighbouring
countries. But it is clear that no amount of assistance
will satisfy the growing needs of the people of Syria
unless a negotiated outcome to the crisis is found. We
therefore agree with those who believe that the recent
unity of the Council in dealing with the matter of
chemical weapons and in addressing the humanitarian
situation may constitute the foundation for a political
and negotiated solution for the crisis in Syria that
recognizes the legitimate aspirations and demands of
the Syrian people and lays the foundation for lasting
peace through the early holding of a conference on
Syria to implement the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex).
Of course, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and grave violations of human rights cannot go
unpunished. The International Criminal Court has a
role to play there. We must again stress, as we have
done frequently, that the delivery of arms to the parties
in the conflict must cease.
To conclude, I should like to talk about certain
developments that have occurred over the past year
with regard to peacekeeping operations. As a member
of the Security Council, Argentina voted in favour
of resolution 2098 (2013) regarding the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, based on the concern generated
within the international community by the continuing
deterioration of the situation in that country and the
need to ensure the protection of human rights and
international humanitarian law and the rule of law, and
the end of impunity, particularly in the eastern area of
the country.
Argentina voted in favour of the resolution, but
subsequently expressed its concern regarding the
establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade,
and particularly its ability to use force in offensive
action, even when such a decision, enabled under
paragraph 9 of the resolution, was considered to be
of an exceptional nature and would not constitute a
precedent. My country believes that such a use of force
would represent a conceptual change in the traditional
concept of peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, with respect to including the
dimension of the imposition of peace within the

13-50522

09/10/2013

A/68/PV.32

concept of peacekeeping, even when justified by the
circumstances, there should have been further broader
consultations with all countries that contribute troops to
the United Nations, not only with countries contributing
troops to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
should be done bearing in mind the new tasks that
might have to be undertaken and the impact that such a
decision might have on the entire peacekeeping system.
The principles of neutrality and impartiality inherent
in peacekeeping missions are at stake here. My country
supports the peaceful settlement of disputes consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and other bodies.

The Central African Republic merits priority
attention on political questions. The report describes
the assistance given to 55 Member States in building
democracy and holding elections. We commend the
Secretary-General for that assistance, particularly
to African countries. On 30 September, Cameroon
organized municipal and legislative elections in a
climate of peace and calm, which was welcomed by
national and international observers, a sign of the
significant progress in and maturity of our electoral
process, patiently established and constantly being
refined by our Government with the assistance of
bilateral and multilateral partners, including the United
Nations.

Again, I should like to restate Argentina’s readiness
to contribute and continue to work with the SecretaryGeneral in order to achieve a United Nations that is more
efficient and better adapted to the new international
realities.

With respect to promoting sustained economic
growth and sustainable development, the report
mentions the actions carried out by the United Nations
to accelerate the implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals and to promote the post-2015
development agenda, as well as the well-being of all
throughout the world.

Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
We read very attentively the Secretary-General’s
annual report on the work of the Organization (A/68/1).
Structurally, the report is organized around the three
major priorities defined by the General Assembly in the
strategic framework for the biennium. Substantively,
it provides copious information regarding what has
been accomplished in the 12 months under review. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General for all of that
information, which clearly demonstrates the efforts that
he and his staff have made in discharging the weighty
and delicate tasks given to them by the Member States.
We join the Secretary-General in expressing our
emotional condolences to the families of the officials
of the Organization who have lost their lives serving
humankind and the noble ideals and principles in the
Charter.
Regarding questions of international peace and
security, the report summarizes the activities carried out
by the Organization in maintaining and building peace,
in conflict prevention, and in mediation in a number
of parts of the world. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that prevention, peacebuilding and mediation
are the best ways to prevent conflict situations from
degenerating or becoming seriously bogged down.
In Africa particularly, we support the SecretaryGeneral in the efforts to resolve existing crises on our
continent, but especially to build African capacities for
peacekeeping on the continent and subregionally.

We also agree with the Secretary-General that
climate change is a major issue in our age and that the
time to act is now. The recurrence of natural disasters
throughout the world, with Hurricane Sandy as an
overwhelming and devastating example, striking even
the United Nations basement, should prompt us to
make good decisions before it is too late, at any rate
before we have to pay an even heavier price, materially,
financially and in terms of human lives.
The contribution of countries such as Cameroon
to sustainable socioeconomic progress throughout the
world resides, among other things, in an environmentally
rational management of our forest area of 21 million
hectares in the greater Congo basin, which is the
second largest after the Amazon and a large reservoir
for the retention of carbon and other greenhouse gases.
It is an oxygenic lung aerating the world, home to rare
tree species, rare and diverse flora and fauna, and a
biodiversity that has multiple uses. If all of that wealth
is going to be global, a partnership must allow those
who have such things to enjoy them in a legitimate
manner, to obtain a fair price for them, and to provide
oversight, maintenance, conservation and regeneration.
Regarding development in Africa, which is a
definite priority that is always underscored by the
General Assembly, the report highlights the actions
undertaken by the United Nations, in close cooperation

13-5052219/26

A/68/PV.32

with the African Union, for the development of Africa
through its support to the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. There is no need to reiterate that our
continent has in the past few years reaffirmed its
leadership in defining the future and the role that it
wishes to have in the short, medium and long term in
the comity of nations and throughout the world.
Programmes and projects have been developed
for that purpose on the continent, subregionally and
nationally, with follow-up measures, partnerships and
strategic assistance partnerships. We have requested
such projects, and we support the concrete measures
proposed in paragraph 44 of the report, which states
that everything has been done to ensure that the needs
and priorities of Africa are given full attention as we
think about the post-2015 development agenda.
The monitoring mechanism mandated by the
General Assembly in its resolution 66/293 will allow us
to summarize the implementation of the commitments
made for development in Africa. Resources for support
are, of course, expected along those lines.
On the promotion and protection of human rights,
the report describes the actions taken and the progress
made and notes the shortcomings and disappointing
results in some cases. In an area so expansive and
diverse as human rights, we need to emphasize the need
for firm will on the part of States to move ahead in that
area. Cameroon is deeply committed in that respect, as
can be seen by the progress made by our Government
on the ground with respect to political, economic and
social rights in developing appropriate legislation
for children, women, the family, older persons and
persons with disabilities, in our participation in
international treaties and conventions and in presenting
national reports in those areas and following up on
recommendations made by the competent national and
international bodies.
With respect to humanitarian assistance, the
report provides detailed information on the total
contributions received and their recipients. We
commend the Secretary-General for the efforts made,
and we would encourage him to move ahead, ensuring
good coordination, speed and greater security for
humanitarian assistance operations.
With respect to the promotion of justice and
international law, the report notes a number of activities
concerning the International Criminal Court, as well
as specific international courts. The Secretary-General

20/26

09/10/2013

should have included in that paragraph of the report
information regarding the dissemination and teaching
of international law in a number of regions of the world.
On disarmament, the Secretary-General expresses,
among other things and quite rightly, strong concern
regarding the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Cameroon is a party to the ban on such weapons and
can only say that they should not be used. We worked
for the recent adoption in The Hague of a resolution on
that question, which was then amplified by the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), paving
the way for the destruction of the Syrian chemical
weapons. Beyond the destruction of those weapons,
Cameroon supports the ongoing Russian-American
initiatives aimed at finding a peaceful political solution
to the entire Syrian crisis. Our peace-loving country is
working for an Africa and a world that does not have
chemical weapons.
On drug control, crime prevention and
combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, Cameroon notes with appreciation the
actions undertaken by the United Nations, as stated
in the report. I should like to emphasize that acts of
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea were
the subject of a summit of West African countries held
in Cameroon in April. That meeting enabled us to adopt
unanimous measures to combat such acts vigorously.
In fact, an interregional clearing house headquartered
in Yaoundé was established. The United Nations and
other bilateral and multilateral partners are called
upon to provide assistance to the centre as needed. The
partnership that the Secretary-General wholeheartedly
seeks could find fertile ground for cooperation in the
interregional centre.
Finally, on the strengthening of the Organization,
the report emphasizes the measures taken by the
Secretary-General to increase the effectiveness of
the management of the United Nations. We need not
reiterate that the Organization is the body that regulates
our higher common interests, including peace, security,
and the well-being of one and all as the most critical
elements. The Organization tajes an integrated
approach to management through its key instruments,
including the strategic framework, the programme
budget and oversight, and the inspection, investigation
and assessment mechanisms.
The Organization’s staff, as the Secretary-General
has affirmed, is its greatest asset. In the past few years,
the stability and predictability of all those factors have
13-50522

09/10/2013

been sorely tested, owing to global financial difficulties
that have not spared the Organization. The SecretaryGeneral has been constrained to do more with less. We
hope that projects such as Umoja and the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards norms mentioned
by the Secretary-General will, in keeping with the time
frame and goals set by the General Assembly, result in
a long-lasting management culture, if the Organization
is to survive in the information age of the twenty-first
century, where it has to deal with actors that may be
better equipped in those areas. Cameroon supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General to modernize the
Organization in the hope he will move forward in full
consultation with and giving careful consideration to
the views of all Member States.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): First of all, on behalf of
my delegation and on my own behalf, I wish to extend
sincere compliments to Ambassador John Ashe on
assuming the presidency of the Assembly and to pledge
our full support in the discharge of his important
duties in that capacity. I look forward to celebrating his
success, which will indeed be a common victory for us
all.
I also wish to put on record our sincere thanks and
compliments to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on his
industrious and successful stewardship of our complex
Organization.
Our Organization represents the soul of human
conscience, a monument to the united determination
to make our planet a better place by all means and
standards, and a vehicle for translating into reality our
collective resolve to that end. The Secretary-General
symbolizes the pinnacle of integrity, dedication,
competence, judgment and overall coordination and
leadership in the functioning of the Organization. It is
with this fact in mind that my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report, as contained in document
A/68/1, as an excellent window into the progress of the
Organization over the past year in all areas of its core
functions.
The Secretary-General’s comprehensive analysis
outlining the complex context of peace, security and
development needs, resource gaps and other parameters
of peace in the contemporary world, and the conclusions
drawn therefrom, are pertinent and urgent, together
with the actions that Member States need to take in
the course of next year and beyond. On the whole,
the Secretary-General has highlighted major global

A/68/PV.32

issues with insightful suggestions and provided a good
basis for constructive intergovernmental deliberations
ahead. My delegation commends the report for its clear
articulation of serious concern over such development
issues as the Millennium Development goals (MDGs),
the post-2015 development agenda and sustainable
development goals, and how the most needy and most
vulnerable of countries can be taken on board in our
future development efforts.
Nepal has unflinching faith in the principles
and purposes of the United Nations, believes in the
centrality of the Organization in all multilateral affairs,
attaches great significance to each and every aspect
of the work of the Organization, and takes seriously
each and every point the Secretary-General makes
in the report. In looking at what the Organization
can accomplish directly and as a catalyst for peace,
security, development and justice throughout the world,
we believe the United Nations has no alternative except
to ensure a more robust and reformed Organization, for
which my delegation will be working closely with all
in future.
Nepal has been contributing to the work of
the Organization in different capacities, and most
importantly in the United Nations peacekeeping efforts
throughout the world, including in the most difficult
of missions and at the shortest notice. I assure the
Secretary-General of Nepal’s continued commitment to
participating in United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
Issues of sustained economic growth and
sustainable development, including climate change
and mountains, MDGs and other internationally
agreed development goals, the development of the
least developed and landlocked developing countries,
international peace and security, human rights and
humanitarian assistance, justice and the rule of law
at the national and international levels, international
cooperation to free the world from the arms race and
weapons of mass destruction, drugs and terrorism are
all very close to our heart. Nepal is supportive of the
serious efforts being made to address the concerns and
aspirations of small island developing States.
We are aware that no matter how we may wish
to move ahead, we have to deal head on with the
crucial issues of infrastructure development, capacitybuilding in terms both of hardware and software,
resource mobilization, official development assistance,
technology transfer, trade, foreign direct investment,

13-5052221/26

A/68/PV.32

sustainable
agriculture,
tourism,
international
migration and development, to which we must accord
priority.
The MDGs have been the most successful
development drive in the history of the United Nations.
The drive has brought the United Nations closer to
people in the countries of the South. At the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, our
leaders agreed to build on the success of the MDGs and
to develop universally applicable sustainable goals for
the future.
As we embark on the post-2015 development
agenda, now is the time to stand by that resolve in the
firm determination that we will not betray the bottom
billion people living in abject poverty on any other
development pretext, and that we will place humanity
at the centre of development. The exercise of the post2015 development agenda should rise to the challenge
of facilitating the transformational shifts that the world
needs.
While my delegation understands full well the time
constraints facing us and the Organization, I find it
important to issue a word of caution regarding the use
of time between now and 2015.
The Secretary-General has outlined a plan for
holding big events in 2013, 2014 and 2015 as part of the
post-2015 development agenda exercise. It is important
to ponder how that planning relates to the necessary,
relevant activities at national level. We have less than
100 weeks to deliberate on all aspects of the post2015 development agenda and to agree on a post-2015
development framework by September 2015. If we cut
out weekends and holidays, that period will be shorter
by one-third. While the job has to be full-time, given
its long-term pertinence and urgency, it will be one of
several responsibilities for most of the people supposed
to work on it.
The resulting danger is threefold. The exercise may
not be able to be adequately informed of the voices of
all; the agenda may not be able to encompass or avoid all
that it should; and the specific aspects of the outcome of
the whole exercise may not correspond to the specific
needs on the ground. More importantly, there may be
a disconnect between exercises at the global level and
those at the national level. We have numerous examples
of agreeing on time-bound programmes of action — say
for five or 10 years — and spending the first half of
that period figuring out how it can all be integrated into

22/26

09/10/2013

the national scheme of things for implementation and
follow-up.
Any recurrence of the same experience in the case
of the post-2015 development agenda would be most
unfortunate. Parallel efforts to engage machineries
and all stakeholders at the national level right from
the planning phase is important to forge a sense of
participation, partnership, ownership, attachment and
commitment, which are all essential to ensuring that
the intended results are achieved, achieved in full and
achieved together.
I therefore humbly call on the presidency of the
Assembly and the Secretary-General to schedule the
meetings and activities carefully and judiciously,
ensuring justice and balance among issues and countries,
as well as across themes and regions. That will help to
ensure that all efforts at the national and international
levels will go in tandem right from the planning phase,
together with crafting financing and other mechanisms,
so that we will be able to deliver what may be agreed
and to evaluate the results afterwards.
With that fervent call, I reiterate my delegation’s
admiration for the dedicated and dynamic leadership of
the Secretary-General, and especially for his personal,
empathetic hopes for uplifting the downtrodden and
needy, and our full confidence in his work ahead. Nepal
looks forward to working with all Members to make the
Organization rise to the challenge posed by our world
in the twenty-first century.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We commend the
Secretary-General for presenting a very comprehensive
and substantive report on the work of the Organization
(A/68/1). We all know that this past year the SecretaryGeneral has worked hard to promote peace and security
around the world, to shape our 2015 development
agenda, to champion the cause of education for all, to
mobilize the international community to deal with the
challenges of climate change, and to muster support for
sustainable energy for all. With the support of Member
States, the Secretary-General and the Organization
on his watch have made impressive progress. What is
more, we all, because of our collective wisdom, seem
to be moving in the right direction.
This past year, we also had the honour of receiving
the Secretary-General in Pakistan, where he held an
in-depth dialogue with our leadership and focused
on issues of education, energy, disaster response and
preparedness, counter-terrorism, and peace and security

13-50522

09/10/2013

in the region. His visit to Pakistan was memorable
because he celebrated our independence day with the
people of Pakistan.
If we look at the state of the world, we see five broad
trends. First, the world has still not fully recovered
from the international financial crisis, and that has
a direct impact on the United Nations development
agenda. Secondly, the social and economic development
agenda in many developing countries remains anaemic.
It requires the convening power and support of the
United Nations. Thirdly, climate change has become
a serious challenge for our globe’s increasingly fragile
ecosystems. Fourthly, conflicts are raging throughout
the world, most of which we cannot resolve without the
intercession and intervention of the United Nations.
Last but not least, terrorism and other forms of
asymmetric threats destabilize societies and pit faith
against faith, nation against nation, and civilization
against civilization.
Not all is dark and dismal. There are many positive
trends. The Millennium Development Goals have
made progress, although we have to go some way to
meet them 100 per cent and that is what we ought to
be doing. The United Nations is now preparing for the
post-2015 development agenda to evolve and implement
a development framework that deals with social,
economic and environmental challenges in a holistic
and cohesive manner.
The sustainable development goals must set the
goal of the eradication of poverty by 2030. At the same
time, we have to find a balance between economy
and ecology, and we have to ensure that developing
countries attain higher levels of economic growth and
development. Our efforts will flounder if we do not
have a strategy for financing for development. We need
both traditional and innovative means to bridge the
resource gaps for our ambitious goals for sustainable
development. Let us strive to succeed in all these goals.
The agenda of the Security Council is dominated
by African issues. The Security Council, the African
Union’s Peace and Security Council, and Africa’s
subregional organizations have been succeeding in the
recent past in resolving some of the most intractable
issues in East, Central and Western Africa.
Daunting challenges remain in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali. In this regard, we
applaud the Secretary-General’s leadership in crafting
the Comprehensive Framework Agreement, with the

A/68/PV.32

help of the countries of the Great Lakes region and the
Southern African Development Community, to bring
peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That is a work in progress.
We also support the Secretary-General’s efforts
to pursue a comprehensive strategy for addressing the
problems of transnational crime, resource scarcity,
terrorism and political instability in the Sahel.
We welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013) to secure control of chemical
weapons in Syria and destroy them. We hope that
the consensus generated by the resolution will lead
to agreements at the “Geneva II” conference so that
Syria can move towards reconciliation and a transition
acceptable to the Syrian people.
We hope that the resumed Middle East peace
process will gain momentum and lead to lasting peace
in the region and a viable Palestinian State.
For our part, we fully support the efforts to shape
a post-2015 development agenda. Our new Government
has taken steps to accelerate social and economic
development, with a sharp focus on the revival of
the economy, investment, trade promotion, energy,
education, health, and disaster prevention. We are
working proactively for peace and stability in the region.
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif met Mr. Manmohan Singh
on the sidelines of the General Assembly last month
and made serious overtures to resolve all outstanding
issues, including the issue of Jammu and Kashmir.
Pakistan supports Afghanistan’s efforts to
initiate a peace process and to move towards national
reconciliation and stability. The international
community should continue to help Afghanistan as it
negotiates political, security and economic transitions.
In the meantime, the United Nations should upgrade
and fortify its strategy for the repatriation of the more
than 3 million Afghan refugees still living in Pakistan.
The Secretary-General has expressed disappointment
over the lack of progress on the disarmament and
non-proliferation agenda. I would say that some
headway has been made. The Arms Trade Treaty
was adopted last year. The Nuclear Security Summit
process is moving apace. A successful nuclear security
conference was held by the International Atomic Energy
Agency earlier this year, and a High-level Conference
on Nuclear Disarmament was hosted by the General
Assembly last month.

13-5052223/26

A/68/PV.32

We believe that the impasse in the disarmament and
non-proliferation agenda can be broken if we address
four core issues — disarmament, the fissile material
cut-off treaty, the prevention of an arms race in outer
space, and negative security assurances — and pursue
them simultaneously without establishing hierarchies.
Similarly, barriers to access to nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes should be removed. We should
adhere to the cardinal principles of security for all,
non-selectivity and non-discrimination.
Our position on a fissile material cut-off treaty
is determined by our national security interests and
the objective of strategic stability in South Asia. We
advocate a strategic restraint regime comprising nuclear
and missile restraint, conventional balance and conflict
resolution. Pakistan fully qualifies to have access
to nuclear technology for peaceful purposes and to
become a member of export control regimes, including
the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
Security Council reform needs to be pursued
carefully and skilfully. This is a momentous process.
Its results cannot be achieved through shortcuts or
procedural moves and manoeuvres. Decisions in this
regard must enjoy the support of all the Members of the
Organization. The reform should aggregate and reflect
the aspirations and interests of all, not the ambitions
of a few. The Council’s reform should make it more
representative, democratic and equitable and its work
more effective, transparent and accountable.
As the Prime Minister of Pakistan told the
Assembly last month (see A/68/PV.15), we should plan
for a dynamic future, and not entrench anachronistic,
historical patterns and privileges. The Uniting
for Consensus group recommends such a viable
intermediate solution. Let us not forget that it is our
collective responsibility to revitalize the Assembly
so that it can play its rightful role for peace, stability,
sustainable development and the promotion and
protection of human rights. This is a new era. Let us
not hark back but look forward.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate the President upon his election and
commend the Secretary-General for his report on the
different activities of the Organization (A/68/1).
Development is an important source of financing
and support for many developing countries. In spite
of the importance that we attach to other sources of
financing, there is no substitute for public financing.

24/26

09/10/2013

We are concerned by what we read in the SecretaryGeneral’s report regarding a decline in official
development assistance for the period 2011-2012. We
hope that the developed countries will honour their
commitments.
The Secretary-General’s report does not take into
account the concerns of the developing countries,
in particular the implementation of the promises and
commitments already made, in particular on how to
implement the fact that developed countries provide
financing, build capacity and transfer technologies
to developing countries as part of international
efforts to promote sustainable development because
of their historic responsibility, climate change and
environmental obstacles to development, and given
their financial and technological resources, pursuant to
principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, conerning common but differentiated
responsibility. We welcome more vigorous United
Nations efforts to assist African countries in
development, in particular through the financing of
peacebuilding programmes through the Peacebuilding
Fund and through cooperation with regional and
international financial institutions.
The situations in Guinea-Bissau and the Central
African Republic require peacebuilding in line with
an comprehensive perspective that takes account of the
specificities of each of the two countries rather than
one model and lessons learned from the past and from
experience with the six countries on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
With respect to peacebuilding under the Charter,
Egypt welcomes the United Nations role in democratic
transformation, including in Egypt in line with its
national priorities. We express our concern regarding
the treatment of the situation in Egypt in the report’s
chapter on international security and peacebuilding.
Ours is an internal situation that does not threaten
international peace and security. The SecretaryGeneral has said that this is an Egyptian matter and
that it is the responsibility of Egyptians to resolve this
issue for a better future.
I reaffirm that the Government of Egypt is
committed to implementing the road map within
the agreed timelines, to holding presidential and
parliamentary elections by the deadline of May 2014,
and to repudiating terrorism and violence. We accept
the principles of the rule of law, respect for human

13-50522

09/10/2013

rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy, equality
and justice for all.
Regarding justice and international law, Egypt
recognizes the importance of respecting the judgement
of international law. We believe that peaceful means
should be used to settle disputes pursuant to international
law, including the International Court of Justice, the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and
international arbitration. We hope that the international
humanitarian summit will be prepared with an agenda
that will build national capacities in developing
countries so that they will be able to deal with their
crises and offer solutions that will promote sustainable
development through their national institutions.
Although the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1) and other resolutions of the General
Assembly support the responsibility to protect, the
definition of that principle is still subject to different
interpretations among Member States out of fear that
it will be used in a way that is contrary to the Charter
of the United Nations. We therefore stress that there
should be no politicization or pretext for interfering in
the internal affairs of States.
Egypt welcomes ongoing social activities to
promote women’s rights, as highlighted in the report.
We would have hoped that the report would have
addressed last year’s accomplishments, for example in
preventing violence against women and violence during
conflicts.
We thank the Secretary-General for his work
with the Open-ended Working Group on Nuclear
Disarmament, his efforts to promote a fissile material
working group, and for his disarmament efforts. We
thank him for stressing the humanitarian aspect of
nuclear disarmament. He has stated that the 2012
conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction had been welcomed, but has not named the
State responsible for quashing it.
We draw attention to our interest in seeing the
conference convened on basis of the most recent
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), as noted
by the Secretary-General and the three depositary
countries. We reaffirm that the universalization of
the NPT is the foundation of the international nuclear
disarmament system.

A/68/PV.32

We cannot equate nuclear disarmament with any
other issue. The Secretary-General has commented on
the illegal proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
We affirm that countries producing, accumulating,
benefiting from and exporting such weapons are the
source of that proliferation. Egypt reaffirms that the
Arms Trade Treaty must take into account the interests
of exporting and importing countries and the right of
States to self-defence and to export weapons within
legal rules. We support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to strengthen the position of the Organization
in this area.
We welcome the progress made in administration
in the areas of International Public Sector Accounting
Standards, Umoja and human-resource management.
We support the principle of mobility as long as financial
resources are available. We do not want it to be promoted
at the expense of the Organization’s other priorities,
such as development. Egypt is ready to open dialogue
with the President and others for specific results at this
session as as to move forward in our actions for peace,
justice and development.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
I have had a request from one delegation to speak
in exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim In Kyong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): I am speaking in exercise of the right of
reply regarding the Japanese delegation’s allegations
concerning the abductions issue and the Korean nuclear
issue.
First, on behalf of the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, I fully reject the
preposterous allegation of the Japanese delegation
regarding the abductions issue. As we have made clear
on several occasions, the issue of the abductions of
Japanese was completely and cleanly resolved thanks
to our sincere and genuine efforts to implement
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-Japan
Pyongyang Declaration.

13-5052225/26

A/68/PV.32

The continued attempts of the Japanese delegation
to raise the already resolved abductions issue are part
of their entire hostile policy towards the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which has persisted for half
a century and is aimed at hiding their past inhuman
crimes against the Korean people. Japan should
sincerely atone for its past crimes against humanity,
as unanimously demanded by the international
community, rather than play tricks with the abductions
issue, which has already been resolved.
Secondly, on the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula, we have already stated several times how
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula originated.
The nuclear issue originated because of the United
States and its hostility towards the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The United States has defined the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as an enemy
and seeks to eliminate our political system.
My country possesses a nuclear deterrent not
because of ambitions but because it had to counter the
threat. It has already been reported that, at this very

26/26

09/10/2013

moment, a strike group made up of United States
ships — including the large nuclear-powered carrier
USS George Washington with at least 100 nuclear bombs
aboard, many guided-missile destroyers, cruisers,
submarines and escort warships — is engaging in a
military exercise.
That is why, in exercise of the right of reply to the
allegation of the Japanese delegation on the abductions
issue and the nuclear issue, I once again reject all
allegations made by Japan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization, as
contained in document A/68/1?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 111.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

13-50522
