S/2012/120

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 February 2012
English
Original: French

Letter dated 27 February 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
bring to your attention the attached letter, dated 20 February 2012, from the Deputy
Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Mr. Alexander
Vershbow, transmitting the report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 1 July to 30 September 2011 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-24479 (E) 020312

*1224479*

S/2012/120

Annex
[Original: English]
In accordance with paragraph 20 of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I
attach a report on the operations of the Kosovo Force covering the period from
1 July to 30 September 2011 (see enclosure).
I would appreciate it if you would make this report available to the members
of the Security Council.
(Signed) Alexander Vershbow

2

12-24479

S/2012/120

Enclosure
Report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
Introduction
1.
The present report on the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is provided in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and covers the period from 1 July to
30 September 2011.
2.
As at 30 September 2011, the total number of KFOR troops in theatre was
6,200. This includes an Operational Reserve Force battalion, which was deployed in
theatre in the aftermath of the events of July 2011 in the northern part of Kosovo.
Security situation and operations
3.
The overall security situation in theatre by the end of the reporting period
remained calm but volatile in the northern part of Kosovo.
4.
On 25 July, Kosovo Police regional operational special units tried to enforce a
trade embargo at crossing points Gate 1 and DOG 31. This provoked a violent
reaction by Kosovo Serb demonstrators in the northern part of Kosovo, who set up
roadblocks on several roads leading to the crossing points. KFOR responded to the
events by deploying its Quick Reaction Force, and the Commander of KFOR
immediately engaged in discussions with local representatives to defuse the
situation.
5.
On 27 July, violence occurred at Gate 1, where Kosovo Serb demonstrators set
fire to the Gate and a number of cars. KFOR troops used tear gas in order to
extricate themselves from the crowd. On 28 July both Gate 1 and DOG 31 were
reinforced by KFOR and the situation calmed down, although it remained tense. On
1 August, the Commander of KFOR requested reinforcements from the out-oftheatre reserve forces to sustain ongoing operations at Gate 1 and DOG 31. On
9 August, a jointly manned German and Austrian Operational Reserve Force
battalion was deployed to the KFOR area of operation to provide increased
capability.
6.
On 28 August, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe visited KFOR, where
he received briefings from the Commander of KFOR, Major General Erhard Bühler,
on the security situation in Kosovo. In addition, he met with the Head of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), General Xavier Bout de Marnhac,
and visited KFOR troops in the northern part of Kosovo.
7.
On 3 September, KFOR formally handed over policing tasks for the
Montenegro border to the Kosovo Border and Boundary Police.
8.
On 8 September, the NATO Military Committee visited KFOR. This visit
provided the opportunity for national military representatives from KFOR troopcontributing countries to receive situational briefings from the KFOR Commander
as well as other key players.
9.
On 9 September, the change of command ceremony for the Commander of
KFOR was held in Pristina, with Major General Erhard Drews assuming command
from Major General Erhard Bühler.

12-24479

3

S/2012/120

10. On 15 September, the NATO Secretary General visited KFOR and held a series
of meetings with the Commander of KFOR and all other key players in Kosovo. On
16 September, EULEX officially assumed Customs responsibilities from KFOR at
Gate 1 and DOG 31. KFOR, in its third responder role, continued to support
EULEX/Kosovo Police operations at the gates in order to maintain a safe and secure
environment and freedom of movement.
11. On 25 September, KFOR, as third responder, conducted enhanced security
operations in close coordination with EULEX and the Kosovo Police during the
consecration of the Serbian Orthodox Church of the Holy Resurrection in Dakovica.
This event was attended without incident by approximately 150 persons from the
Serbian Orthodox Church.
12. On 27 September, in support of EULEX, KFOR enlarged the security
perimeter around Gate 1 to enable EULEX to set up a vehicle checkpoint on the gate
bypass recently installed by Kosovo Serb demonstrators. In reaction, Kosovo Serb
individuals gathered at the scene in a protest which turned violent when
demonstrators started throwing stones at KFOR soldiers. KFOR responded by firing
rubber bullets. The situation quickly deteriorated and a number of explosive devices
were thrown towards KFOR troops. During an attempt by Kosovo Serb
demonstrators to breach the security perimeter, a KFOR soldier was physically
assaulted and one weapon was stolen; other soldiers were injured. A KFOR soldier
fired a single shot in self-defence, striking an attacking demonstrator in the leg. The
Commander of KFOR arrived at the scene to personally assess the situation. Later
that day, the situation calmed down, protesters dispersed and the situation remained
quiet.
New North Atlantic Treaty Organization tasks
13. Early in the reporting period, Kosovo Security Force (KSF) units participated
in a joint exercise with EULEX and KFOR, always in compliance with the KSF
mandate. This exercise showed considerable improvement in the execution of their
tasks by KSF units. The after-action review highlighted the ability of KSF with
regard to core capabilities within its mandate. During the reporting period, KSF
members attended a number of courses in accordance with the annual training plan.
Courses were well prepared and instructors presented good professional skills.
14. A KSF Cadet School Programme board meeting was convened from 18 to
20 July. Forty candidates were interviewed, and this process resulted in the selection
of 10 of them. Training commenced on 5 September. Over the years, the KSF Cadet
School Programme has proved to be very effective. On successful completion of the
five-year programme, these KSF members will receive a university degree
(Columbia University, distance learning).
15. During the reporting period, KSF conducted the following engineering
projects: suspected mass grave investigation at Zhilivoda; continuation of the KSF
Explosive Ordnance Disposal Company’s demining operations in Xerxe-Dragash,
Raushiq-Peja, Vushtrri and Ferizaj; clearance of the mined area in the vicinity of
Podujevo, where 17 anti-personnel mines were found and destroyed; road
construction (5 km) between Burnik and Grebno, in Ferizaj and Strpce
municipalities.

4

12-24479

S/2012/120

16. Recently, the NATO Headquarters Civil Emergency Planning Committee
extended support to KFOR, to continue KSF training contributions from Finland and
Bulgaria. Finland contributes to two courses for KSF, one on hazardous materials
and the other on firefighting. Both courses will be conducted locally in the KSF
civil protection regiment. Bulgaria has offered to conduct a vehicle rescue and
extrication course, at its national training centre.
Summary
17. KFOR, in close coordination with EULEX and the Kosovo Police, continued
to work towards guaranteeing a safe and secure environment and freedom of
movement for all citizens in Kosovo. The situation in the northern part of Kosovo is
still potentially volatile and several roadblocks continue to hamper the freedom of
movement for the local population, EULEX and KFOR troops. Illegal bypasses at
the Administrative Boundary Line and smuggling activities constitute a persistent
problem. KFOR continues to monitor the situation closely and maintains its
deterrent posture to react quickly and decisively if necessary.

12-24479

5
