General A111embly-Twenty-fifth Se88ion

development banks and subregional groupings and with
the assistance of other organizations of the United
Nations system, to make suitable arrangements for
conducting regular appraisals and evaluation of the
progress in the implementation of the International
Development Strategy;
5. Urges that the regional economic commissions
and the United Nations Economic and Social Office at
Beirut be provided with the means and resources
necessary to fulfil their role for the benefit of their
member countries.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2688 (XXV). The capacity of the United Nations
development system

The General Assembly,
Having considered the parts of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations DevP.lopment
Programme on its ninth41 and tenth42 sessions and of
the Economic and Social Council.a concerning the
capacity of the United Nations development system,
Taking note of the observations and reservations
made in the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme at its tenth session44 and in
the Economic and Social Council at its forty-ninth
session,""
Noting that some questions remain to be settled
within the framework of the examination of this
subject,
1. Approves the provisions concerning the United
Nations Development Programme contained in the
annex to the present resolution and declares that such
provisions shall apply to activities of the Programme
commencing on 1 January 1971, taking into account
the transitional measures in those provisions;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to prepare for consideration by the General Assembly at its twentysixth session, if possible, a draft omnibus statute for
the Programme, incorporating the provisions contained
in the annex to the present resolution and appropriate
provisions from past resolutions relating to the Programme.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
ANNEX
I.

THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT CO-OPERATION CYCLE

1. The formulation of the United Nations Development
Programme country programme is the first phase of a process
which may be called the United Nations Development Cooperation C~cle. The other phases are project formulation,
appraisal and approval, implementation, evaluation and
follow-up. The Cycle will also include periodic reviews. The
scope of the Cycle might expand as envisaged in paragraph 9
below.
41 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4782), chapter VI.
42 Ibid., Supplement No. 6A (E/4884/Rev.l), chapter V.
43 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8003 and Corr.I), chapter X,
section A.
44 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6A (E/4884/Rev.1),
chapter V, paras. 95-106.
45fbid., Forty-ninth Session, 1712th to 1714th meetings.

II.

UNITED

NATIONS

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
PROGRAMMING

COUNTllY

A. General principles
2. United Nations Development Programme country programming means the programming of its assistance at the
country level. It involves the identification of the role of
Programme inputs in specified areas within the country's
development objectives.
3. Country programming will be used as a means of
achieving the most rational and efficient utilization of
resources at the disposal of the Programme for its activities
in order to have the maximum impact on the economic and
social development of the developing country concerned.
4. Country programming will be based on in!lividual
national development plans or, where these do not mat, on
national development priorities or objectives.
S. It is recollJlized that the Government of the country
concerned has the exclusive responsibility for formulatiq its
national development plan or priorities and objectives. Individual developing countries should be given, at their request,
assistance from the United Nations, including the regional
economic commissions and the United Nations Economic
and Social Office at Beirut, in the general field of planning and
from the specialized agencies in sectoral plannina.
6. The programming of Programme assistance will be
carried out in each country within the framework of indicative planning figures constituting an order of maanitude of
the resources expected to be available from the Programme
during the country programme period.
7. The country programme, based on national development plans, priorities or objectives and on the indicati-ve
planning figures, will be formulated by the Government of
the recipient country in co-operation, at an appropriate staae,
with representatives of the United Nations system, the latter
under the leadership of the resident representative of the
Programme; it should coincide, where appropriate, with the
period of the country's national development plan. The formulation of the country programme should involve:
(a) A broad identification of the needs which arise out
of the country's objectives in particular sectors, within the
framework of its over-all development objectives, and which
might appropriately be .met by Programme assistance;
( b) As precise an indication as possible of the internal
inputs, Programme inputs and, wherever possible, other United
Nations inputs to meet these needs;
(c) A preliminary list of projects to be subsequently
worked out for financing by the Programme to implement
the country programme.
8. The country programme of assistance should support
activities which are meaningfully related to the country's development objectives. This implies that the assistance provided
constitutes a programme which receives its coherence and
balance from its relationship to these national objectives.
9. In the process of country programming, efforts should
be made at all levels to co-ordinate all sources of assistance
in the United Nations system, with a view to achieving integration of the assistance at the country level.
10. It will be for the Government to take into account,
while preparing the country programme, other external inputs,
both multilateral and bilateral.
11. The resident representative will transmit the country
programme to the Administrator of the Programme who, in
turn, will submit it, with his recommendations, to the Governing Council for its consideration and approval. Approval will
cover the entire period of the programme, with provision
for periodic reviews aimed at possible adjustments. With
the agreement of the country concerned, the Administrator,
in submitting the country programme for consideration and
approval, will invite the attention of the Governing Council
to details of any other related programme of United Nations
assistance.
12. The assistance of the Programme must be sufficiently
flexible to meet unforeseen needs of recipient countries or

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

exceptional situations, which country programmes could not
take into account.
B. Indicative planning figures
13. For the purpose, among others, of establishing the
indicative planning figures, any distinctions between the Technical Assistance and Special Fund components will be eliminated. The resources to be devoted to country programming
will be a specified percentage of the total resources for the
current year, projected over a given period of time and
including a rate of growth per annum over that period, one
of the assumptions being that the resources of the Programme
will increase at least at the same rate as the average of the
lut few years.
14. Thd indicative country-planning figures should not be
construed u representing a commitment, but as a reasonably
firm indication for the purpose of forward programming.
15. The indicative planning figures will be proposed by
the Administrator to Governments on the basis of the criteria
and guidelines established from time to time by the Governing
Council. There should be some flexibility in determining
the level of resources available for indicative planning figures.
After taking into account any comments which Governments
may wish to make in regard to the figures, the Administrator
will submit his final indicative planning figures for each
country for approval by the Governing Council; wherever
possible, the country programme concerned will be approved
at the same time.
16. As an experimental basis for the first series of indicative planning figures, the Administrator will calculate the
percentage devoted to each country of the total earmarkings
of programmed resources (that is, Technical Assistance country targets plus Special Fund project earmarkings) during the
five-year period from 1966 to 1970, including projects approved by the Governing Council at its eleventh session.
He will apply this percentage in each case to resources
estimated, in accordance with the procedure laid down in
paragraph 13 above, to be available for country programming
for a period of from three to five years, consistent with the
period of the country's development plan or development
programme, in order to obtain a preliminary indicative planning figure for each country for that period. He will scrutinize
these figures in the light of existing criteria for the allocation of resources and adjust them where necessary to avoid
arbitrarily projecting any exceptional present country situations, to correct any inequities due to historical circumstances
and, in particular, to ensure that special consideration is
given to the situation of the least developed countries and of
newly independent countries whose lack of an adequate
administrative infrastructure has prevented them from taking
proper advantage of programme assistance.
17. The figures will be reviewed periodically by the Administrator and the Governing Council, in consultation with the
Government concerned, in the light of progress in the
implementation of the country programme.

C. Formulation, appraisal and approval of project.
18. Project formulation will be an on-going process and
need not await the approval of the country programme. To
ensure the soundness of project formulation, it will be
carried out at the country level. Association of various kinds
of expertise with the formulation of a particular project will
be only at the specific request of the Government which, in
the light of the expertise available locally, is in the best
position to know the type of expertise required.
19. The appraisal of each project will be, to the fullest
extent possible, an integral part of the process of formulation
of the project. Thus smaller projects, up to a specified cost
limit, will be appraised on behalf of the Programme by the
resident representative with the assistance of competent technical expertise whenever necessary. Responsibility for the
appraisal of larger projects will rest with the Administrator.
20. The Governing Council alone is empowered to approve
projects submitted by countries to the Programme for consideration. The Governing Council. while retaining this

59

authority, delegates to the Administrator for three years the
authority to approve projects within country programmes.
Nevertheless the Council and the requesting Government
reserve the right to request the Administrator to submit
particular projects of whatever magnitude to the Council
for its consideration and approval. The Administrator may
also bring to the Council any project which, because of its
policy implications or the magnitude of its impact on the
country programme as a whole, deserves the consideration and
approval of the Council. The Administrator will, to the
maximum extent feasible, which will be determined and
indicated by him to the Governing Council in due course,
delegate the authority to approve projects to the resident
representatives. The Governing Council will be informed as
soon as possible of all project decisions completed under its
delegation of authority.

III.

INTEllCOUNTllY PROGRAMMING

21. Intercountry programming is the programming of
assistance for groups of countries on a subregional, regional,
interregional or global basis. Such assistance will be provided
through subregional, regional, interregional and global projects
at the request of at least two Governments, taking into
account the equitable distribution of resources among regions.
22. The programming of such assistance will be based
broadly on the same general principles as set out above for
country programming, particularly in that it will be systematically related to the development priorities of the countries concerned and, as far as possible, planned in advance
over a period of years.
23. The procedures for the formulation, appraisal and
approval of intercountry projects will follow, in their relevant
aspects, the same general lines as for projects within country
programmes, and will be subject to criteria and guidelines
established from time to time by the Governing Council. All
global projects, however, will require specific approval by
the Governing Council.
IV.

OVER-ALL DISPOSITION AND MANAGEMENT OF UNITED
NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME RESOURCES

A. Over-all disposition of resources
24. The total resources available for programming will be
divided between country programming on the one hand and,
on the other, intercountry programming consisting of subregional, regional, interregional and global projects.
25. Initially, and until fQrther review by the Governing
Council, at least 82 per cent of the net resources available
each year, after deduction of programme support costs and
administrative costs, as well as resources to meet the requirements set out in paragraph 27 below, will be set aside for
country programming and, at most, 18 per cent for intercountry programming, it being understood that these proportions are intended as a planning guide.
26. Subregional, regional and interregional projects, particularly those designed by interested countries to accelerate
the process of economic and social integration and to promote
other forms of regional and subregional co-operation, will
have the first claim on the resources for intercountry programming. Global projects will come next in the order of
priority. Subject to review by the Governing Council from
time to time, the amount to be allocated for global projects
should not exceed 1 per cent of the net r~•ources available
for programming.
27. It will be necessary to make provision to meet unforeseen needs, to meet special needs of the least developed
of the developing countries, and to finance unanticipated
projects or phases of projects, particularly projects of the
Special Industrial Services type, which could have a catalytic
role in the economic development of the country concerned.
At the eleventh session of the Governing Council, the Administrator will make proposals on the manner in which resources

60

General AHembly-Twenty-fi.ftb Seuion

to meet such requirements, as well as to maintain under
present arrangements the programme of Special Industrial
Services at least at the present level, will be made available.

B. Full utilization of resources and financial control
28. All financial resources of the Programme are to be
available at all times to the maximum possible extent for
programme purposes, subject only to the maintenance on a
continuous basis of an operational reserve. After provision
has been made annually for programme support and administrative costs and for replenishment of the operational
reserve, all resources not otherwise committed will be utilized
for project activities.
29. The purpose of the operational reserve is to guarantee
in all circumstances the financial liquidity and integrity of
the Programme, to compensate for uneven cash inflows and
to meet such other requirements as may be decided upon
by the Governing Council at a subsequent stage. The Council will keep under constant review the size and composition
of the reserve, basing itself on the planning of payment
authorizations and expenditures for the following financial
year. At the outset, and pending receipt of a more detailed
analysis from the Administrator of the financial position of
the Programme up to the end of 1970, the Council, as an
interim measure, authorizes the establishment of an operational reserve of $150 million in all cate11ories of resources,
the composition of which is to be determined and maintained
by the Administrator in accordance with sound principles
of financial management, this level to be reviewed by the
Council at its twelfth session in the context of the financial
review referred to above.
30. Full responsibility for proper utilization of funds of
the Programme and for the exercise of financial and accounting controls will be borne by the Administrator. The SecretaryGeneral will continue as custodian of Programme funds,
but decisions regarding the Programme investment portfolio
and currency management will be reached in agreement with
the Administrator, subject to a full report on this arrangement and review by the Governing Council at its twelfth
session.
31. In presenting forecasts of expenditure and requests
for earmarkings to the Governing Council, the Administrator
will distinguish clearly among the following types of expense:
(a) project costs; (b) programme supports costs, including
overhead and consultative services costs; and (c) administrative service costs.
C. Assessment of local costs
32. Specific recommendations will be made by the Administrator to the Governing Council at its eleventh session
on the formula to be followed for the assessment of local
costs, which should make provision for simplified application of full or partial waivers of local costs, takiug into
account those cases where undue burdens would otherwise
be placed on the recipient Government.
D. Agency overhead costs
33. The Administrator will consult with the participating
and executing agencies and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions with a view to
arriving at new methods for calculating appropriate reimbursement for project implementation and for advisory services
involving programming, project formulation and policy development. The prospect of entering into general compensatory
arrangements for advisory services and separate specific
arrangements for the reimbursement of costs in connexion
with project execution will be explored. The solution worked
out should not be considered as binding until it bas been
submitted to the Council for consideration and approval,
accompanied by a report on the kinds of services to be
reimbursed.
34. The Administrator will co-operate to the fullest degree
in efforts to achieve common budgeting policies and accounting systems throughout the United Nations family of organizations.

V.

IMPLEMENTATION OF UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMME ASSISTANCE

A. Responsibility of the Governing Council
35. The Governing Council bas over-all responsibility for
ensuring that the resources of the Programme are employed
with maximum efficiency and effectiveness in assisting the
development of the developing countries.
36. To this end, the principal responsibilities of the Governing Council remain as stated in the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly. In the context of the principles
of country and intercountry proarammlna set out above
and of the implementation of assistance so provided, the
Governina Council will consider and approve country proarammes, including indicative country-plannin11 fiiUres, ap.
prove certain projects included In the proarammea In accordance with the provisions mentioned in paraarapha 20 and 23
above, exercise effective operational control, including periodic
reviews of the country programmes, and make broad allocations of resources and control their use.

B. Responsibility of the Administrator
37. In addition to the responsibilities to be delegated to
him by the Governing Council, the Administrator will be
fully responsible and accountable to the Oovernllli Council
for all phases and aspects of the Implementation of the
Programme.
C. Role of United Nations organizations in implementation of
country programme.,
38. The role of the organizations of the United Nations
system in the implementation of country programmes should
be that of partners, under the leadership of the Programme,
in a common endeavour of the entire United Nations system.
Their advice should be available to the Administrator in the
implementation of all projects, as appropriate, whether
executed by them or not.
D. Selection and accountability of executing agents
39. The Administrator will consult the Government in
each case on the selection of the agent by which Programme
assistance to each project will be implemented.
40. The appropriate organizations of the United Nations
system will, subject to this procedure, have first consideration
as executing agents.
41. When necessary to ensure the maximum effectiveness
of Programme assistance or to increase its capacity, and
with due regard to the cost factor, increased use may appropriately be made of suitable services obtained from governmental and non-governmental institutions and firms, in agreement with the recipient Governr:,ent concerned and in
accordance with the principles of international competitive
bidding. Maximum use should be made of national institutions and firms, if available, within the recipient countries.
42. In cases where expertise or services are required which
are not adequately available in kind, quantity and quality
within the United Nations system, the Administrator will, in
agreement with the Government concerned, exercise his
authority to obtain them, while inviting, in appropriate cases,
the relevant United Nations organization to provide complementary support.
43. Every executing agent will be accountable to the
Administrator for the implementation of Programme assistance
to projects.
44. In the selection of individual experts, institutions or
firms, in the procurement of equipment and supplies and in
the provision of training facilities, the principle of equitable
geographical distribution consistent with maximum effectiveness will be observed.
E. Availability and quality of international and
national project personnel
45. The Administrator should intensify efforts in coordination with the appropriate organs of the system and

61

Resolutions adopted on the reporll of the Second Committee

should develop suitable proposals for consideration by the
Governing Council, to improve the availability, briefing,
refresher training and procedures for the punctual recruitment
of well-qualified international project personnel. These proposals should particularly take into account the desirability
of increasing the number of personnel recruited from the
developing countries. The Administrator should also pay
particular attention to such factors as the personal suitability
of candidates, including their motivation and adaptability;
the need for realistic job descriptions and reporting dates;
prompt decisions on candidates by the agencies and request•
ing Governments; and conditions of service that will attract
and retain candidates for whose services there is world-wide
demand.
46. In suitable cases, qualified nationals may be designated
as project managers, assisted by international specialists.
47. Where necessary, and upon the request of the recipient Government, consideration should be given by the
Programme to training suitable counterpart personnel as an
integral part of a Programme-assisted project, including its
planning phase, so that they will be qualified to participate
in and ensure effective execution of the project.
48. Since there is no set formula for the proportions of
international personnel, fellowships and equipment for a
particular project and no ceiling on the ratio of the value
of the equipment in relation to the total cost of a project,
Programme pre-investment assistance should be sufficiently
flexible so that in appropriate cases it may consist of the
supply of equipment alone as part of an integrated preinvestment project. In the latter case, particular attention
should be given to the availability of personnel qualified to
use the equipment or to train personnel in its use in recipient
countries.

F. Operational control and assessment of results
49. The monitoring of project assistance, in so far as it is
required for the discharge by the Administrator of his responsibility for operational control, will normally be carried out
at the country level by the resident representative.
SO. Evaluation carried out within the United Nations system
of Programme-assisted activities will only be made with the
agreement of the Government concerned. This will be carried
out jointly by the Government, the Programme, the United
Nations agency concerned and, where appropriate, the executing agent outside the United Nations system.
St. Such evaluation shall be on a selective basis and
restricted to the minimum essential for the improvement or
follow-up of the projects concerned, for the needs of Governments and for the improvement of the Programme. With
the agreement of the Government concerned, the results will
be communicated to the Governing Council for its information.
G. Investment and other forms of follow-up
52. Provision for investment and other forms of follow-up
to Programme-assisted projects will, when necessary, be an
integral part of the programming process and of the forwulation, implementation and evaluation of the projects.
53. The Government in each case will be primarily responsible for all measures which should be taken at all stages
of a project to ensure effective follow-up, including follow-up
investment. It will be open to the Government to seek
investment assistance from all available sources. No one
source of follow-up investment financing should be regarded
as the only acceptable source or as a source enjoying preference over others. The Administrator will assume full
responsibility within the United Nations system, as its major
source of pre-investment financing, for providing assistance
and advice on behalf of the United Nations system on
follow-up investment, with the agreement of the Government.
The Programme will develop its expertise in this matter to
ensure, in consultation with the Government, early coordinati9n, from the planning stage onwards, with potential
bilateral and/ or multilateral sources of finance for projects
requiring follow-up investment.

VI.

TIMING

AND

TRANSITIONAL

MEASURES

54. The principles set out above, and the procedures to
give effect to them, will be progressively applied from the
date of their approval by the competent legislative organs
of the United Nations. The Administrator will undertake as
soon as nossible the necessary measures so that, if possible,
some country programmes will be submitted in time for
consideration by the Governing Council at its twelfth session
in June 1971.
SS. In the transitional period, to ensure continuity of
action by the Programme in meeting Governments' requests
for assistance, the appraisal and approval of projects will be
carried out in accordance with existing procedures. These
transitional measures may be extended in cases where the
Government wishes to start its country programme later
than 1972, on the understanding, however, that the total
amount of assistance to be provided from 1 January 1972
will be consistent with the indicative planning figures and
that the existing distinctions between the two components of
the Programme will have been eliminated.
VII.

ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMME

S6. The Governing Council recognizes its responsibility for
policy formulation, the determination of programme priorities,
and the review of implementation in both planning and practice. The decisions of the Council on country programmina
and its implementation have important organizational implications. The country-programming approach implies that
the Administrator will be fully accountable for the management of all aspects of the Programme. At the same time, It
will be necessary to bring about, within the Programme,
greater decentralization of responsibility for programmina
and implementation from the headquarters to the country
level. The application of the twin principle of the Administrator's full accountability for the Programme and the
decentralization to the country level will require certain
modifications in the existing structure and procedures of the
Programme. A clear definition of functions and responsibilities
at all levels of the administration will therefore be necessary.
57. At the headquarters level, regional bureaux should be
established to provide a direct link between the Administrator
and the resident representative in all matters concerning field
activities. In order to streamline channels of communication
and expedite the decision-making process, the beads of these
bureaux should have direct access to the Administrator. To
achieve the required degree of effectiveness of management
of the bureaux, they should be beaded by persons with the
high qualifications and rank commensurate with their important responsibilities.
58. The country-programming approach also implies that
the Programme should not only concern itself with current
policy formulation, but should also be able constantly to
analyse the main trends in the evolution of the Programme
in order to give it new directions and to explore new possibilities for making it more effective. To meet this need, a
small but highly competent long-term planning staff should
be established at the headquarters level under the direction of
a senior official.
59. The country-programming approach also envisages more
rational and effective procedures for evaluation and followup. This, as well as the need to maintain close relations
with other collaborating organizations of the United Nations
system, must be fully reflected in the organizational restructuring at the headquarters level. The Administrator is invited
to take the necessary steps in this direction and to submit
further proposals to the Council.
60. The strengthening of the management of the Programme
at the headquarters level, in view of the reform of the system
and the expectation of a growing Programme, should be
achieved by securing the services of highly qualified and
experienced staff with due regard to the principle of equitable
geographical distribution and to the need for economy.
61. The Administrator should continue to have the authority to appoint and administer the staff of the Programme.

61

General Auembly-Twenty-fifth Senion

For this purpose, he should have authority, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, to frame such staff rules, consistent with the relevant principles laid down by the General
Assembly, as he considers necessary to meet the special
problems which arise in the service of the Programme.
62. With respect to the organization of the Programme at
the country level, the resident representative will be redesignated resident director of the Programme. His appointment
by the Administrator will be subject to the prior approval
of the Government concerned.
63. There should be the maximum possible delegation
of authority to the resident director. His role therefore needs
to be greatly strengthened. In this context, his relations with
the representatives of other United Nations organizations in
the field are of crucial importance. The resident director
should be recognized as having full over-all responsibility for
the programme in the country concerned and his role in
relation to the representatives of the other United Nations
organizations, where they are posted with the prior approval
of the Government concerned, should be that of the leader
of the team, taking into account the professional competence
of these United Nations organizations and their relations with
appropriate organs of the Government. This role of leadership and over-all responsibility should extend to all contacts
with the governmental authorities concerned in connexion
with the programme, in regard to which he will be the
principal channel of communication between the Programme
and the Government. The resident director should have ultimate authority on behalf of the Administrator for all aspects
of the programme at the country level and should, subject
to the agreement of the organizations concerned, be the
central co-ordinating authority on their behalf for the other
development assistance programmes of the United Nations
system. In this connexion, the organizations in the United
Nations system are requested to ensure that the resident
directors of the Programme are consulted on the planning
and formulation of development projects with which those
organizations are concerned and that they are supplied with
reports on the execution of those projects, as requested by
the Economic and Social Council in resolution 1453 (XLVII)
of 8 August 1969.
64. The creation of new field offices or the enlargement
of the existing ones should depend on the volume of Programme operations in the particular country and should be
undertaken with due regard to the need for economy. In
the strengthening of field offices, priority should be given to
effective redeployment of existing staff.
65. The Inter-Agency Consultative Board should continue
to be the forum for interagency consultation and coordination relating to the Programme. However, the Board
should undertake a thorough review of its basic functions
and methods of work and its relations with the Governing
Council in the light of the new system of country programming
of Programme assistance and the need for the efficient implementation of the country programmes.

2689 (XXV), Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its ninth46 and tenth47 sessions.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2690 (XXV), United Nations Capital Development
Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of 13 December 1966 and 2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967,
46 Ibid.,

Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4782).
6A (E/4884/Rev.1).

41 Ibid., Supplement No.

Recalling further its resolution 2525 (XXIV) of
5 December 1969, in which it decided, inter alia, to
continue the provisional arrangements for the operation of the United Nations Capital Development Fund,
Noting that it has not been possible for the Governing
Coun.::il of the United Nations Development Programme to undertake the exploratory study requested
by the General Assembly in resolution 2525 (XXIV),
Taking note of the statement by the SecretaryGeneral at the 1970 United Nations Pledging Conference on the United Nations Capital Development Fund
in which he called on the General Assembly to carry
out a searching review of the whole question, 48
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2525 (XXIV) and requests Member States to offer suggestions, within the
framework of the exploratory study, so as to expedite
the beginning of the effective operation of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to consider, within
the framework of the study mentioned above and
taking into account the observations made by Member
States during the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, all possibilities for reaching the objectives
of the United Nations Capital Development Fund, including the desirability and feasibility of providing
follow-up investment projects of the Fund in country
programmes;
3. Decides to preserve the original functions of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1971, in accordance with the measures set
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
2321 (XXII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to contribute separately, at the same pledging
conference, to the United Nations Development Programme and to the United Nations Capital Development Fund;
5. Appeals to Member States, and in particular to
developed countries, to provide substantial contributions to the United Nations Capital Development Fund
so as to make the Fund operational and effective.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2691 (XXV). International university

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraphs 196 and 197 of the introduction to the report of the Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization submitted to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fourth session, 49
Recalling its resolution 2573 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1542 (XLIX) of 30 July 1970,
Believing that the establishment of an international
university, truly international in character, could contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Believing further that the studies on the establishment of an international university must be undertaken
48 See A/CONF.51/SR.1.
4 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/7601/Add.1).
