A /72/PV.87

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

87th plenary meeting

Thursday, 26 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tevi (Vanuatu),

Agenda item 65 (continued)

Vice-President, took the Chair.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

High-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Agenda item 140 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/72/713/Add.4)
The Acting President: In keeping with established
practice, I would like to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/72/713/Add.4, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/72/713/Add.3, the Central
African Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela have made the payments necessary to reduce
their arrears below the amount specified in Article 19
of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
due note of the information contained in document
A/72/713/Add.4?
It was so decided.

Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/707)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.49)
The Acting President: Before we proceed, I would
like to appeal to all speakers to keep their statements
brief and concise, in order to make maximum use
of the limited time we have remaining for this highlevel meeting. To enable all on the list of speakers to
be heard, statements in plenary meetings should be
limited to three minutes when speakers take the floor
in their national capacity. As members will recall, in
its resolution 71/323 of 8 September 2017, the General
Assembly called for strict adherence by each speaker
to the time limits in the Assembly, in particular during
high-level meetings. Participants with longer statements
are encouraged to read a shorter version of their text
and to submit their full statements to the Secretariat for
posting on the PaperSmart portal.
Also in accordance with resolution 71/323, the “all
protocol observed” principle is recommended, whereby
participants are encouraged to refrain from the listing of
standard protocol expressions during their statements.
Bearing in mind the time limit, I would like to appeal
to speakers to deliver their statements at a reasonable
pace so that interpretation into the six official United
Nations languages may be provided properly.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-12539 (E)

*1812539*

A/72/PV.87

I appeal for the cooperation of all speakers in
observing the time limits for statements, so that all
those inscribed will be heard in a timely manner.
Mr. Tiare (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): First
of all, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this high-level meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace pursuant to General Assembly resolution 70/262
and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), both
adopted on 27 April 2016.
This high-level meeting is timely because the
many current challenges to peace ensure that there
is no longer any need to demonstrate its relevance. It
also comes after the publication of the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (A/72/707), which describes the progress that
has been made in the implementation of the resolutions
and makes specific relevant recommendations, and for
which my delegation commends the Secretary-General.
It is well known that the cost of conflicts to States
and the international community is much greater than
the cost of preventing them. We need to put particular
emphasis on prevention in order to ensure that they
do nor start, or at least that they are not continued or
aggravated. Prevention must therefore be a primary
objective, both for States and the United Nations, and
it must be at the heart of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. This can only be done by joining forces from the
national level to the United Nations, at the subregional
and regional levels and through strategic partnerships,
as the Secretary-General so cogently described in
his report.
However, the fact is that peacebuilding and
sustaining peace are the primary responsibility of
national Governments, which must determine the
necessary priorities and strategies by involving all
sectors of society. But peacebuilding and sustaining
peace initiatives can succeed only if they have sufficient,
predictable, sustainable and consistent funding through
the support of multilateral and bilateral partners and
the private sector. Unfortunately, where the financing
of peacebuilding is concerned, much remains to be
done to ensure that sufficient funds are allocated to
countries affected by conflicts. My country therefore
calls for increased contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund in order to meet the needs of the countries that
require it. We must also avoid spreading our efforts too
thin and over too many peacebuilding and sustaining
2/27

26/04/2018

peace initiatives by focusing on aligning national and
regional strategies and resources on sustainable peace.
Like other countries of the Sahel, Burkina Faso is
facing the challenge of maintaining peace, owing to
security threats. We have therefore worked with our
four partner countries in creating the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and we are playing an active
part in initiatives aimed at ensuring lasting peace in
the Sahel by establishing the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
whose mandate is to fight terrorism. The Force must
be operational, because without security there can be
no development and without development there can be
no peace.
As a reminder, in October 2014 and in 2015, my
country experienced a popular uprising and a political
transition, and since then the Government has made
preserving social peace its top priority. During
that difficult period, my country received support
from the Peacebuilding Fund through financing
for projects. Today, the Government is undertaking
institutional reform in order to strengthen democracy
and governance, particularly through a number of
initiatives, including an inclusive and permanent
dialogue to ensure economic and social stability, which
are preconditions for peacebuilding.
Those initiatives include the creation of a High
Council for Social Dialogue and a High Council
for Reconciliation and National Unity, whose
objective is to achieve lasting peace through national
reconciliation. We also have an emergency programme
for the Sahel to set up essential socioeconomic and
security infrastructure for people living in the northern
part of our country. In order to build peace, we must
address the root causes of conflict: poverty, exclusion,
discrimination, the effects of climate change and
so forth.
The many challenges to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace attest to the close link between
security, development and human rights. My delegation
calls for the implementation of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and for the adoption of a holistic
approach to current and future reforms, because our
ultimate goal is to achieve lasting peace by 2030. We
must therefore strengthen partnerships, coordination
and cooperation among the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations to ensure better support
for peacebuilding initiatives.
18-12539

26/04/2018

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
President for this very important initiative on sustaining
peace. It is an opportune time to have the discussion we
are having today, given the many challenges the world
is facing.
We would like to associate ourselves with the
statements made by the delegations of Venezuela, on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
Turkey, on behalf of Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic
of Korea and Australia (see A/72/PV.83), and Mexico,
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Sustaining Peace
(see A/72/PV.85). We share many of the views that
the Secretary-General presented in his remarks on
sustaining peace and peacebuilding, and we welcome
his report (A/72/707) in that regard.
As a country that has gone through its own transition
to a peaceful and democratic State, Indonesia has borne
witness to various challenges and opportunities in
building peace. From our own experience, we learned
that achieving peace is difficult, but sustaining it is even
harder. Sustaining peace needs collective work, and
this forum could serve as a great avenue for advancing
our common work in promoting this agenda. It is clear
that United Nations peacebuilding efforts are still
facing the challenges of slow disbursements of funding,
insufficient allocation to respond to real demand, the
need to do more on prevention and the necessity of
linking peace with development efforts.
Lasting peace cannot be brought about on the
ground if the affected countries themselves do not
take full charge of their destiny. We need to listen to
those countries about what they need, especially as
they make the transition into the post-conflict phase.
We need to be creative in our approach to supporting
United Nations peacebuilding. We need adequate and
predictable financing.
Indonesia
and
Norway
are
coordinating
peacebuilding financing in the Peacebuilding
Commission. However, more must be done. We
must build resilient communities. No one organ by
itself can promote peacebuilding, sustaining peace
or the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Stronger and inclusive partnerships are therefore
needed — partnerships such as those between the
United Nations and the World Bank, the international
financial institutions and regional organizations — to
link conflict prevention and reconstruction with good
governance and economic policies. We need economic

A/72/PV.87

incentives as tools for prevention, and we must ensure
that development and poverty are adequately addressed,
so that conflict will not be the viable alternative
for many.
Prevention is the key word. Conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy are part of Indonesia’s foreign
policy. We believe in the power of diplomacy to prevent
or bring conflict and war to an end, as well as to usher
in peace. We believe in reconciliation.
Peace is not merely an absence of war. Peace
is underpinned by activities that ensure long-term
opportunities by which ordinary people, including
women and youth, can sustain their lives in a decent
way and ensure sustainable development with a
view to preventing relapse into conflict. For its part,
Indonesia will continue its peacebuilding efforts
through South-South and triangular cooperation so as
to complement ongoing international peacebuilding
efforts. Thatincludes our efforts with our brothers and
sisters in Africa, Asia and the Pacific.
Earlier this month, we convened the first ever
Indonesia-Africa Forum in Bali, which brought together
Indonesia and 47 African countries. It was a meeting
that reflected a cross-continental partnership that goes
back to the Asia-Africa Forum held in Bandung in
1955, which intended to transform those ties into robust
economic relations. Partnership and working together
are key to achieving sustainable development and
lasting peace.
There is no one-size-fits-all approach to peace. For
truly lasting peace to be achieved, we have to ensure
that no one is being left behind. We have to ensure that
the United Nations system works. Every country, large
or small, has a responsibility to contribute to peace
and security, whether it is in the Security Council or
not. As a family of nations, each of us has a role to
play in helping each other to improve and enhance
global peace. We have to make the system better so
as to ensure sustained peace, and in doing so, all the
193 States Members of the United Nations have to
contribute — not just the 15 members of the Security
Council, irrespective of their type of membership.
We salute the Blue Helmets who preserve peace, and
we also salute the many United Nations volunteers who
help to build democracy and sustainable development.
For its part, Indonesia has been contributing troops
for 60 years, not only for preserving peace in conflict
areas, but also in development capacity-building

18-125393/27

A/72/PV.87

and humanitarian assistance in disaster areas. War
and conflict are not the only challenges to human
security. There are others, including climate change, as
experienced in many Caribbean and Pacific islands.
In conclusion, peace is all about humankind.
Contributing to global peace and security is enshrined
in the Indonesian Constitution, and it is clearly stated
in Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
that one of the purposes of the Organization is “to
maintain international peace and security”. Indonesia
has contributed and will continue to contribute to this
noble quest of humankind, in line with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan, which
attaches great importance to the topic of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, had expected His Excellency
Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, Chairman of the Senate
of the Republic of Kazakhstan, to deliver a statement
today. However, he could not be here with us, so it is
with great pleasure that I will now deliver his message
to the Assembly. At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, President of the General Assembly
at its seventy-second session, for having convened this
high-level meeting on an issue of such importance.
We are living in a time of turbulence and upheaval.
Each year brings new challenges such as sectarian
strife, migration and refugee crises. Regions that had
been considered relatively calm have turned violent
and volatile. The arms race is raging, and wars and
conflicts are undermining global security. Given those
developments, the imperative for peace is growing. As
peacebuilding and sustaining peace lie at the heart of
the mandate of the United Nations, people around the
world look to the United Nations for vision, leadership
and action. We in Kazakhstan believe that the United
Nations remains the most legitimate and inclusive
multilateral body. Our country has for years been
demonstrating its firm commitment to the principles and
values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and has striven to enhance its cooperation with the
Organization. For more than a decade now, the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia has been serving as a good example
of political engagement and preventive efforts by the
United Nations in our part of the world. I would like to
offer our perspective on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace, including the practical steps that our country has
taken to promote international peace and security.
4/27

26/04/2018

For many years now Kazakhstan has been a
staunch advocate of global nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. At the dawn of our independence,
we closed down the Semipalatinsk nuclear-test site
and voluntarily gave up our nuclear arsenal, and
29 August, the date on which the test site was shut
down, has been proclaimed by the General Assembly
as the International Day against Nuclear Tests. We
believe that a more holistic approach should be taken to
peacebuilding. To that end, Kazakhstan has proposed a
comprehensive threefold strategy to address conflict:
strengthening the security-development nexus, taking
a regional approach and coordinating the efforts of
United Nations agencies and structures.
We support the idea that sustaining peace is
both a goal and a process. In 2016, the President of
Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev, presented the
international community with a manifesto, “The
World. The 21st Century”, which outlines guiding
principles that the international community should take
to heart and follow in order to eliminate the scourge
of war. Confidence-building measures are a powerful
part of the peacebuilding toolbox. As far back as 1992,
in this very Hall, President Nazarbayev initiated the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia. Since then, the Conference, which
includes 26 States, has emerged as a tangible factor in
international politics. Clearly, diplomatic engagement
and constructive negotiations should serve as the main
means of resolving and preventing all disputes and
conflicts. With that in mind, Kazakhstan has been
hosting peace talks on Syria and on the Iran nuclear deal,
acting as an honest broker and an unbiased manager.
Today, amid mounting sectarian conflicts, terrorism
and violent extremism, our world is in dire need of
mechanisms that can facilitate genuine dialogue, based
on a recognition of individual identities and respect for
religious plurality and cultural diversity, one in which
stakeholders can listen, hear and talk to one another.
Since 2003 Astana has successfully hosted the Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, bringing
together the representatives of diverse religions as well
as prominent politicians and heads of international
organizations. We are grateful to the United Nations
for its continued support for and involvement in our
forum. We fully support the notion that the primary
responsibility
for
implementing
peacebuilding
strategies lies with Member countries. Member States
can improve the prospects for sustainable peace by
18-12539

26/04/2018

addressing and tackling social and economic as well
as political challenges, engaging their various national
actors and in particular creating opportunities for young
people and women and promoting their empowerment.
Inclusiveness should therefore be at the core of any
peacebuilding strategy.
In conclusion, let me say that we should work
together with patience and persistence on the
tremendous challenge that peacebuilding represents
for the entire international community. Only through
efficient partnerships can we build long-lasting peace
and security on our planet. As Dag Hammarskjöld said,
“We should, rather, recognize the United Nations
for what it is — an admittedly imperfect but
indispensable instrument of nations working for
a peace evolution towards a more just and secure
world order”. (A/3594/Add.1, p.3)
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The number and the level of the participants
in this major event testify to the genuine interest in
addressing the challenges that the United Nations faces
in the area of peacebuilding. It is only regrettable that
certain delegations have taken advantage of this forum
and the opportunity it presents for conducting political
public relations and making unfounded accusations. If
we may, rather than stooping to their level of polemic,
we will focus on the issue at hand.
We view United Nations peacebuilding assistance
as one of the most important instruments in the
Organization’s arsenal for assisting States in dealing
with the consequences of conflicts and preventing
their recurrence. The United Nations has been involved
in this type of action for many years now. Member
States periodically conduct reviews of it in which they
consider States’ experiences, the changing realities and
the proposals and recommendations in various studies
and reports.
We thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his personal efforts and close attention to the
problems of peacebuilding. By adopting draft
resolution A/72/L.49, the General Assembly will be
sending an important signal that Member States are
ready to continue to discuss the recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s thematic report (A/72/707)
on developing coherent approaches to the work of the
United Nations in peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
which are inseparably linked to each other.

A/72/PV.87

I would like to talk specifically about the latter
concept. In 2016, following a detailed discussion, the
Security Council and the General Assembly adopted
twin resolutions — resolutions 2282 (2016) and 70/262,
respectively — on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture. In those resolutions, Member States made
clear what they meant by the importance of sustaining
peace. First and foremost, they asserted that it required
a common understanding on the part of all sectors of
society of what must to be done to tackle conflict and
its root causes, promote recovery and prevent relapses.
All national stakeholders have a shared responsibility
for peace, and the role of the United Nations, when
necessary, is to help strengthen the capacities of the
recipient country, given that it is the latter that has
primary responsibility for all these processes. Since
it is the host States that take the lead, any proposal
for making sustaining peace a new area in the work
of the United Nations demands additional discussion.
Member States have not yet discussed any kind
of agenda for sustaining peace and have taken no
corresponding decisions.
As we all know, according to the twin resolutions,
the United Nations is called on to assist States in
sustaining peace at any stage in a conflict, and the
earlier the better. Nonetheless, in general we fully
support the importance of strengthening United
Nations efforts to prevent conflict. That must be done
in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, in which it is clearly included, and the
relevant decisions of Member States. It is important to
emphasize that the States themselves play the leading
role in this area as well, since it is their decisions that
define the parameters of international support, if it is
required at all.
Of course, prevention is better than cure, but a proper
cure needs a proper diagnosis and the right choice of
treatment, or the cure may be worse than the disease. We
believe that every conflict has its own unique collection
of causes. Each individual case requires a careful and
impartial approach, patient analysis and the quest
for an appropriate solution, above all at the national
level. Cookie-cutter templates or universal indicators
of potential crises can be incorrectly applied and may
only do damage. There are all too many examples of
that, unfortunately. Assistance from this international
Organization should be aimed at eradicating the root
causes of crises and facilitating reconciliation and
development, not monitoring unclear parameters

18-125395/27

A/72/PV.87

26/04/2018

on which there is no consensus. It is also crucial to
ensure that Member States act in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations rather than on the basis
of contentious concepts such as so-called humanitarian
interventions and the responsibility to protect.

resolving administrative and financial problems. The
funds and programmes could in their turn make use
of their experience of working with non-governmental
organizations and the private sector. Such coordination
would also help to prevent any duplication of effort.

I should also touch on the important issue of human
rights. The Organization’s 70 years of experience have
shown that this topic is often distorted and politicized
with a view to influencing national political processes.
And yet interference in internal affairs is the most
common cause of national and international conflicts
today. The United Nations should have no part in that.

Only an impartial, non-politicized and transparent
approach to peacebuilding and sustaining peace
can ensure that efforts in that area are effective. It is
important to ensure that such assistance is provided in
support of the efforts of the recipient States, without
mentoring or imposing cookie-cutter solutions. That
is the only way that United Nations peacebuilding
assistance has the chance to make a qualitative leap and
help to achieve sustainable peace.

Human rights, development, and peace and
security are unquestionably interlinked, but they are
not directly dependent on one another. Development
alone cannot guarantee peace, while peace does
not necessarily ensure development. It is therefore
important to take account not only of the interlinkages
but also the different goals of such processes, as well
as which United Nations body or organ is responsible
for advancing understanding of them. It is important
that the entities of the United Nations system concerned
with
peacebuilding,
peacekeeping,
preventive
diplomacy, development assistance, human rights and
humanitarian assistance strictly respect their mandates
and refrain from encroaching on one another’s areas of
responsibility. That also fully applies to the functions
of United Nations country teams and their leaders, the
resident coordinators. We take a cautious approach
to proposals for focusing their efforts on predicting
potential conflicts. In our view, their priorities should be
solving existing problems, eliminating the underlying
causes of crises and building State institutions’ capacity
and effectiveness, not duplicating or replacing their
work. Where peacebuilding assistance is concerned, its
parameters should be defined by the priorities of the host
countries, supported by a dedicated intergovernmental
advisory body, that is, the Peacebuilding Commission.
We agree on the importance of ensuring adequate,
predictable and sustainable financing for United
Nations peacebuilding assistance. The SecretaryGeneral already has all the necessary powers and
instruments for that. In particular, he heads the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination. Within that body, he has the right to
involve all United Nations specialized agencies, funds
and programmes in peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. That would not only enable the mobilization of
resources but would ensure a coordinated approach to
6/27

Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation would like to express its
thanks and appreciation to the President of the General
Assembly for convening this high-level meeting on the
vital issue of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We
would also like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his report on the subject (A/72/707).
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(see A/72/PV.83).
Working for peace has always been at the heart of
international diplomatic efforts. In 1945 it led to the
establishment of the United Nations with the aim of
saving humankind from the ravages of war. The work
of achieving peace at both international and regional
levels is based on some fundamental pillars, the most
important of which is respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, as well as the
charters of relevant regional organizations.
The large numbers of internal armed conflicts
in many developing countries constitute a clear
demonstration of the strong and direct link between
peace and development. Weak development, or none
at all, frequently results in armed conflict, which
in turn prevents any sustainable development. It is a
vicious circle. The General Assembly and Security
Council twin resolutions on the subject (resolutions
70/262 and 2282 (2016), respectively) emphasize the
close link between peacebuilding and sustaining peace
and development. In order to avoid future conflicts
in developing countries, therefore, efforts should be
made to empower them to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
18-12539

26/04/2018

development. We can therefore say that the first step
towards empowering developing countries that are
currently undergoing internal conflicts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals is supporting them
in their efforts to achieve peace. Without that, any
environmental, social or economic development is
difficult to achieve, if not impossible.
My delegation would like to make a few preliminary
suggestions on how to promote collective work with a
view to achieving the ultimate goal of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
First, structural changes should be made in
humanitarian work, with a focus on helping people to
get a decent livelihood, and by linking our humanitarian
work with our efforts for peace, with a view to
giving those who receive humanitarian assistance
the possibility of a decent life while preserving their
dignity and helping them to become producers rather
than recipients of humanitarian aid.
Second, a foundation should be laid down for a
new generation of peacebuilding operations based
on two basic pillars: traditional, or what we call hard
peacekeeping operations, and soft peacekeeping, which
involves initiating support for programmes related to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace from the beginning
of establishing peacekeeping operations, and installing
units in all peacekeeping operations aimed at furthering
development. Moreover, a coordination mechanism
should be established between peacekeeping operations
and the United Nations country teams, coupled with
more focus on the engineering component, such as
building roads, digging wells and establishing facilities
for providing basic services.
Third, the role of the United Nations in conflict
mediation and resolution should be strengthened as
soon as possible, while reducing the negative effects of
conflicts as much as possible.
Fourth, strategic partnerships between the United
Nations and relevant regional organizations must
be strengthened.
Fifth, we must take into account the local
environment in each conflict and provide innovative
solutions and initiatives, in cooperation with the
Governments of host countries and local communities,
according to their needs and circumstances. Efforts
should not be focused on certain fields involving donors

A/72/PV.87

while ignoring other vital fields that are indispensable
for peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Sixth, we must increase allocations to the
Peacebuilding Fund. In this regard, my country’s
delegation would like to support the proposals made by
the Secretary-General in his report.
Seventh, top priority should be given to choosing
prominent figures who are highly qualified and have
varied experience in the work of the United Nations in
order to lead United Nations country teams in States
where there are conflicts.
Our experience in the Sudan has shown us that lack
of development, or weak development, is the basis for
internal conflicts, which generate new conflicts that
deplete a country’s resources and prevent development
projects from getting implemented. That tarnishes
a country’s image and undermines its relationship
with the international community, preventing it from
getting loans and investments from the private sector.
The result is further poverty, deprivation and lack
of opportunities, providing fertile ground for new
conflicts. An effective way to prevent future internal
conflicts and sustain peace in those countries is therefore
to support development by investing in all areas so as to
assist developing countries in attaining the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda.
The current situation in Darfur represents an
opportunity to realize the new vision for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace by transitioning from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, while addressing
the root causes of the conflict in Darfur. This can be
done through support to the United Nations country
team, while transferring some of the resources available
to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur to support development efforts in the Darfur
states, which have great natural and human resources
that could, with the help of the international community,
form a starting base for launching fast economic growth
and unprecedented change in the region. This would
provide job opportunities for young people, foster
confidence among various sectors of the community
and prevent harmful friction between farmers and
herders, while establishing an environment conducive
to the success of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes.
In conclusion, my delegation stresses the importance
of the golden opportunity before the international
community, as embodied in the United Nations, to

18-125397/27

A/72/PV.87

achieve peacebuilding and sustaining peace in Darfur.
This would fulfil the aspirations of the people of Darfur
and represent a successful United Nations experience, in
reviving its role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
which could be applied and utilized in other regions. My
delegation hopes that the international community will
not miss that opportunity. We reiterate our readiness
to fully cooperate and coordinate with all regional and
international partners in achieving this great objective.
Let us all work towards a new dawn for the United
Nations in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago commends the President of the General
Assembly for convening this high-level meeting on the
very important topic of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace, especially at a time when peace is absent from
so many parts of the world. As an important basis
for our discourse, we have the twin resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council (resolution
70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016)) on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture. It is noteworthy that
the resolutions stress that Member States need to work
better together to sustain peace at all stages of conflict.
Trinidad and Tobago therefore views this debate
as a means for further strengthening multilateralism,
which is a crucial vehicle for resolving the challenges
associated with peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
This is an important step in our efforts to deepen effective
multilateralism, as the absence of multilateralism is
itself a threat to peace. Nonetheless, we concur with
the Secretary-General in his report on the subject
(A/72/707), which emphasizes that sustaining peace is
first and foremost a responsibility of Member States.
In 2015, in this very Hall, Member States adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. This
landmark agreement was yet another testament to the
triumph of multilateralism, especially as it emphasizes
a people-centred agenda that leaves no one behind.
However, its inclusive and ambitious agenda must not
be lost in mere rhetoric. Trinidad and Tobago therefore
supports the view that there can be no peace without
development and no development without peace, and
that there can be neither development or peace without
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
The challenge before us is to make the world
peaceful and secure. This is of particular concern
to small States, which must rely on the international
rule of law, the strict observance by all States of the
8/27

26/04/2018

purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, and the collective security
mechanism embodied by the Security Council for their
right to a secure, sovereign and peaceful existence to
be guaranteed.
For small States such as Trinidad and Tobago
and indeed all the States members of the Caribbean
Community, the maintenance of international peace and
security, including peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
are of particular importance. We are keenly aware that
our sustainable development is intricately linked to the
safety and security of our people. Trinidad and Tobago is
located in a region that is affected not by armed conflict
but by armed violence. Transnational organized crime
and its global networks pose a daunting challenge to the
security of States, especially small island developing
States. In the Caribbean Community’s crime and
security strategy, transnational organized crime has
been identified as an immediate significant threat. It
attacks the functioning of State institutions, adds new
vulnerabilities to governance and fosters instability.
In doing so, it undermines the fundamental premises
of our democracies — the rule of law, human rights
and development.
Lasting peace can be achieved only if women
become more involved in decision-making processes
related to peacebuilding and post-conflict development.
Accordingly, in recognition of the important
contribution of women to peace and development, in
2010 Trinidad and Tobago introduced — and has since
been the main sponsor of — resolution 65/69 on women,
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control.
Trinidad and Tobago agrees that significant linkages
between financing intended for both peacebuilding and
development are important to achieving sustainable
peace and development. We encourage the development
of innovative financing mechanisms, which could go a
long way to helping countries gain access to financing
for peacebuilding and development.
Finally, my country calls on all members of the
international community to renew their commitment
to working with Member States, intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations
to assist the United Nations in fully realizing our
commitment to building and sustaining peace.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): I thank the President of
the General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák, for the initiative he has taken in organizing
18-12539

26/04/2018

this important event. His endeavour is proof of his
strong commitment to preventing conflicts and
sustaining peace.
Serbia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU) (see A/72/
PV.83). However, speaking in my national capacity, I
shall now make a few additional points.
The consequences of the increasing number of
conflicts and interconnected crises are far-reaching and
fraught with social tensions and instability. They often
result in threats and challenges that are increasingly
complex and disruptive, and that become drivers
of uncertainty for the future. Peace and security,
development and human rights have always been at
the core of the United Nations, but the complex nature
of today’s challenges calls for innovative approaches
as we strive to find shared solutions. To that end, we
must strengthen multilateralism and the role of the
Organization, including by adapting its system to the
needs of our time. Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
are no exception.
Serbia welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (A/72/707),
which has been submitted pursuant to paragraph 30 of
the twin resolutions of the General Assembly (resolution
70/262) and the Security Council (resolution 2282
(2016)) on the review of the peacebuilding architecture,
based on the principle that peace must be pursued at
all stages of conflict in a more efficient and effective
way. As conflicts emerge in various parts of the world
at the same time, while peacekeeping efforts are often
overburdened and overstretched, the role of diplomacy
in prevention, mediation and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts has become more essential than ever before.
The report and the relevant resolutions provide a solid
basis for further strengthening our common endeavours.
Conflicts rarely emerge from nowhere, and their
root causes are many and far-reaching. The links
between such issues as dealing with poverty, political
uncertainty, food and water shortages and inequalities
are critical to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and should not be addressed in isolation.
Peace can be attained only if the promise of the 2030
Agenda is met. In the words of the Secretary-General,
the 2030 Agenda is the blueprint of the common vision
of society towards which the world is trying to move.
We are well aware that growth and development
must be sustainable and take into account protecting

A/72/PV.87

the environment, eradicating poverty, ensuring gender
equality and stopping violence against women and girls.
There can be no growth or development without peace
and stability, just as no long-term peace or stability is
achievable without growth, development and respect
for human rights. Serbia’s experience over the past two
decades has shown that the gravitas of this paradigm is
all too evident and important. Sustainable development
cannot be achieved without peaceful and inclusive
societies, the promotion of the rule of law at all levels,
justice for all, and efficient and effective national and
international institutions.
The importance of the regional and subregional
perspective in addressing the issue of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace cannot be stressed enough.
Various international organizations have come to the
Western Balkans for various purposes and at various
times, engaging in promoting comprehensive processes
that are essential to modern conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. As a host country to a number of
international and regional entities, Serbia understands
and appreciates the need to work closely with key
international and regional organizations to build new
partnerships in a harmonious way.
In that context, I would like to reiterate what my
country has said on numerous occasions. The presence
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) is of paramount importance
for ensuring stability in Kosovo and Metohija and
for creating conditions conducive to a lasting and
sustainable solution to that question. Serbia also
appreciates UNMIK’s engagement in creating the
conditions necessary for ensuring security, prosperity
and respect for the human rights of all communities in
those locations. The contributions of other international
organizations operating under the auspices of the United
Nations, such as the Kosovo Force, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as specialized United Nations agencies,
is also invaluable and highly appreciated. Their
continued presence, especially that of UNMIK, in the
southernmost province of Serbia is indispensable for the
overall security and stability of the region and for the
implementation of the agreements reached within the
EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
I would like to point out that the Serbian side in the
dialogue has time and again confirmed its willingness
to be constructive as well as its readiness to make

18-125399/27

A/72/PV.87

compromises that are often difficult to achieve. It has
contributed to seeking mutually acceptable solutions
to the many complex issues. We have embarked on the
process in the belief that the solution to all outstanding
issues in a status-neutral framework will contribute to
peace, stabilization and the realization of conditions
for the unimpeded progress of the Western Balkans
towards EU membership. Only through committed
dialogue will it be possible to resolve all outstanding
issues and build a stable region.
In conclusion, we are all aware that the challenges
facing many parts of the world are numerous, that
security is fractious and intractable and that we need
continuous commitment and hard work to address these
issues. At the same time, however, we must not be
discouraged or deterred by the distances that we may
be called on to traverse. Indeed, as Secretary-General
Hammarskjöld once said, we must never measure the
height of a mountain until we have reached the top,
for it is only then that we will see how low it is. To
ensure that we are all part of a United Nations that is
fit for purpose, our deliberations must be conducted in
a transparent and inclusive way, and our sights must be
firmly trained on the prize of peace.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We are honoured to take
the floor at this timely and important meeting on the
imperative of building and sustaining peace, and we
commend the President of the General Assembly for
convening it.
Angola aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/72/PV.83).
I will begin by echoing the sentiment expressed
by Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed at
the Security Council open debate on peacekeeping
operations, held on 29 August 2017 (see S/PV.8033).
Implementing the sustaining peace agenda means
putting Member States and their populations in the lead,
giving priority to political solutions and prevention,
and inclusively leveraging the United Nations three
pillars — peace and security, human rights and
development — in a mutually reinforcing way.
Prevention and peace processes must be rooted in
national leadership and inclusive ownership, and they
must be responsive to the needs and contributions of
all segments of society, including women and young
people, as agents of development and peace. The
nature of today’s challenges requires us to pool all
10/27

26/04/2018

our efforts in favour of peace and security, human
rights and sustainable development. Accordingly,
the fundamental role of women and young people
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace has been
highlighted in the twin resolutions on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture adopted by the General
Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security Council
(resolution 2282 (2016)) on 27 April 2016. In this regard,
I would like to emphasize the importance of the report
of the Secretary-General (A/72/707), which provides
an overview of progress made towards implementing
these resolutions and the relevance of his ongoing
reforms in the areas of peace and security, development
and management. Furthermore, these landmark
resolutions advanced the concept of sustaining peace
in strengthening the coherence of the United Nations
system in its provision of assistance to national
Governments throughout every stage of conflict.
Angola supports the work of the Secretary-General
with regard to the reform process. Achieving sustained
peace and sustainable development will require that
we embrace strong collective actions and enhanced
collaboration and partnerships, including with the
business community, financial institutions, civil
society and regional and subregional organizations.
Following a long period of war and devastation
affecting its social, economic and human fabric above
all, Angola is now living in peace and is making a bold
effort to fostering economic and social development, as
well as deepening its democracy. We may consider that
this is a success that should make all the nations in the
world proud.
In conclusion, I would like to ask the following
question: Does it make sense that at the very moment
that we are discussing the building and maintenance of
peace, we are also creating tensions in other parts of
the world?
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I have taken note of the
President’s reminder concerning the protocol for this
meeting. I stand by it and will proceed directly with
my statement.
Three years ago, we adopted the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development as a global framework
for sustainable development guided by international
commitments for achieving global peace and
prosperity. The first target of Sustainable Development
Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong institutions calls
for a significant reduction in all forms of violence and
18-12539

26/04/2018

related death rates everywhere. Over the past two days,
one speaker after another has expressed deep concern
about the ongoing struggles to bring about a peaceful
world, emphasizing the importance of prevention
and highlighting the fact that peace is a precondition
for development.
We seem to be on the same page as far as our
aspirations for a world free of conflict are concerned.
Yet news bulletins remind us daily that we are not
meeting that target. Armed conflict and other forms
of violence continue to see increased casualties among
innocent civilians, including among our peacekeepers.
I believe that we need to dramatically strengthen our
collective efforts to refocus our attention on conflict
prevention and on addressing the root causes of
conflicts, sustainable development and human rights as
a means to achieve peace. We must intensify our focus
on conflict-prevention strategies.
We must foster the increased participation of
women, young people and faith-based communities,
including the private sector. We must mobilize
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding. We
must shift towards more inclusive policies that ensure
more equal access to natural resources, basic services,
security, justice, democracy and good governance. And
we must invest in human resource development. These
efforts will support the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals for the benefit of all. There can be
no sustainable development without peace, and there
can be no peace without sustainable development.
Let us take to heart the lesson contained in an ancient
African proverb: when elephants fight, it is the grass
that suffers.
Namibia has been independent for 28 years now.
Since we are reminded daily about the dire conflicts
and situations across the world, I would like to offer
the Namibian example as a reason for hope. Yes, our
country continues to face challenges, many of which are
the direct consequences of the long war, violence and
deprivation of the apartheid system under which our
people lived for decades. However, as His Excellency
Mr. Hage Geingob stated at his inauguration as the
third President of Namibia, our people have developed
a new narrative to overcome the hatred of the past.
Namibians have been determined to implement a
policy of reconciliation that has not been without its
trials but that has seen much success in bringing our
people together. It has resulted in increased solidarity,

A/72/PV.87

cooperation and trust. A stable environment has
provided fertile ground for the Government to implement
its development agenda with a view to improving
the quality of the lives of the Namibian people. As a
result, success has already been seen in higher levels
of services in such areas as education and the reduction
in maternal and infant mortality rates and the number
of deaths caused by HIV/AIDS, among other things. At
the international level, Namibia supports peacebuilding
through its participation in a number of peacekeeping
missions and through its leadership in introducing
resolution 1325 (2000) emphasizing the role of women
in peace and security.
Those are the effects of peacebuilding that we have
seen in Namibia, thanks to the assistance of the United
Nations and other partners. Concerning the situation in
the region, it is a fact that we continue to have some way
to go in overcoming economic and political challenges,
but let us remember how far we have come. We remain
steadfast in our resolve to overcome those challenges
and ensure that in our struggle to lift people from
poverty and hunger through economic emancipation,
no one is left behind.
It is in that context that Africa has put in place its
development blue print, Agenda 2063, which depicts
the Africa we want. To that end, in our collective
efforts to put Africa on a sustainable path of peace,
we have decided to silence the guns by 2020. In and of
itself, this is a contribution to general disarmament. It
is important to view disarmament not only in terms of
nuclear and chemical weapons, but also of small arms
and light weapons, which are leading to misery and
undermining peace and stability in the global South.
We urge the global community of nations to join us in
this important initiative.
In conclusion, I want to convey a personal belief of
Namibia’s founding president and father of our nation,
His Excellency Mr. Sam Nujoma, who reminded us that
our common goals and objectives are achievable because
a people united, striving to achieve a common good for
all members of society, will always emerge victorious.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking the President of the General Assembly, His
Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, for organizing this
important high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
The timing of this high-level meeting could not
be more appropriate, in the light of the unprecedented

18-1253911/27

A/72/PV.87

challenges that the United Nations is facing in relation
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
All indications are that we are passing through a period
characterized by growing geopolitical tensions among
major Powers. The proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is becoming a major threat. Terrorism
and violent extremism also remain a grave danger to
international peace and security. Cybercrime and the
possibility of disruption to critical infrastructure are
nothing less than a nightmare. The spread of small
arms and light weapons and the expanding activities
of transnational organized criminals continue to
foment instability around the world. Nevertheless, we
are encouraged by the ongoing reform process that
the Secretary-General is undertaking to make the
Organization fit for purpose in responding to current
security challenges.
In view of the enormous peace and security
challenges that we are facing today, giving priority to
conflict prevention is not a mere option; the concept
of sustaining peace is also perfectly aligned with this
important priority, and it has certainly brought about a
new paradigm shift in the manner in which we should
deal with peace and security issues. It is therefore
encouraging to note that the proposed reform of the
United Nations peace and security pillar has established
prevention and sustaining peace as its overarching
goal. In our view, this is important because it provides
the necessary framework for coordinating a coherent
response to root causes and violence in the various
stages of conflict.
The President took the Chair.
We believe that the outcome of the reforms will
enable the United Nations to develop an integrated
capability to comprehensively tackle contemporary
security challenges, among other things by minimizing
duplicative structures and overlapping mandates,
ensuring greater transparency and accountability, and
improving planning and budgetary processes. We feel
that this will ultimately strengthen the Organization’s
ability to deliver effective and efficient operational
support in the field, including in complex security areas
where peacekeeping and special political missions are
deployed. That is why we welcome the latest report of
the Secretary-General (A/72/707) on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture and its recommendations.
It has been emphasized time and again that peace
and security and development and human rights are
12/27

26/04/2018

inextricably linked, and that closer cooperation among
various United Nations organs and other stakeholders
is therefore required for building peaceful and inclusive
societies. As the latest report clearly underscores,
addressing institutional fragmentation and ensuring
policy and operational coherence across the entire
United Nations system are also absolutely essential to
ensuring that conflict prevention and sustaining peace
are placed at the heart of the Organization’s work
and activities.
However, we have to realize that we cannot achieve
this end without making full use of the potential role of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), particularly its
convening, bridging and advisory role in tandem with
the principal and relevant organs of United Nations. We
should therefore scale up the PBC’s contribution along
those lines, and our continuous focus and engagement
are needed to ensure that the Commission promotes
an integrated, strategic and coherent approach. In this
regard, we are encouraged by the recent comprehensive
advice that the PBC has provided to the Security
Council on a number of regional and country-specific
issues. We are also encouraged to note that the
Secretary-General’s reform proposal underscores the
crucial role of the Peacebuilding Support Office in
linking the peace and security pillar with development
and humanitarian efforts.
We believe that the United Nations cannot address
the myriad of international security challenges alone. In
order to achieve the end goal of sustaining peace, there
is a need to enhance partnerships with such various
stakeholders as regional and subregional organizations,
international
financial
institutions,
national
Governments, civil society and private organizations
across the spectrum of conflict cycles, which includes
prevention, peacekeeping, special political missions,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. For instance,
the peacebuilding efforts of the African Union (AU)
in line with its implementation of the post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy framework
and the African Solidarity Initiative undoubtedly
complement the work of the PBC. We hope that the joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security will be instrumental
to further strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in Africa. We also welcome the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
the PBC and the Economic Community of West African
18-12539

26/04/2018

States, which provides a framework for cooperation and
partnership in peacebuilding.
Ultimately, sustaining peace is, of course, a national
endeavour, and the national ownership and inclusiveness
of all stakeholders, including the Government, the
private sector and civil society, are key to achieving the
objective of sustaining peace. What is really required
of the United Nations and international partners is help
in building national and local capacities for sustaining
peace. This has to be very well explained and understood
by all so as to avoid any misunderstanding. Building
the necessary confidence among Member States is
absolutely crucial to facilitating the implementation and
operationalization of the new approach to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
Finally, we believe that there is a need for a
change in mindset without which no number of
structural adjustments or innovations can help us
achieve the ultimate objective of making peace and
security sustainable and avert what could otherwise
be a calamity of immeasurable consequence. That
should not be considered too difficult or complex to
achieve, for a good start can be made by summoning
our earlier commitment to multilateralism, without
which the creation of the United Nations would have
been inconceivable, and by reining in the short-sighted
and undisciplined pursuit of national interest, which is
central to the reasons for that creation and which the
Second World War made a lesson to be ignored only
at our peril. There is no doubt that this is a time when
much wisdom is needed in relations among States.
Mr. López Lavado (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly for organizing this highlevel meeting.
Two years ago, the Assembly and the Security
Council adopted twin resolutions on the review of
the peacekeeping architecture (resolutions 70/262 and
2282 (2016), respectively). They emphasize the primary
responsibility of States to promote peace and the
importance of strengthening the Organization’s work
in preventing conflict.
Today we are witnessing a deterioration in the
world’s efforts to uphold the principles and values
of the United Nations, and we therefore want to
reiterate our commitment to peace and our support for
multilateralism. The reforms proposed by the SecretaryGeneral point the way to a more efficient and coherent

A/72/PV.87

Organization that is better adapted to the challenges
facing the international community. We therefore
express our support for his proposal (A/72/707) to focus
his peace initiatives on improving prevention.
Andorra is one of the few places that has succeeded
in maintaining peace for centuries. Our institutions
have played a key role in consolidating lasting peace
through a pact between those who had once waged war.
That pact has indeed lasted, and it has been the basis
of our history, in which our institutional architecture
has cemented the unity of that instrument with a
democratic and social rule of law. Despite our centuriesold tradition, we are aware that peace should never be
taken for granted. We have a responsibility to support
a culture that has peace as its purpose and foundation,
with a commitment that must be nurtured, preserved
and shared from a multifaceted and holistic perspective.
With regard to conflict prevention, education has
been identified throughout this high-level meeting
as a key ingredient in equipping children and young
people with schooling and critical-thinking skills.
Andorra is a country that has also made education one
of its priorities, and specifically education for global
citizenship. The promotion of a democratic culture
that respects diversity, and of education for sustainable
development and on human rights and gender equality,
plays an essential role in forming attitudes and skills in
our young people that promote the peaceful resolution
of conflicts and thereby foster a culture of peace. The
promotion of a culture of peace must also be accompanied
by reform of the development system. Promoting
sustainable development means, to a large degree,
addressing the root causes of conflict. We therefore
support the reforms proposed by the Secretary-General
that seek greater efficiency and accountability of the
United Nations development system, a new system that
is capable of delivering greater results on the ground.
We share the view that peace means not only
the absence of conflict but also the presence of the
conditions and mechanisms necessary for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, such as sustainable development,
prevention and respect for human rights. Andorra would
like to join the international community in its efforts to
promote, create and maintain the necessary conditions
for sustainable peace.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, President Lajčák, for convening
this high-level meeting to demonstrate support for

18-1253913/27

A/72/PV.87

sustaining peace, the critical notion that peacebuilding
goes before and beyond a conflict period and applies to
all phases of conflict — before, during and after.
All parts of the United Nations system should be
engaged in sustaining peace. We must recognize that
peace is not the absence of conflict; it is not merely the
silencing of the guns. Peace is built over time and often
requires a wholesale reconstruction of the relationship
between a Government and its citizens and among the
citizens of a society emerging from or heading towards
conflict. Peacekeeping missions alone cannot produce
lasting peace. Missions can and should help create
space for peace to take hold, but they must be part of
a broader strategy. Most critically, Governments must
also hold up their end of the deal. There can be no
sustained long-term peace without political solutions
and commitments on the ground, including to respecting
and promoting fundamental human rights. If it is to
realize peace, the United Nations must change how it
does business. The United States strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s reform initiatives, which centre
on the need for greater integration of all the parts of
the United Nations system in order to ensure a more
coherent, effective and efficient Organization.
We strongly support the Secretary-General’s focus
on conflict prevention. We must reorient the system
to better head off conflict by addressing root causes
before they lead to crisis. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to integrate the Peacebuilding
Support Office into the Department of Political Affairs,
an important structural change. We also encourage the
Secretary-General to take action on his sustaining
peace report (A/72/707), specifically including the
creation of integrated strategic frameworks, United
Nations development assistance frameworks and
greater in-country cross-pillar cooperation. That is
especially true with regard to human rights.
We also urge the Peacebuilding Support Office
to serve as a more useful resource for Member States,
by providing detailed best practices on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. However, we do not believe that
throwing money at a conflict will result in peace. As
a newer United Nations initiative still trying to prove
itself, peacebuilding should be voluntarily funded and
should not be tied to the peacekeeping budget. We should
strengthen the operational ties between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The United States has advocated
within the Security Council to include viable plans for
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
14/27

26/04/2018

Liberia is a great example of the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission working
closely together. The United Nations worked with the
Government of Liberia and civil society to reach a plan
that all parties could support. After almost 15 years
of peacekeeping and successful presidential elections
last year, the United Nations Mission in Liberia closed
and the Liberian Government, in partnership with the
United Nations country team, has taken the reins. That
is a positive story for the United Nations to tell and
it is a great model for it to use in future transitions.
While every situation is different, the key ingredient
to success is buy-in — by the host country, the security
forces and judicial organs and the people in civil society,
including women and youth leaders, human rights
activists, experts in transitional justice and others.
Peacebuilding helps bring everyone to the same table,
and its convening power there presents an opportunity
for all voices to be heard. Only when that happens can
effective and lasting transitions to peace occur.
The United States is committed to the peacebuilding
process and looks forward to working with all Member
States to advance peace in our world.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for holding this important
meeting on sustaining peace, with a view to finding a
new approach to achieving peace and increasing our
Organization’s effectiveness so that it can keep up with
the challenges of today’s world. In that regard, we thank
the Secretary-General for his report on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace (A/72/707).
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace require
programmes and mechanisms on human rights,
development and the rule of law. Peace is not just the
absence of war; it requires the creation of conditions
that will help to sustain it. The Kingdom of Bahrain
welcomes the Secretary-General’s vision for reforming
the Organization, with an emphasis on linking
the reform process to its three pillars of human
rights, development, and peace and security, with
a view to fulfilling the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, especially where the role of women and
youth in making and building peace is concerned.
That vision requires strengthening all United Nations
organs and entities and intensifying their efforts, by
mainstreaming best practices and facilitating their
mechanisms and their culture of work, with the aim
of ensuring that the Organization can improve its
effectiveness and its ability to face challenges, thereby
18-12539

26/04/2018

fulfilling the comprehensive vision of Member States
for an Organization founded on the pillar of peace
and security.
Under the leadership of His Majesty King Hamad
Bin Isa Al Khalifa, His Royal Highness Prince Khalifa
Bin Salman Al Khalifa, our Prime Minister, and His
Royal Highness Prince Salman Bin Hamad Al Khalifa,
Crown Prince, Deputy Supreme Commander and
First Deputy Prime Minister, the Kingdom of Bahrain
has emphasized a principled approach to promoting
partnership and cooperation with all United Nations
organs and bodies, because we believe in the role that
our Organization has to play in bringing about a more
stable and prosperous world.
In his address to the General Assembly at
its seventy-second session (see A/72/PV.20), His
Excellency Shaikh Khalid Bin Ahmed Al Khalifa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain, underscored
the Kingdom’s firm belief that establishing stability
and security in the Middle East and the entire world
requires a shared political will, as well as a serious
collective effort by all to ensure respect for the basic
principles underlying relations among States, such as
good-neighbourliness, non-interference in the internal
affairs of others and compliance with international
conventions and instruments, so that together we can
address terrorism, the greatest challenge facing us, and
deter States, individuals and entities from supporting
and financing it. That is especially important now
because terrorism is no longer limited to terrorist
organizations that we can confront and eliminate.
Rather, it has become a tool in the hands of States
determined to provoke crises in other countries in their
pursuit of their own agenda. They have consequently
become fully complicit partners in the commission of
terrorist acts and a destabilizing factor for international
peace and security.
Given the strategic importance of peace and
security in our region, the Kingdom of Bahrain has
established strategic partnerships with its allies and
neighbours in order to preserve the security of the
region, combat terrorism and protect international
navigation and commerce routes.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain will
continue to work with the international community and
the United Nations to promote peace and security and
thereby achieve sustainable development, with a view
to benefiting the world and future generations.

A/72/PV.87

Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this highlevel meeting on building and sustaining peace.
Today’s challenging international conflicts, as well as
the growing number of conflicts within and between
States, call on us to draw lessons from our experiences,
take stock of the measures we have undertaken and
put prevention at the core of the mandate of the United
Nations system.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his opening
remarks (see A/72/PV.83), more must be invested in
prevention. The $233 billion that countries have spent
on humanitarian interventions, peacekeeping and
hosting refugees should be redirected to strengthening
early-warning mechanisms and championing regional
and national leadership so as to foster resilience in
societies. In that regard, we believe it is important to
highlight five points that we consider key to effectively
promoting and sustaining peace throughout the United
Nation system.
First, as a number of speakers have highlighted,
sustaining peace is a component of the three pillars
of the United Nations work — security, human rights
and development. In that regard, we believe that the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is an asset
to all Member States, and we should consequently
spare no effort in supporting the Organization’s
ability to implement it comprehensively, providing
and devoting every possible means towards that end.
It is hardly necessary to recall here that poverty, social
exclusion and systemic inequalities fuel the recurrence
of conflicts.
Secondly, we believe that promoting communityled initiatives aimed at strengthening social cohesion
and finding grassroots-generated solutions to local
grievances continues to be of paramount importance.
The Secretary-General tied that notion to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, specifically
Sustainable Development Goal 16, and reaffirmed
that promoting social cohesion, so that diversity is
seen as a benefit rather than a threat, is an investment
in sustaining peace. As societies become more
multicultural, multi-ethnic and multi-religious, people
must feel that their identities are valued even as they
feel a sense of belonging to the larger community.
Communities and grassroots organizations are the
best places to bring their needs to the fore and debate
possible avenues to address them.

18-1253915/27

A/72/PV.87

Thirdly, promoting sustaining peace is strongly
linked to the leverage given to the role of women in
addressing the root causes of conflict. We should opt
to vigorously enhance their leadership at various levels
and in various contexts. In that regard, we commend
the 50 per cent increase in Peacebuilding Fund
expenditures on programmes targeting women’s impact
on the ground. It is indeed pivotal to encourage their
meaningful participation in the mediation process, as
has already been said in Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and in
other General Assembly resolutions on mediation.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General sets out in his
report (A/72/707) on the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, options to
increase, restructure and better prioritize financing for
peacebuilding. The report identifies possibilities for
innovative financing, including through cost savings
based on budgetary partnerships between peacekeeping
operations and the private sector. As Member States,
we should carefully consider the various options
proposed by the Secretary-General for a sustained and
predictable response to conflicts.
Fifthly, as highlighted in the joint United
Nations and World Bank report Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict,
a scaled-up system for preventive action could save
between $20 billion and $70 billion per year. A focus
on prevention should therefore be our priority and
ultimate objective.
In conclusion, it is our duty to ensure, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the mandate
of the 2030 Agenda, that prevention cuts across all the
pillars of the work of the United Nations, so that we can
work effectively to bring about lasting peace.
Mrs. Ighil (Algeria): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting, which constitutes a crucial milestone
in our common endeavour for peace. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General for his insightful report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (A/72/707), which
demonstrates his steadfast and strong commitment to
conflict prevention. We support his efforts aimed at
placing conflict prevention at the heart of the United
Nations peace and security agenda through his proposed
mutually reinforcing reforms.
16/27

26/04/2018

The adoption by the General Assembly and the
Security Council of the landmark twin resolutions
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture (resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016),
respectively) was certainly a turning point for the United
Nations approach to conflict prevention, affirming
the Organization’s commitment to sustaining peace
as an overarching goal and a process for addressing
the persistent challenges of conflict and laying the
foundation for durable solutions. In addressing the
complexity of modern conflicts, we must recognize
the importance of conflict prevention, early warning
and preventive diplomacy by promoting a paradigm
shift towards a holistic approach that gives priority to
political solutions rather than managing conflicts once
they break out, thereby underpinning the concept that
sustaining peace encompasses all cycles of conflict and
is the key to long-term stable and durable peace. To
ensure the success of our collective peacebuilding and
sustaining peace efforts, we believe that the following
elements are essential.
First, we must promote broad and inclusive
national ownership and leadership, bearing in mind
the specificities of each situation and country beyond a
one-size-fits-all approach. Secondly, there is a need to
overcome the current fragmentation of United Nations
activities by bridging its work across its three pillars
through a more coherent and sustained approach by the
main United Nations intergovernmental organs, each
from the vantage point of their responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations. Thirdly, we must
address the nexus between security and development
in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Fourthly, more women and young people
must become involved in conflict-prevention initiatives.
In this regard, we welcome the creation of the African
Union’s pan-African network of women mediators,
FemWise-Africa, which held its first Assembly in
Algeria in December. Fifthly, predictable, sustainable
and better-prioritized funding should be ensured in order
to back up sustaining peace and conflict-prevention
activities. Sixthly, United Nations partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, especially
the African Union (AU), should be strengthened
by promoting better coordination and interaction
between United Nations and AU envoys, focusing
on capacity-building and addressing the root causes
and socioeconomic factors conducive to terrorism,
radicalization and violent extremism.
18-12539

26/04/2018

In its active efforts to help to stabilize its
immediate neighbourhood, Algeria endeavours to
promote prevention and peaceful means for conflict
resolution at both the regional and the international
levels, by advocating for political solutions, mediation,
inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation, in full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and the unity and cohesion of peoples. We also
continue to work to foster the peaceful resolution of
conflict in Africa and advance African solutions for
African problems.
After emerging from a national tragedy during the
1990s and winning its battle against terrorism, Algeria is
trying to create the conditions necessary for stability and
development and to address the root causes of conflict.
Our civil concord policy and national reconciliation
process initiated by His Excellency President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika have significantly contributed to restoring
peace and stability to the country. Algeria is currently
implementing a preventive approach aimed at building
a resilient and stable society. Deradicalization and the
fight against violent extremism are key to achieving that
objective. Our policy of deradicalization encompasses
political, economic, social, educational, religious and
cultural aspects. It is mainly focused on addressing all
factors related to marginalization and exclusion and on
promoting national reconciliation, democracy, the rule
of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms as well
as social justice and equality of opportunity, women’s
empowerment, education and job opportunities for
young people.
Finally, it is important to highlight that our
deliberations on sustaining peace should be State-driven
and conducted in a transparent and inclusive manner.
Sustaining peace is first and foremost a responsibility
of Member States, as the Secretary-General rightly
pointed out in his report.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
are truly grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. When it was being planned, no one
could have imagined the international context that we
would be holding it in today.
Today we are all once again solemnly affirming
our commitment to sustaining peace. But all around us
unprecedented conflicts are evolving, accompanied by
direct military aggression, provocations on a national
scale, threats and bellicose rhetoric. Hundreds of

A/72/PV.87

thousands of people are being made to suffer because
of the aggressive geopolitical ambitions of certain
States. The world has effectively been sliding into a
new cold war and is on the brink of the threatened use
of weapons of mass destruction. According to certain
specific formal indicators, a third world war is not
merely possible but is already under way. Politics and
military technologies today are such that war does not
always take the form of mass battles involving tanks,
armies, artillery, aviation and navies. According to
some assessments, at least a third of all States today are
in one way or another involved in combat operations,
which is more than the number of States that participated
in the Second World War.
We all recently witnessed events in Syria that
constituted a blatant act of aggression against a
sovereign State when a massive rocket strike was
launched on Damascus, based on unproven allegations
and bypassing the Security Council. That was also
how the war in Iraq began in its time, and to this day
someone is probably still searching for weapons of mass
destruction there. The people of Syria have become
hostages to this confrontation, and while for all intents
and purposes the Islamic State has been defeated, there
is no end in sight for the war.
The degree of confrontation between the most
powerful States in the world has now reached a critical
point. Accusations of the use of chemical weapons,
manipulations and falsehoods at the highest international
level, the spread of fake news, the unabashed persecution
of uncooperative countries, sanctions and countersanctions — all of these have taken the situation to
the point of absurdity. For some State leaders, war has
become a method of political self-assertion. And this is
all taking place against a backdrop of an utter crisis in
diplomacy and in the United Nations, which is the main
international organization called on to prevent and
end international conflicts. In our view, among other
things super-Power status implies and imposes a superresponsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Otherwise the super-Power risks becoming a
barbarian armed with a modern tomahawk.
Belarus has always adhered to the principles of a
peaceful, non-confrontational policy in international
relations. We are not only actively involved in
implementing peace initiatives in our region, Eastern
Europe, we are also donors to the cause of regional
stability and security. As long ago as 2015, President
Alyaksandr Lukashenko of the Republic of Belarus,

18-1253917/27

A/72/PV.87

speaking at the general debate of the General Assembly
at its seventieth session (see A/70/PV.15), suggested
that we needed to hold a new, wide-ranging discussion
on the principles for States’ coexistence in the future
and on the fact that our peoples’ well-being and
development are inextricably linked to the issues of
ensuring universal peace and security. Implementing
Belarus’s initiative to recreate a comprehensive process
to guide relations between East and West, similar to the
Helsinki process, could give us all a chance at a future
of geopolitical calm, peace and security.
A true struggle for peace — but a struggle, not a
war — is particularly significant today. The political
ineptitude of some State actors, alongside the extremist
groups cloaking themselves in religion, against a
global backdrop of accumulating weapons of mass
destruction and increasingly primitive terrorist attacks
that no longer require elaborate preparation or major
financing — all of this is turning the whole world
into a potential theatre of war. Responsible civilized
States should not support conflicts, nor should they
create new flashpoints of conflict or engage in wars of
sanctions. They should learn once again to talk to one
another, come to agreements, show political will, set
their ambitions aside and unite in the name of universal
peace and prosperity. Sustaining peace is in the hands
of States themselves. Our common future depends
exclusively on the good-faith efforts of every country.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see
A/72/PV.83).
The establishment of the United Nations gave the
peoples of the world, who are cited at the beginning
of the Charter, new hope for the possibility that
the Organization could shoulder its principal
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security, sparing humankind the ravages and horrors
of war, committing to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace, and preventing conflicts and address their root
causes, with emphasis on the primary responsibility of
national Governments for setting priorities, strategies
and activities aimed at ensuring sustained peace.
The Syrian Arab Republic believes that in order
to achieve peacebuilding and sustaining peace in our
world today we must emphasize the following points.
18/27

26/04/2018

First, there must be respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
stress the importance of upholding the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
every country, as well as non-interference in their
internal affairs. The question here is: How can all
those important provisions be implemented while some
States Members of the Organization ignore the Charter
and the principles of international law?
Secondly, the sovereignty and independence of
States must be maintained, and greedy countries
must stop intervening in the internal affairs of other
countries and attempting to change the ruling regimes
by force through incitement and fuelling internal
strife. The question here is: Have foreign interventions
and external conspiracies established peace in many
countries of the world or have they instead propelled
those countries into a raging state of war, in which
terrorists and mercenaries have sown the seeds of chaos
and where people have been forced into displacement
and migration?
Thirdly, foreign occupation, the main barrier to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace anywhere in the
world, must be ended. Foreign occupation is a threat
to peace and security not just in the region where it
occurs, but also to global peace and security. The
question here is: How can we build sustained and
comprehensive peace in our region when Arab
territories have been occupied by Israel for decades
and when the occupier has refused to withdraw from
these lands, return them to their legitimate owners,
or implement hundreds of international resolutions
adopted by the United Nations, aimed at ending Israel’s
occupation of Arab territories — in which it carries out
all kinds of violations and aggression against the people
of the occupied territories, in addition to its direct
aggression against my country, Syria — and requiring
its immediate withdrawal?
Fourthly, the unilateral economic sanctions
imposed by some States as a way of putting economic
and political pressure on others must be lifted. They
are a blatant violation of international law and of the
principles of sovereignty and sovereign equality.
Fifthly, terrorism must be fought and the countries
supporting it must be stopped from investing in it.
Wherever it occurs, terrorism blocks any opportunity
for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Moreover,
terrorism is a cross-border and cross-continent
18-12539

26/04/2018

phenomenon that cannot be prevented from expanding
unless it is opposed and uprooted at the international
level. This calls for the assertion that no effort to counter
terrorism can succeed if it goes against the purposes of
the Charter and the principles of international law, and
without prior coordination and full cooperation with
the Governments of relevant countries.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Turkish
regime claimed from this rostrum the day before
yesterday (see A/72/PV.83) that States must interfere
to prevent conflicts and that if conflicts erupt,
States must interfere to end them. What the Turkish
Minister said is the ultimate hypocrisy, because his
Government, together with those of other countries
both inside and outside the region, has been the main
driver of terrorism in Syria for more than seven years.
It has opened its borders to terrorists from all over the
world. It has established training centres for them on
its territories and given them every kind of support for
killing Syrians. It was the first to facilitate terrorist
organizations’ access to poisonous chemical materials
within Syria so that they can commit crimes against
Syrian civilians and soldiers.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): Peacebuilding
is one of the most important activities of the United
Nations and therefore deserves the full attention of
the international community. The Holy See would
like to underline five priorities for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
First, the United Nations can and should recommit
to its peacebuilding efforts and to scaling them up,
including by ensuring the unified delivery of action
across the board, developing effective transition
and exit strategies, conducting continuing analysis,
promoting stronger synergies and coherence and
constantly adjusting its responses.
Secondly, as an integral part of preventive
diplomacy, the international community should focus
on institutional capacity-building in States where there
are situations of potential or impending conflict, a step
that is also key to safeguarding successful transitions
from conflict to lasting peace.
Thirdly, to build sustained peace, illicit flows and
accumulations of weapons must be firmly addressed.
Ending the arms trafficking and illicit financing that

A/72/PV.87

directly or indirectly contribute to corruption and to the
commission of atrocity crimes is an essential element
in sustaining peace.
Fourthly, inclusivity is a crucial aspect of
sustainable peace. Conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding processes and efforts should involve
all sectors of society. Women should play an active role
across the whole spectrum of conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as post-conflict peacebuilding.
Lastly, the success of the transition from conflict
to building and sustaining peace demands that we
seriously address issues of justice and accountability.
Justice and legal accountability are essential vectors
for reconciliation, not its opposite. Failure to ensure
justice and put an end to impunity can sabotage postconflict peacebuilding efforts and eventually rekindle
conflicts, thereby arresting development and violating
human rights.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
for the accomplishments of United Nations missions in
preventing or ending conflicts afflicting many parts of
the world, thereby greatly contributing to building the
sustainable peace and stability that enable development
and respect for human rights to flourish. The Holy See
reiterates its commitment to collaborating wherever
possible in the work of conflict prevention and
resolution and of building sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening this important
meeting, and the Secretary-General for his report
(A/72/707) pursuant to the 2016 resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture (resolutions
70/262 and 2262 (2016), respectively).
Some may wonder what the representative of
a nation that has not experienced a day of genuine
peace in decades, and that has endured one of the
most protracted conflicts and the longest occupation
in modern history, could have to say about sustaining
peace. But our position is based on that very experience,
because, having been deprived of it for so long, we know
how invaluable peace truly is and how fundamental to
all aspects of life.
The efforts and means needed to prevent conflicts
are infinitely fewer than those needed to resolve a

18-1253919/27

A/72/PV.87

conflict once it has erupted, with all its immediate
and long-term effects. We can therefore only agree
with the vision of the Secretary-General, which places
prevention at its heart.
The attention span of the international community
has proved increasingly hard to sustain. There are too
many crises, too many cold conflicts and too many
violent conflicts, so we address the most urgent of
them instead of adopting a more holistic and strategic
approach. Diplomacy cannot just follow the news
cycle; it must be able to assess early warning and
engage and address situations before they make it into
the news, and long after they have disappeared from
television screens.
Peacebuilding, human rights and development are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Failure to act on
one deeply affects the others. Accordingly, consistent
and sustained efforts are needed on all three fronts,
including by addressing the root causes of conflicts,
upholding international law, ensuring accountability
and reinforcing multilateral mechanisms and responses.
Such efforts must be inclusive and involve the United
Nations, intergovernmental bodies, Governments
and civil-society organizations. Moreover, they can
only gain from the involvement of women, with their
important perspective and their ability to contribute to
peace efforts, and of young people, who have a right
to build their world and whose energy can change the
present and shape the future.
In the absence of peace, the Palestinian people
continue to be denied their rights and to suffer an
acute crisis of protection and accountability, as well
as a crisis arising from a failure of multilateralism.
Palestine suffers from double standards, from an à
la carte approach to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions and from Israel’s exemption, which
for decades has allowed it to escape accountability
for its systematic breach of those resolutions. The
lack of enforcement of the long-standing international
consensus enshrined in the United Nations resolutions
on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and a
just peace has allowed Israel to entrench its occupation
instead of ending it. Our tragedy has proven over
and over again that impunity is the enemy of peace.
It undermines the credibility and authority of the
international system, born of the horrors of two world
wars and designed to prevent their recurrence and to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
but which has failed to do so.
20/27

26/04/2018

We must revive and recommit to the ideals
underpinning our international system, and uphold the
law so that we may all know sustainable peace. Peace
is the noblest cause and the most powerful, positive
change agent. We have a duty to achieve and preserve it
across the globe, and Palestine pledges to play its part
in that endeavour, in our region and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mr. Caroni (Inter-Parliamentary Union): When
Colombia’s President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón,
who spoke here on Tuesday (see A/72/PV.83),
received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2016, he said in his
acceptance speech,
“That is the great paradox I have found: while
many who have not suffered the conflict in their
own flesh are reluctant to accept peace, the victims
are the ones who are most willing to forgive”.
What we learn from that is that it is important to
listen to the victims and their ability to reconcile,
because without dialogue between current and former
antagonists, reconciliation remains impossible, as does
sustaining peace.
But of course antagonism and diverging interests
are inevitable in any society, which is why it is so
important to have platforms to address such divergences
constructively and, if possible, with a view to finding a
compromise, and without violence, needless to say. At
the national level, the most prominent and influential
platforms for such dialogue are usually parliaments.
For that reason, I can hardly imagine a better ally
for the United Nations sustaining peace agenda
than parliaments.
But as the United Nations moves forward in
reorganizing itself to better prevent conflicts around
the world, parliaments and parliamentarians are often
missing from key United Nations debates and reports.
This high-level meeting is a noteworthy exception,
and the thanks of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
go to you, Mr. President, for your kind invitation.
However, it often seems that such debates are more
focused on partnerships with civil society or the private
sector, despite the fact that parliaments are the central
institution through which the will of the people is, or
ideally should be, expressed. Parliaments have a key
role to play in sustaining peace, be it helping to prevent
18-12539

26/04/2018

conflicts or contributing to reconciliation in postconflict situations.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union was itself founded
to promote dialogue and the peaceful resolution of
conflict. Sustaining peace within the IPU falls under
the mandate of its Standing Committee on Peace and
International Security, which prepared a resolution on
sustaining peace as a vehicle for achieving sustainable
development. The resolution, which was facilitated by
two rapporteurs, Mexico’s Senator Rojas Hernández and
myself, from Switzerland, was adopted unanimously by
the IPU Assembly in March. It is a good illustration of
what parliaments can do to help achieve the sustaining
peace agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals.
The resolution highlights the importance of
national ownership and the need for inclusivity in
peacebuilding and development. It therefore calls for
greater partnerships and a meaningful involvement
of parliaments in the implementation process, since
they guarantee inclusive decision-making processes,
sponsor active dialogues within communities and
work with civil society to oversee political processes.
In parallel, the resolution calls on parliaments to
make use of their relevant lawmaking, oversight,
budgetary, representative and electoral functions to
facilitate the adoption of enabling legislation, including
key budget laws, and to monitor and ensure the
efficient implementation of the sustaining peace and
development agendas.
The IPU, in its own right, also supports
peacebuilding, while helping parliaments to mature into
more democratic and robust institutions. The IPU makes
use of parliamentary diplomacy as well. To that end, the
IPU offers its good offices and provides a neutral venue
for members of parliament to exchange views and
experiences and discuss conflicts within and between
countries. Moreover, the IPU assists parliaments in
dealing with various threats to security and taking
action on counter-terrorism and disarmament. It does
so by raising awareness and encouraging an exchange
of views among parliamentarians and by providing
technical assistance to strengthen the different
capacities of parliaments.
In my view, at its core, sustaining peace is about
inclusiveness. Who would be better suited than
parliaments to provide it, given that parliaments are the
forums where the different needs of society are, or at
least should be, addressed?

A/72/PV.87

In conclusion, we believe that parliaments have
a lot to offer when it comes to sustaining peace.
I therefore ask all the relevant sustaining peace
actors — at the national, regional and global levels — to
keep parliaments in mind. In turn, I can promise that
we parliamentarians will keep all the other actors in
mind too. Together, we can move forward.
The President: I now call on the observer of the
University for Peace.
Mr. Rojas-Aravena (University for Peace) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting.
New and old threats have become intertwined in the
dynamics of conflicts. Such conflicts have increasing
costs, while fewer and fewer resources are allocated to
the sustainability of peace. Conflicts and complex crises
require better analysis, forging shared viewpoints and
anticipatory actions, which provide better opportunities
for prevention, as highlighted by Secretary-General
António Guterres and our documents related to
peacebuilding and sustainability. In the current context
of global interdependence, it is necessary to visualize
and establish operational platforms so that the
mutually reinforcing link between peace and security,
development and human rights can be transformed into
specific actions that contribute to the de-escalation of
domestic, regional and international tensions.
Education, accompanied by multilateralism,
constitutes the key tool for confronting those tensions.
In a society divided by and caught up in conflict,
education for peace is required. That means education
for non-violence, inclusion, social cohesion, the rule
of law, legality and ethics — in short, education for
sustainable peace and prevention. It is essential to
provide education that promotes skills, values and
behaviours that contribute to peace, justice, sustainable
development, democracy, human rights, solidarity and
the protection of the planet.
Without a new generation that has the value of peace
in its hearts and minds, societies will be condemned
to repeat past cycles of conflict and violence. Without
peace there is no possibility of exercising our rights.
Without peace, human rights are profoundly violated.
There is no development in the absence of peace.
Without development there is no growth or prosperity,
which creates more poverty, more inequality and more
tension. Ultimately, it exacerbates and compounds

18-1253921/27

A/72/PV.87

crises, violence and conflicts. Building sustainable
peace is essential. Multilateralism is dialogue for peace.
Achieving the sustainability of peace requires
prevention. It requires the development of new
leadership and holistic educational policies on the
different trends that mark conflicts and complex crises.
Prevention must address the root causes of conflict and
violence and understand their consequences.
We at the United Nations University for Peace
anticipate that complex intranational crises will
become more serious and will become the fundamental
factor of conflict in the future, as they are connected
to global crises such as climate change. We need to
provide broad and efficient education on prevention in
order to achieve the Goals set out in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
The University for Peace puts the pillars of
the United Nations at the centre. In that context,
it highlights the importance of women and young
people in conflict prevention, reconciliation and postconflict situations. The University for Peace develops
education on prevention. It reaffirms its commitment
to such tasks in its master’s, doctorate and training
courses, as well as its publications. The University for
Peace is educating and training leaders for prevention,
mediation and the transformation and resolution of
conflict and post-conflict situations in order to achieve
a future with sustainable peace. If we want peace, let us
work for peace.

26/04/2018

to justice, protecting the vulnerable, ensuring equitable
access to resources and services, providing the means
for fair and transparent adjudication of disputes,
encouraging peaceful collaboration and punishing
violence, the rule of law helps to build stability, resilience
and public confidence in constitutional processes, and
to strengthen trusts in laws and institutions. The rule of
law serves to encourage an environment conducive to
trade, investment and economic growth that generates
jobs, which, especially when targeted to unemployed
young people, can reduce the risk of social unrest
and violence.
The value of the rule of law to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace is evident. Its implementation,
however, is fraught with many challenges. That makes
this high-level meeting and the proposals of the
Secretary-General all the more vital.
IDLO works in fragile and conflict-affected
countries in every region in the world. Based on that
experience, I would like to make four key points.
First, meaningful and sustainable justice-sector
reforms are possible only when they are nationally led
and owned, tailored to the specific context and inclusive
in approach. Our work, and that of other organizations,
shows that community-level engagement and the
participation of marginalized groups, such as women,
youth and historically excluded minorities, helps a
great deal in building mutual trust and confidence.

Mr. Civili (International Development Law
Organization): As the world’s only intergovernmental
organization devoted exclusively to advancing the
rule of law and access to justice, the International
Development Law Organization (IDLO) welcomes this
opportunity to contribute to this high-level meeting.

Secondly, like other aspects of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, rule-of-law initiatives benefit when
they are both top-down and bottom-up. That means
supporting capacity development for institutional
and legal reforms, on the one hand, and the legal
empowerment of justice seekers, on the other. Legal
empowerment not only enhances access to justice, but
also contributes to building trust and confidence in
fragile and conflict-affected situations.

Access to justice and the rule of law lie at the heart
of inclusive and sustainable development. They are also
critical to building and sustaining peace. Many root
causes and drivers of conflict, such as discrimination
and exclusion, unequal distribution of public goods and
natural resources, human rights violations, corruption
and lack of accountability, issue from or are exacerbated
by the absence of the rule of law.

Thirdly, justice-sector reforms require greater
and more sustained investment. Short funding cycles
and unrealistic time frames not only fail to achieve
targets, they risk creating a perverse negative impact by
alienating stakeholders when they fail to deliver what
they promise. IDLO welcomes the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on sustained efforts and adequate resources
for peacebuilding.

For peace to take hold, people must have confidence
in justice institutions. By promoting equality and access

Finally, as the report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/707) notes, restructuring global peace and

The President: I now call on the observer of the
International Development Law Organization.

22/27

18-12539

26/04/2018

A/72/PV.87

development efforts calls for the active involvement of a
wide range of international, regional and national actors.
IDLO has partnered successfully with United Nations
political missions and development programmes in
some of the most fragile and conflict-affected countries.
We look forward to further deepening and broadening
our collaboration with the United Nations system and
Member States to build and sustain peace.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
this high-level meeting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.49, entitled “Follow-up to the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/72/L.49?
Draft resolution A/72/L.49
(resolution 72/276).

was

adopted

The President: I would like to express my
sincere thanks to His Excellency Mr. Masud Bin
Momen, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
and Her Excellency Ms. Audra Plepytė, Permanent
Representative of Lithuania, who ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations
in the informal consultations on resolution 72/276. I
am sure that the members of the Assembly join me in
extending to them our sincere appreciation.
I would like to start my concluding remarks with a
simple message: I sincerely thank members. Whether
delegations travelled from abroad or were already in
New York, participated directly or worked behind
the scenes, they have all shown their commitment to
sustaining peace, and, because of them, this high-level
meeting was a success.
First, we increased visibility and awareness. As
I said on Tuesday (see A/72/PV.83), this meeting has
attracted the highest levels of attendance seen at the
United Nations this year.
Secondly, we followed up on our promises. We
made sure that the 2016 resolutions on sustaining peace
(resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution
2282 (2016)) were not one-off measures but the start
of a new approach to peace. The resolution we have
just adopted, and my Chair’s summary, will drive this
process forward.

Thirdly, we have gained more understanding, more
lessons learned and more ideas for the future. Let me
mention them in more detail.
First, with regard to our understanding of peace, we
have talked a lot over the past two days about how we
see and understand peace. We said that peace is more
than a ceasefire; it is more than a peace deal; and it is
more than the absence of war. That means that one-off
operations or activities are not enough to achieve it.
Instead, we need to tackle conflict at its roots. We need
to look to the horizon to see the warning signs. We need
to build a culture of peace and a culture of prevention.
Sustaining peace is not an easy task. I think that
was highlighted by the President of Colombia, who said
that it is more difficult to build peace than to silence
the guns (see A/72/PV.83). However, it is not a task we
are shying away from. Instead, we are stepping up to
take it on.
A second achievement came through the lessons we
learned, and I will mention four areas in particular.
First, with regard to prevention, our discussions
showed that prevention is not an abstract concept.
It has happened; it is happening; and it can happen
again. Many participants shared their experiences with
mediation and diplomacy. For example, we heard about
how mediation helped Montenegro to remain stable
and peaceful at a time of regional instability. We also
talked about longer-term prevention, which turned our
focus to sustainable development, economic growth,
institution-building and respect for human rights.
It is clear that we are beginning to view those areas
through a lens of prevention. That is why successful
poverty reduction in Peru was held up as a contribution
to sustaining peace.
Secondly, with regard to coherence, we learned
that a more coherent approach is already evident at
both national and international levels — in the Gambia,
for example, where sustaining peace is central to the
country’s national development plan; or in Malawi,
where United Nations development and political
actors came together to support the national peace
architecture; or in New York, where the Peacebuilding
Commission is building bridges across the three pillars
of the United Nations.
Thirdly, with regard to national ownership, we were
all on the same page. We agreed that sustaining peace
does not stand a chance unless it is driven by national

18-1253923/27

A/72/PV.87

26/04/2018

actors. Lessons from the Philippines showed us the need
to complement rather than replace national cultures,
sensitivities and policies. And we were reminded that
national ownership made sustaining peace a reality in
Côte d’Ivoire.

support of the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. Our
interactive discussions also generated some exciting
ideas about financing for sustaining peace. That is only
a fraction of our wider toolbox. I hope to capture more
in my summary.

Finally, the message of “inclusion, inclusion,
inclusion” could not have been clearer. When we
widen the space — when we pull more chairs up to the
table — we see the results. One example mentioned
pertained to women in Liberia. When women have had
a platform and a voice, they have used it to prevent the
country from sliding back into war. Young people in the
Balkans were another example mentioned. Even years
after conflict, they continue to work for reconciliation.
We also heard about religious leaders in Afghanistan
who have used their influence to advocate for peace.
And we learned that civil society in Sri Lanka had
helped to design the national reconciliation process.

This was a successful high-level meeting. But we
cannot speak only about success. The realities of peace
for many people on the ground are too horrific and the
signs that things could get even worse are all too clear.
There are challenges and concerns. It is up to all of us
to act in response, not only those of us who live with
conflict, who have a vested economic or social interest
or who have the time or the money, but every single one
of us.

Sustaining peace cannot be limited to this Hall.
We need to open our doors wider, and that includes the
private sector. As we heard in a video message from
Sir Richard Branson, businesses must play a greater
role in making our planet more peaceful.
A third major achievement of this meeting came
through our ideas for the future. We reviewed our
toolbox and we chose many tools, which we can use
more frequently and more efficiently going forward,
such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
for example. The Secretary-General called it the
common blueprint for more peaceful, stable, resilient
groups of societies. However, we need to do more to
fully grasp its preventive potential.
Peace operations are another example. In that
regard, I want to repeat the call, made on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to look closer
at how such operations can better support sustaining
peace or inclusion, because that can be both an aim and
a tool. We can act on the recommendations of the recent
progress study on youth, peace and security. We can pay
more attention to the gender aspects of other tools for
sustaining peace, including conflict analysis. Regional
organizations also have their own toolboxes. The United
Nations must learn from those and support them.
Finally, when we talk about tools for the future,
we cannot ignore financing. Many speakers drew
attention to the proposals outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General (A/72/707). They urged us to
consider them seriously. Others spoke up loudly in
24/27

Our shared responsibility is clear. In fact, it is
the basis of the Charter of the United Nations. In the
words of the President of Ireland, it is a most profound
political and moral responsibility not only to the
citizens of our own nations but to the peoples of other
nations. We all signed up to it. That is why sustaining
peace rests on all our shoulders, why we all have an
interest in achieving it and why we all stand to lose if
we decide to go down a more dangerous path alone. We
must embrace our political and moral responsibility. We
must keep the promises that we made in 2016. We must
bring sustaining peace out of this Hall to the people on
the ground.
I would like to inform Member States that in due
course I will circulate a summary of the proceedings of
the plenary meeting and the interactive dialogues held
during the high-level meeting.
Several delegations have asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I would like to remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sahraei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am taking
the floor to exercise my right of reply in response to
the unfounded remarks made about my country by the
representatives of Saudi Arabia (see A/72/PV.86) and
Yemen (see A/72/PV.85).
I would like to note that Saudi Arabia’s military
acquisitions and intervention in Yemen represent the
main underlying reason for the escalation of the crisis
and for the human tragedy in that country. In such a
situation, the claim that Iran intervenes in the internal
18-12539

26/04/2018

A/72/PV.87

affairs of Yemen is a naive and false scenario aimed at
deflecting the attention of the international community
from the war crimes committed by the Saudi-led
coalition against the innocent Yemeni people.

responsible for the destruction of Syria and the suffering
of the Syrian people will be held accountable for their
crimes. Until then, Turkey will continue to stand by the
democratic aspirations of the Syrian people.

We are of the view that the crisis in Yemen has
no military solution. It can be resolved only through
a ceasefire and inclusion. As you, Mr. President,
rightly said in your closing statement, inclusion, with
the participation of all Yemeni parties and groups, is a
prerequisite for the peaceful settlement of the conflict
in Yemen. Iran’s fundamental policy is based on the
peaceful settlement of conflict and the establishment
of stability and security in the region. In line with that
policy, in his statement in this Hall on the first day of
the general debate, the Iranian Foreign Minister urged
the countries of the Persian Gulf to join an initiative to
set up a dialogue for regional cooperation (see A/72/
PV.83). My delegation would like to once again reiterate
the importance of that initiative as a valuable means to
advance long-lasting stability in Yemen and other parts
of the region.

Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Our delegation would like to exercise its right
of reply with regard to what was mentioned by the
representative of the Turkish regime.

With regard to the correct name of the body of
water between Iran and the Arabian Peninsula, I
should remind the representative of Saudi Arabia
that the traditional term “Persian Gulf” has been the
correct appellation for that body of water since about
500 B.C., and it will remain so forever. It is a standard
geographical term, recognized by the international
community, including the United Nations, and should
not be tinkered with because of the political projects
and day-to-day wishes of this or that ruler.

The Turkish regime continues to support, finance
and arm the terrorists on Syrian territories. I would
like to mention a book entitled ISIS Defectors: Inside
Stories of the Terrorist Caliphate, by Ahmet Yayla,
who headed the counter-terrorism division in Sanliurfa,
Turkey, between 2010 and 2013. In his book, he wrote:

Mrs. Koçyiğit Grba (Turkey): The Turkish
Minister for Foreign Affairs made a statement on behalf
of our country on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
during the initial segment of the high-level meeting
(see A/72/PV.83). I have asked for the floor in exercise
of the right of reply.
I reject the statement by the representative of the
Syrian regime in its entirety. As usual, it contains only
distorted facts and baseless accusations against my
country. The regime, which long ago lost its legitimacy,
is ruthlessly massacring its own people by employing
all imaginable instruments of force and violence.
Those actions represent war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We are appalled that such a regime, which
has the blood of innocent people on its hands, can
dare to take the floor in the context of a meeting on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Eventually, those

The Turkish regime has exploited Turkey’s full
capacities, in cooperation with other States and
regimes inside and outside our region, in order to
support terrorist organizations, in particular Da’esh,
the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations
affiliated with them. In fact, the Turkish regime opened
Turkey’s borders to terrorists and established training
centres for them on Turkish territory, assisting them
with training in the use of toxic chemical weapons. The
Turkish regime also facilitated the entry of all kinds of
weapons, including toxic chemicals, to Syrian territory
so that those terrorist groups could use them against
civilians in Syria.

“In my capacity as the Chief of the Counterterrorism Division, I personally witnessed in 2013
that the Turkish hospitals in the south-east treated
free of charge members of the terrorist Da’esh
organization who had been injured. I also saw that
those terrorists were protected in most cases by
Turkish police. During my work as chief of security,
I received instructions for providing injured
combatants with security services. In August
2014, the man who was the right arm of Abu Bakr
Al-Baghdadi and six men of his group were injured
during an air strike. They received treatment in
a private hospital in Sanliurfa, southern Turkey.
Doctors in that hospital told me that the Turkish
Government covered all their expenses.”
This is a Turkish writer who refers in his book to the
terrorist acts perpetrated by the Turkish regime, namely,
violating all Security Council resolutions on counterterrorism by providing support to terrorists inside
Turkey. Now the city of Gaziantep is called the Turkish
Tora Bora. It has become a safe haven for terrorist

18-1253925/27

A/72/PV.87

groups and where they undergo training and conduct
tests on using toxic chemicals, which are transferred,
with the help of the Turkish regime, to Syria, where
they are used against civilians in my country.
Mrs. Koçyiğit Grba (Turkey): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor one more time. I
will not take up your valuable time, and I will not honour
the Syrian regime’s representative by addressing the
details of his statement, which we reject in its entirety.
The President: I declare closed the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 65.
Agenda item 99 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
(cc) Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on nuclear disarmament
Draft decision (A/72/L.50)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft decision A/72/L.50, entitled “United
Nations high-level international conference on
nuclear disarmament”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/72/L.50?
Draft decision A/72/L.50 was adopted (decision
72/556).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (cc) of agenda
item 99.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of twenty members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/612/Add.1)
The President: Pursuant to General Assembly
decision 42/450, of 17 December 1987, and upon the
nomination by the Economic and Social Council, the
Assembly elects the members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
26/27

26/04/2018

Members will recall that, at its 71st plenary
meeting, held on 11 December 2017, the General
Assembly elected 17 members to the Committee for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2018
and expiring on 31 December 2020.
Members will also recall that, by its decision
2018/201 B, of 5 December 2017, the Economic and
Social Council postponed the nomination of one
member from among the Group of African States, one
member from among the Group of the Latin American
and Caribbean States and one member from among
the Group of Western European and other States for
election for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2018 and expiring on 31 December 2020.
In that connection, the Assembly has before it a
note by the Secretary-General contained in document
A/72/612/Add.1. As indicated in that document, by its
decision 2018/201 E, of 16 April 2018, the Economic and
Social Council nominated Chad and Italy for election
by the General Assembly to fill outstanding vacancies
in the Committee for Programme and Coordination for
a term of office beginning on the date of election and
expiring on 31 December 2020.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot and there
shall be no nominations. However, I should like to
recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly decision
34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing with the
secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs when the
number of candidates corresponds to the number of seats
to be filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The President: The number of States nominated
from among the Group of African States and among the
Group of Western European and other States is equal to
the number of seats to be filled in each of those groups.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes
to declare Chad and Italy elected as members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination for a term
of office beginning on the date of election and expiring
on 31 December 2020?
It was so decided.
18-12539

26/04/2018

The President: I congratulate Chad and Italy
on their elections as members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
Members are informed that the Economic and Social
Council, in its decision 2018/201 E, decided to further
postpone the nomination of one member from among
the Group of Western European and other States for
election by the General Assembly for a term beginning

A/72/PV.87

on the date of election and expiring on 31 December
2018, and one member from among the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States for election by the
Assembly for a term beginning on the date of election
and expiring on 31 December 2020.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 114.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

18-1253927/27
