"The members of the Council also warmly welcome
the unmanning of military positions which has recently taken place, and urge the two parties to consider further steps in co-operation with United
Nations authorities aimed at reducing tension, avoiding incidents and creating a climate of good will, as
well as maintaining an atmosphere conducive to a
settlement.
"The members of the Council take note of the
Secretary-General's intention to meet with the two
parties at the end of June, and share the SecretaryGeneral's hope that the meeting will bear positive
results. They appeal to the parties concerned to cooperate with the Secretary-General in order to
achieve substantial progress in the direction of an
overall settlcment.0

Resolution 634 {1989)
of9 June 1989

The Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations operation in Cyprus of 31 May and
8 June 1989,81
Taking note also of the recommendation by the Secretary-General that the Security Council extend the
stationing of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus for a further period of six months,
Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed
that in view of the prevailing conditions in the island it
is necessary to keep the Force in Cyprus beyond
15 June 1989,
Reaffirming the provisions of resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964 and other relevant resolutions,
1. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force established under
resolution 186 (1964) for a further period ending on
15 December 1989;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
mission of good offices, to keep the Security Council
informed of the progress made and to submit a report
on the implementation of the present resolution by
30 November 1989;
3. Calls upon all the parties concerned to continue
to co-operate with the Force on the basis of the present
mandate.

At its 2898th meeting, on 14 December 1989, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Cyprus,
Greece and Turkey to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The situation in Cyprus:
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/21010 and Add.l)". 83
At the same meeting, t~~ Council also decided to
extend an invitation to Mr. Ozer Koray under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Resolution 646 (1989)

Adopted unanimously at th,,
2868th meeting.

or 14 Ot'cembcr 19ll9

The Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations operation in Cyprus of 7 and 13
December 19~9, 84
Taking note also of the recommendation by the Secretary-General that the Security Council extend the
stationing of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus for a further period of six months,
Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed
that in view of the prevailing conditions in the island it
is necessary to keep the Force in Cyprus hcyond 15 December 1989,
Reaffirming the provisions of resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964 and other relevant resolutions,
1. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
Unite<l Nations Peace-keeping Force established under
resolution 186 (1964) for a further period ending on 15
June 1990;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
mission of good offices, to keep the Security Council
informed of the progress made and to submit a report
on the implementation of the present resolution by 31
May 1990;

Decisions

At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolution 634 (1989), the President of the Council made
the following statemcnt: 82
"The members of the Security Council welcome
and reaffirm their support for the direct talks
launched in August 1988 under the auspices of the
Secretary-General in the context of his mission of
good offices in Cyprus. They express appreciation to
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for their untiring efforts to achieve progress.
"The members of the Council note that 25 years
have elapsed since the establishment of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus. They regre1
that, in that time, it has not been possible to achieve
a negotiated settlement of all aspects of the Cyprus
problem.
"The members of the Council, taking into account
the importance of the current stage of the talks, urge
both parties to redouble their efforts, be flexible and
lend the fullest surport and co-operation to the efforts of the Specia Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Cyprus towards achieving a negotiated,
just and lasting settlement.

3
~ Sec Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fourth Year,
'iupplemcnt for Octoher, Novcmher and Decemher /989.
84
!hid., documents Si210 l\1 and Add.l.

81 Ibid., documents S/20663 and Add. I.

82 S/20682.

17

3. Calls upon all the parties concerned to continue
to co-operate with the Force on the basis of the present
mandate.

"The members of the Council share the SecretaryGeneral's disappointment that it has not been possible to achieve concrete results to date in developing
an agreed outline of an overall agreement. In this
regard, they share the Secretary-General's hope that
direct and meaningful talks can be resumed early
next year.
"The members of the Council urge both leaders to
proceed as suggested by the Secretary-General durmg their most recent meetings and, as agreed in June,
to co-operate with him and his Special Representative in completing work on an outline. They also urge
the two parties to make a further determined effort
to promote reconciliation. They share the SecretaryGeneral's view that the adoption of good will measures could prove useful in this regard.
"The members of the Council are concerned about
the difficulties encountered by the Force during the
last mandate period. They call on all parties to co-operate with the Force and to take effective measures
to ensure that the integrity of the buffer zone is
safeguarded.
"The members of the Council also note the continuing financial difficulties facing the Force as indicated by the Secretary-General. They take note of his
appeal for greater financial contributions to the
Force, which would help it continue its important
peace-keeping role in Cyprus and would reduce its
financial difficult ics.
"The members of the Council request the Secretary-Genera\ to report hack to the Council by 1
March 1990 on what progress has been made in resuming intensive talks and developing an agreed outline of an overall agreement."

Adopted unanimously at the
2898th meeting.

Decision

At the same meeting, the President made the following statement on behalf of the members of the Council:85
"The members of the Security Council take note of
the Secretary-General's rcport 82 on the United Nations operation in Cyprus and express their full support for his continuing efforts in pursuing the
initiative launched in August 1988.
"The members of the Council recall the statement
made on their behalf by the President ofthe Council
on 9 June 1989,82 in which they expressed their regret
that, in the more than 25 years since the establishment of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, it had not been possible to achieve a negotiated settlement of all aspects of the Cyprus problem.
"The members of the Council note the SecretaryGeneral's assessment that a basis for effective negotiations exists provided both leaders manifest the
necessary good will and recognize that a viable solution must satisfy the legitimate interests of both communities.
85

S/21026.

MARKING OF PLASTIC OR SHEET EXPLOSIVES FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETECTION

Decision

Concerned about the case with which plastic or sheet
explosives can he used in acts of terrorism with little risk
of detection,
Taking note of the International Civil Aviation Organization Council resolution of 16 February 1989, in
which it urged its member States to expedite current
research and development on detection of explosives
and on security equipment,
I. Condemns all acts of unlawful interference
against the security of civil aviation;
2. Calls upon all States to co-operate in devising and
implementing measures to prevent all acts of terrorism,
including those involving explosives;
3. Welcomes the work already undertaken by the
International Civil Aviation Organization, and by other
international organizations, aimed at preventing and
eliminating all acts of terrorism, in particular in the
field of aviation security;
4. Urf;es the lntcnrntional Civil Aviation Organization to intensify it, work aimed at preventing all acts of
tcrwrism again'1 international civil aviation, and in
p:111 icula, its wnr k ()fl devising an international regime
l()r the marking of plastic or sheet explosives for the
purpose of detection;

At its 2869th meeting, on 14 June 1989, the Council
discussed the item entitled "Marking of plastic or sheet
explosives for the purpose of detection".

Resolution 635 ( 1989)
of 14 Jun~ I 989

The Security Council,
Conscious of the implications of acts of terrorism for
international security,
Deeply concerned by all acts of unlawful interference
against international civil aviation,
Mindful of the important role of the United Nations
in supporting and encouraging efforts by all States and
intergovernmental organizations in preventing and
eliminating all acts of terrorism, including those involv
ing the use of explosives,
Determined to encourage the promotion of effective
measures to prevent acts of terrorism,
18
