General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

170

2. Appoints the following persons as alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 1977:
Mr. Sol Kuttner,
Mr. August Marpaung,
Mr. Rudolf Schmidt.
107th plenary meeting
22 December 1976

*

*

*

As a result of the above appointments, the members and
alternate members elected by the General Assembly to the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee, whose terms of office
expire on 31 December 1979, will be the following:
Members

Mr. Ernesto GARRIDO (Philippines),
Mr. Mario MAJoLI (Italy),
Mr. Michael G. OK.EYO (Kenya).
Alternate members
Mr. Sol KUTrNER (United States of America),

Mr. August MARPAUNG (Indonesia),
Mr. Rudolf SCHMIDT (Federal Republic of Germany).

31/202.

Establishment of the United Nations
Industrial Development Fund96

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3086 (XXVIII) of 6 De-cember 1973, in which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the question of the establishment of a United Nations industrial development
fund,
Recalling also its resolution 3307 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, in which it requested the Second General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to consider the establishment of an
industrial development fund to be financed on the basis
of voluntary contributions, including the basic guidelines for its functioning,
Taking into consideration the provisions on the
United Nations industrial development fund contained
in paragraphs 72 and 73 of section V entitled "Institutional arrangements" of the Lima Declaration and Plan
of Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 97 which were endorsed by the General Assembly
at its seventh special session in resolution 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975,
Recalling further its resolution 3402 (XXX) of
28 November 1975, in which it requested the Industrial Development Board to report on the matter to
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session,
Decides to establish a United Nations Industrial Development Fund, to be managed by the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization in accordance
with the provisions set forth in the annex to the present
resolution.
107th plenary meeting
22 December 1976
9 6 See also sect.
117 See A/10112,

X.B.6 below, decision 31/ 426.
chap. IV.

ANNEX
Provisions concerning the management of the United
Nations Industrial Development Fund

J.

PURPOSE

The purpose of the United Nations Industrial Development
Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Fund) is to increase the
resources of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and enhance its ability to meet, promptly and
flexibly, the needs of the developing countries. It shall supplement the assistance provided by means of the resources of
the United Nations and the United Nations Development
Programme directed towards the achievement of accelerated
and self-sustained growth of the developing countries in the
industrial field.
II.

GUIDING PRINCIPLES AND FUNCTIONS

1. The Fund shall be used in conformity with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and with
General Assembly resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966 establishing the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization.
2. The Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial
Development and Co-operation shall serve as the fundamental
guidelines for the preparation of programmes financed by the
Fund. In particular, the Fund should enable the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization:
(a) To participate in the implementation of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, adopted by the General
Assembly at its sixth special session,98 in so far as they relate
to industrial development;

(b) To implement relevant provisions of General Assembly
resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, adopted at the
seventh special session;
(c) To implement the recommendations of the Ad Hoe
Committee on a Long-Range Strategy for the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization;
(d) To implement field projects, particularly those of a
non-traditional nature;

(e) To intensify its activities in the development and
transfer of technology;
(f) To intensify its programmes aimed at establishing
and/or increasing co-operation among developing countries and
between developing and developed countries;
( g)

(h)

To strengthen its promotional activities;
To strengthen its industrial information systems;

(i) To take concerted action and special measures to
assist the least developed countries.

JIJ.

ROLE OF THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BOARD AND THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

1. The Industrial Development Board (hereinafter referred
to as the Board) shall establish the terms of reference for the
functioning and administration of the Fund and shall provide
general policy guidance with a view to ensuring that the
resources of the Fund are employed with maximum efficiency
and effectiveness in pursuance of the purposes of the Fund.on

2. The Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization shall, taking into account the need
for appropriate co-ordination with the United Nations Development Programme, prepare and submit anntlally to the Board
the programme of the Fund, with details of the projects and
other activities to be undertaken. At the same time, he shall
submit a plan incorporating estimates of resources and expenses for the following two years, including provision for
1,s Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
oo See resolution 31/203, annex.

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

programme support costs and administrative costs of the Fund
and for transfers to and from reserves.
3. The Board shall approve the programme of the Fund
and shall exercise effective control over its constituent activities,
apportioning the resources available, taking into account the
estimates of the Executive Director, for such activities. The
Board shall authorize the necessary allocation of funds to
cover the following main categories:
(a) Expenditure on programme activities;
( b) Contingency margin for expenditure on projects to
meet emergency needs;
(c) Allocations, if any, to other units of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
4. The Board shall approve projects within the resources as
apportioned for programme activities of the Fund and shall
allocate funds for such projects accordingly. The Board may
delegate this authority to the Executive Director, within limits
and in such categories as it may establish.
IV.

FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

The Fund shall be finctnced by voluntary contributions,
which may be accepted from Governments, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and other non-governmental sources, in currencies chosen by contributors, for
purposes consistent with those of the Fund. The available
resources placed under the authority of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization from voluntary contributions will be integrated and become part of the Fund. Voluntary
contributions by Governments may be made, at their option:
(a) By pledges on an annual basis or for a number of
years;
1.

(b) In accordance with regulations 7.2 and 7.3 of the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations;
( c) By both of these methods.
Other contributions may be accepted in accordance with regulations 7.2 and 7.3 of the Financial Regulations of the United
Nations.
2. The voluntary contributions shall be governed by the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations except for such
modification as may be approved by the General Assembly on
the recommendation of the Board.
3. The Fund shall be administered in accordance with the
Financial Rules of the United Nations Industrial Development
Fund.

31/203.

General procedures governing the oper•
ations of the United Nations Industrial
Development Fund

The General Assembly
Adopts the general procedures governing the operations of the United Nations Industrial Development
Fund set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
22 December 1976
ANNEX
General procedures governing the operations of the
United Nations Industrial Development Fund

I.

INTRODUCTION

The United Nations Industrial Development Fund was
established by the General Assembly under resolution 31/202
of 22 December 1976. The present general procedures are
formulated in pursuance of section III, paragraph 1, of the
annex to that resolution, which provides that the Industrial
Development Board shall formulate such general policy guidance as is necessary to govern the operations of the Fund.

171

Article 1
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of these general procedures, the following
definitions shall apply:
(a) "Fund" means the United Nations Industrial Development Fund;
(b)
"Board" means the Industrial Development Board of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
( c) "Government" means the Government of a State which
is a Member State of the United Nations or member of a
specialized agency of the United Nations or of the International
Atomic Energy Agency which participates in the Fund as a
donor or a recipient or both;
(d) "The Secretary-General" means the Secretary-General
of the United Nations or a member of the staff to whom he
has delegated his authority or responsibility;
( e)
"The Executive Director" means the Executive Director
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization or
a member of the staff to whom he has delegated his authority
or responsibility;

(f) "The Controller" means the Controller of the United
Nations or his authorized delegate;
(g) "Contribution" means any voluntary contribution to
the Fund irrespective of source;
(h) "Donor" means any Government or other organization or individual who makes a contribution to the Fund;

(i) "Project document" means the formal document describing the purpose and plan of activities and the financial
provisions of a Fund project on the basis of which that project
is approved;
(j) "Financial resources" means funds available to the
Fund from all sources, including but not limited to contributions, except counterpart contributions from recipient Governments;

(k) "Counterpart contributions" means the amounts contributed to projects by recipient Governments for the cost of
specific services and facilities as set out in project documents;
(l) "Financial Rules" means the Financial Rules of the
United Nations Industrial Development Fund;
(m) "Allocation" means the authority from the Executive
Director to incur commitments and make expenditures under
those Rules for purposes specified in the allocation;
(n) "Commitment" means the legal obligation to make a
future expenditure from the resources of the Fund;

(o) "Expenditure" means the disbursement of funds of
the Fund by the Executive Director directly in full or partial
liquidation of a commitment.
II.

RESOURCES OF THE FUND
Article 2
FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The financial resources of the Fund shall be derived from
voluntary contributions and other sources as defined in the
Financial Rules.
Article 3
PLEDGES

1. Governments may pledge contributions to the Fund at
any time.

2. Contributions may be pledged either on an annual basis
or for a number of years. Whenever possible, Governments
are urged to pledge their contributions for a number of years.
While Governments may pledge contributions to the Fund at
any time, they are urged to do so on the occasion of the
pledging conference.
