Resolution 227 (1966)

Resolution 227 (1966)

of 28 October 1966

du 28 octobre 1966

The Security Council,
Confirming the consensus approved at its 1301st meet-

Le Conseil de securite,
Confirmant le consensus approuve a la 1301 e seance,

ing, on 29 September 1966,
·
Recalling that, in that consensus, its members welcomed the statement of the Secretary-General on 19 September 1966 that he is ready to consider serving until
the end of the present twenty-first session of the General
Assembly,

le 29 septembre 1966,
Rappe/ant que, aux termes de ce consensus, ses membres
se sont notamment felicites de la declaration faite par
le Secretaire general, le 19 septembre 1966, selon laquelle
il etait dispose a envisager de demeurer a son poste
jusqu 'a la fin de la presente vingt et unieme session de
I' Assemblee generale,
Recommande a l'Assemblee generale, en attendant que
le Conseil de securite ait examine plus avant la question
de la nomination du Secretaire general, de maintenir
U Thant dans ses fonctions de Secretaire general de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies jusqu'a la fin de la
vingt et unieme session ordinaire de l' Assemblee generale.
Adoptee a la 1311• seance

Recommends to the General Assembly, pending
consideration by the Security Council of the question
of the appointment of the Secretary-General, that it
extend the appointment of U Thant as Secretary-General
of the United Nations until the end of the twentyfirst regular session of the General Assembly.
Adopted at the 1311th meeting (private meeting).

( seance privee).

Decisions

Decisions

At the 1329th meeting (private meeting), on 2 December
1966, the President made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
" The Security Council, recalling its consensus of
29 September 1966 concerning the great pos',:ve role
played by the Secretary-General, U Thant, in the
activities of the United Nations, has further examined
the question of the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and, in particular, the situation created by
the impending expiration of the present term of
Secretary-General U Thant at the end of the twentyfirst regular session of the General Assembly.
" After taking all considerations into account, the
members of the Council have agreed that the higher
interests of the Organization would be best served
if U Thant continues in the post of Secretary-General.

A la 1329e seance (seance privee), le 2 decembre
1966, le President a fait, au nom du Conseil, la declaration suivante:
« Le Conseil de securite, rappelant son consensus
du 29 septembre 1966 concernant le role important
et positif joue par le Secretaire general, U Thant,
dans l'activite de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
a examine de nouveau la question de la nomination
du Secretaire general et, en particulier, la situation
creee par l'expiration imminente du mandat actuel
du Secretaire general, U Thant, a la fin de la vingt et
unieme session oruinaire de l' Assemblee generate.
« Apres avoir tenu compte de toutes les considerations, les membres du Conseil sont convenus qu'il
serait de l 'interet superieur de I'Organisation
qu'U Thant continue d'exercer les fonctions de Secretaire general.
« Ils connaissent !'intention du Secretaire general
de ne pas se rendre disponible pour un second mandat et son desir de laisser le Conseil entierement
libre de formuler sa recommandation. Ils ont mOrement reflechi au fait que le Secretaire general souhaite
les voir envisager la possibilite d'un autre candidat.
Quelles que puissent etre leurs vues sur les observations que le Secretaire general a faites en annon~nt
ses intentions, ils respectent entierement sa position
et !'initiative qu'il a prise en appelant leur attention
sur les questions fondamentales auxquelles l'Organisat.ion a a faire face et sur !'evolution inquietante de la
situation dans bien des regions du monde, comme il
l'a fait dans sa declaration du 1er septembre 196629,
a laquelle ils pretent la plus grande attention.

"They are aware of the Secretary-General's intention not to offer himself for a second term and his
desire to leave the Council unfettered in its recommendation. They have weighed the Secretary-General's
wish that they examine the possibility of another
nominee. Whatever their views may be on the observations he made with his announced expression of
intention, they fully respect his position and his
action in bringing basic issues confronting the Organization and disturbing developments in many parts of
the world to their notice, as he has done in his statement of 1 September 1966, 29 to which they accord
their closest attention.

29 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-first Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1966, document S/7481.

29 Documents officiels du Conseil de securite, vingt et unieme
annee, Supplement de jui/let, aout et septembre 1966, document
S/7481.

17
