UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

13 JUNE

1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2589)

*a ..,.

* . . . . . . . a* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . s . . . . .

Expression of welcome to the new representative
Adoption

of the agenda

The situation

of the United

States

........

1
1
1

................................................

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242) . ..*.........
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.....

WPV.2589

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2589th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

(Trinidad and Tobago).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

13 June 1985, at 3 p.m.
435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kofa (Liberia) took
at the Council table.

d place

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2589)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(c)
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sinclair, Acting
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, and
the other members of the delegation took a place at the
Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the new representative
of the United States
1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to extend a warm
welcome on behalf of the Council to the new representative of the United States, Mr. Vernon A. Walters. I should
like to assure him that members of the Council look forward to working in close co-operation with him.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(6) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(c) Further report- of the Secretary-General concerning
the implementation of Security Council resolutions

5. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2583rd to 2587th
meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Poland,
Seychelles, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan).
Mr, Bessaieh (Algeria), Mr. Van-Dunem (Angola), Mi:
Choudhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Mboumoua (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis (Canada),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr.
C&ar (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic

“We, the undersignedmembersof the Security Council, have the honour to requestthat during its meetings
devotedto considerationof the situation in Namibia the
Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Gora Ebrahim,
representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania.”

Yemen), Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Lautenschlager(FederalRepublicOf
Germany),Mr. Asamoah(Ghana), Mr. Karran (Guyana),
Mr. Charles(Haiti), Mr. Kusumaatmadja(Indonesia),Mr.
Barnett (Jamaica),Mr. Kuroda (Japan),Mr. Kiilu (Kenya),
Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait) Mr. Vongsay(Lao People’sDemocratic Republic),Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Zain (Malaysia),Mr. Mwibz Ledo(Mexico), Mr. Nyamdoe (Mongolia), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr. MurargY
(Mozambique),Mr. D’EscotoBrockmann(Nicaragua),Mr.
Gambari (Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr...
Cabrera (Panama),,Mr. Nowak (Palam& Mrs. Gonthier
(Seychelles),Mr. von Schirnding(SouthAfrica), Mr. Woewar&ne (Sri Lanka), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. Al-Atassi
(Syrian Arab Republic),Mr. Tiirkmen(Turkey), Mr. Odaka
(Uganda),Mr. Al-MO@ (UnitedArab Emirates),Mr. Mkapa
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim Chung(viet
Nam),Mr. Golob(Yugoslavia),Mr. Goma(Zambia)andMr.
Mudenge(Zimbabwe)took theplacesreservedforthemat the
sideof the Councilchamber.

IfI hearno objection, I shalltake it that the Council accedes
to that request.
It wasso decided.
9. The PRESIDENT: The first speakeris the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to make his statement.
10. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam): Allow me at the
outset,on behalf of the delegationof the SocialistRepublic
of Viet Nam, to extend a warm welcomeand congratulations to the high-ranking representativesof so many
membersof the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries present here at thesesolemn meetingsof the Council. The
presenceof such an impressivenumber of ministers for
foreign affairs and statesmenat this debate demonstrates
the great importance the Non-Aligned Movement and
justice-upholdingpeoplesthroughout the world attach to
the causeof Namibian independence.

6. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representativesof
Argentina, Bolivia, the Congo and Hungary in which they
requestto be invited to participate in the discussionof the
item on the agenda.In conformity with the usualpractice,I
propose,with the consentof the Council, to invite those
representatives
to participate in the discussion,without the
right to vote, in accordancewith the relevantprovisionsof
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules’ of
procedure.

11. Viet Nam hason many occasions,in thisforum and in
other international forums, made clear its position on the
question of Namibia. We have listened carefully to the
speeches
deliveredduring the pastthree days and are happy
to find absolute agreementamong the speakerson this
question.That agreementis not restrictedto the confinesof
this chamber; it reflects the agreementof the entire world.
Namibia has becomea great issueof consciencefor all
progressivehumanity becauseit has been languishingfor
morethan a century under the colonial yoke. Even after the
United Nations .assumeddirect responsibility for the
defenceof the Namibian people’s destiny 19 years ago
[General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
19661,that people continued to be mercilesslypersecuted
and massacredand their land is being turned into a newtype colony and a military baseof the apartheidregimeof
Pretoria.

At the invitation of thePresident,Mr. Mtiiz (Argentina),
Mrs. Carrasco(Bolivia), Mr. Gayama(Congo)andMr. Racz
(Hungary) took theplacesreservedforthemat the sideof the
Councilchamber.
7. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform membersof
the Council that I have receiveda letter dated 13Junefrom
the Chairman of the Special Committeeon the Situation
with regard to the Implementationof the Declaration on
the Granting of Independenceto Colonial Countriesand
Peoples,which readsas follows:
“On behalfof the SpecialCommitteeon the Situation
with regardto the Implementationof the Declaration on
the Granting of Independenceto Colonial Countriesand
Peoples,I have the honour to requestto be invited to
participatein the Council’sconsiderationof the situation
in Namibia, under the provisionsof rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.”

12. Many peoplebelievethat we werecloserto Namibian
independencein 1978 than we are in the 1980s.That is
obviously true. Pretoria blatantly flouts all United Nations
resolutionson Namibia by continuing its illegal occupation
of the Territory and by usingit as a springboard to attack
the neighbouringcountries,thus threateningthe peaceand
security of the region and of the world as well. After the
shamefulfailure of the so-calledTurnhalle government, the
apartheidregimeof Pretoria is now goingto install another
puppet “interim government” in Namibia. This act has
beendenouncedand condemnedthroughout the world.

In accordancewith pastpractice, I proposethat the Council
extend an invitation under rule 39of its provisional rulesof
procedureto the Chairman of the SpecialCommittee.
It wasso decided.

13. The deadlockis further aggravatedby the insistenceof
Pretoria and Washington on extraneousissues,suchas the
presenceof the Cuban volunteers in Angola. This hasdelinitely nothing to do with the granting of independenceto
Namibia, for the presenceof Cubanvolunteersin Angola is

8. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform membersof
the Council that I havereceivedfrom the representativesof
Burkina Faso,Egypt and Madagascara letter dated 12June
[S/17.%.Slwhich readsas follows:
2

a matter agreed upon between two sovereign States. Those
who cling to this pretext are doubtless practising the dirty
trick of holding Namibia’s independence to political ransom, thereby exposing themselves as the opponents of the
cause of the Namibian people.

17. The solidarity of the international community with
the peoples struggling for national liberation plays a very
important role. In their struggle against United States
aggression and occupation and for national salvation, the
Vietnamese people enjoyed the sympathy and support of
the American people and we ‘are truly grateful in this
respect. We think, therefore, that the solidarity ofthesouth
African and American peoples is at present particularly
vital to the struggle for independence of the Namibian
people. We are glad to note that the American people is now
taking into serious consideration the situation in Namibia
and putting more pressure on the United States Administration to put an end to its aid to the apartheidregime. The
recent adoption by an overwhelming majority oftheunited
States Congress of a resolution on economic sanctions
against South Africa eloquently reflects the will of the
majority of the American people. The international community, on the other hand, should be mobilized to render
maximum support and assistanceto the peoples ofNamibia
and the front-line States. The attainment of independence
for Namibia is the cause of all people of conscience the
world over.

14. It is believed that theunited States must bear responsibility for the intransigence of the apartheidregime of Pretoria. Billions of United States dollars in aid to Pretoria, the
so-called constructive engagement policy pursued by the
present United States Administration, which wasrelevantly
paraphrased by Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), as “destructive engagement”, have emboldened that ruthless regime in
its war of extermination against Namibia and its undeclared
wars against the’front-line States. It is worth noting that
while the United States acted so quickly and mercilessly in
declaring sanctions against the Sandinist Government of
Nicaragua, it publicly protected the reactionary regime of
South Africa by the brazen use of its veto against any
resolution calling for economic sanctions against Pretoria.
15. At this forum, many representatives have agreed that
now is the time for the independence of Namibia. What
should we do then? This question has been raised for the last
two decades. In 1983 Mr. Sam Nujoma declared before this
body that the question of Namibia demanded positive and
immediate action, not simple exhortations or hollow promises [24393/r meeting,para. Ill]. This holds true today. The
developments in Namibia constitute a flagrant challenge to
the conscience and pride of mankind-a tumour SO painful
that it demands urgently to be operated on. It is, therefore,
our duty as the people of the world to help these martyred
people free themselves from the yoke of tyranny and also, in
the process, to help remove the blot on our conscience.

18. The people and Government of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam, for their part, reaffirm their unrcservcd support for the people of Namibia in their struggle, including
armed struggle, under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole
legitimate representative. At the same time, we welcome the
goodwill on the part of SWAP0 in seeking a peaceful
settlement of the question. We are confident that sooner or
later the people of that land will be freed and will join the
international community as an independent State.
19. This important series of meetings, requested by the
Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April, will mark a
turning point in the search for the independence of Namibia. We are glad to be participating and would like to
thank you and the other members of the Council for giving
us the opportunity to do so. We are convinced that, with
your diplomatic skills and wisdom, you will lead the work
of the Council for this month to fruitful results.

16. The United Nations Council for Namibia has so far
done good work for the cause of the Namibian people; last
year it organized meaningful seminars on the occasion of
Namibia’s hundredth year under foreign occupation. In our
opinion, the United Nations Council for Namibia’truly lives
up to its role as the sole legal authority oftheTerritory. Now
that Pretoria is attempting to bypass the United Nations on
this question, our Organization, in particular the Security
Council, should exhaust all available measures to stop the
apartheid regime from attaining its goal. The question of
Namibia is not only a question of decolonization; it also
relates to the maintenance of peace and security. We urge
the Council to adopt effective measures, including mandatory sanctions, in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure the unconditional,
immediate and complete implementation of resolution 435
(1978), the sole legal basis for the solution of the Namibian
question. Any solution outside the framework of that resolution must be considered null and void. We fully support
the Secretary-General in his endeavours to initiate dialogue
conducive to the attainment of independence for Namibia
and call upon other members to do the same. We urge the
Council to work out a specific and concrete calendar for the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and to exert maximum political pressure upon South Africa and its
protectors.

20. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Seychelles. I invite her to take a place at the Council
table and to make her statement.
21. Mrs. GONTHIER (Seychelles): My delegation is very
plea: :d to see a fellow islander presiding. We are also
especially gratified, Sir, to seeyou display the special brand
of island feelings towards our brothers and sisters in Namibia.
22. I should like’also to pay tribute to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and to the representative of Thailand for
having seen the Council through-the trials and tribulations
of the month of May with grace and dignity,
23. Since this is the first time I have spoken before the
Council this year, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate all the new members and to welcome the
representative of the United.States.
3

24. I shall be brief. We all know what resolution 435
(1978) represents. We all know that the people of Namibia
still wait for resolution 435 (1978) to be implemented. The
majority of us also think that making Namibia’s liberation
contingent upon Cuban troop withdrawal from Angola is a
perfidious act.
25. However, in this charged atmosphere, the country
itself gets forgotten, the real Namibia that lies under all the
layers of argument and obfuscation. While debates continue here, there and everywhere, that suffering country
waits to be restored, not only so that onlookers can see it
more clearly, but so that it may rediscover itself. I repeat:
rediscover itself. If that is to happen-and it is the sincere
hope of the Republic of Seychelles that it will happen
soon-our
actions here, there and everywhere must speak
louder than our words.
26. When Governments sit and make policy regarding
Namibia, they should be reminded that policy affects
people. They should feel for the human suffering going on
in Namibia, understand clearly why and how the struggle is
taking place, and think of their own histories and how their
own Governments came into being. And yes, they should
have pity for all the bleeding and the tears, and resolve that
the Namibian people deserve to laugh and to smile so that
they may know the joy of our own lucky lives.
27. Mr. de KfiMOULARIA
(France) (interpretationfrom
French): It is a privilege for the Council during this difficult
month of June to see your country, Sir, occupying the
presidency. We are grateful to you for having been good
enough personally to place your experience and authority at
the service of the Council for this debate. I take advantage
of your presence here to recall the excellent relations
between Trinidad and Tobaga and my country. On a personal note, I would add that, as you know, I have often had
occasion to visit your country and your Gbvernment. I am
personally acquainted with your President, and wish particularly to convey my greetings to him as he is a former
representative to the United Nations. I recall here too that
Trinidadian society is an example of a successful multiracial society.
28. I ask you to convey to your predecessors, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand, my
delegation’s gratitude for the outstanding way in which they
conducted the proceedings of the Council in May.
29. A number of Ministers for Foreign Affairs are present
for these meetings, and their presence underscores the
importance of our work and the weight of the responsibilities we bear.
30. Finally, it is my pleasure to welcome our new COIleague in the Council, Mr. Vernon Walters. I knowalready,
for it is clear from his past record, that thanks to his human
qualities and his exceptional knowledge of foreign
languages-including
French-he will be a, partner who
will be listened to, not only because he represents the great
democracy of the United States, but because of his own
background: His experience of world affairs, both military
and diplomatic, will be valuable to us in our debates, His

knowledge of my country, where he lived for a long time, is
exceptionally thorough, and we recall that among his
heroes is General de Gaulle. He says he is neither shy nor
modest, but rather pragmatic. He is, therefore, open to all
ideas and is without prejudices. We are very happy to
welcome him.
31. France fully shares the concern of the non-aligned
countries, which, at their meeting held at New Delhi last
April, decided to ask the Security COUrd
Once
again
to
consider the question of Namibia. That concern, that frustration are particularly great for the African countries,
which are impatient to see Namibia achieve independence
at last.
32. It is known that France has taken an active part in the
efforts of the international community to make South
Africa live up to its obligations. I have no wish to go over
the past, since everyone here will remember it, but shall try
to refer only to the present situation.
33. The United Nations, particularly the Security Council, bears primary responsibility towards Namibia and its
people. There is a United Nations plan, which constitutes
the only acceptable basis for a final settlement of the question of Namibia, It is contained in Council resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978). Those resolutions form a coherent
whole and could rapidly be fully implemented. The difficulties of implementing the plan have been removed through
hard negotiations. As the Secretary-Genera1 reminds us in
his report, virtually all the pending questions concerning the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) have now been
resolved [S/17242, para. 451. All that remains to be settled is
the problem of the electoral system to be used in the elections to the constituent assembly.
34. In its resolution 539 (1983), the Council called upon
South Africa to communicate to the Secretary-General
forthwith its choice of the electoral system. My delegation
can only regret that such communication has not yet been
made. But, as we. all knoi, this is not the essential point.
Resolution 539 (1983) condemned, South Africa for its
obstruction of the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and rejected South Africa’s insistence on
linking the independence of Namibia to issues extraneous to
the implementation of the settltment plan. In his report; the
Secretary-General points out that the South African
Government persists in its intransigence and reaffirms the
unacceptable link between the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola[ibid.].Just: a few days ago [2583rd meeting], the
IVtSentatiVe
of South Africa repeated here his Government’s demands on that point,
35. France, which voted for resolution 538 (1983), has a
clear and consistent poiition on the s’ubject. Although it is
well known to everyone here, I hope that I may be’permitted
to recall it briefly, as follows,.Namibia’s accession to independence cannot be obstructed by extraneous considerations. Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (197g), which
bind all Member States of the United Nations, are sufficient
in themselves. They must be implemented unconciitionally

and without any preconditions. From the moment the
necessary conditions for the implementation of those resolutions had been met, the French Government took the
logical step of suspending, in December 1983, its participation in the work of the contact group, whose mandate in
effect was only to facilitate the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). However, France continues to regard itself
as being wholly concerned in !he matter, and intends to
continue its tireless efforts for Namibia’s accession to internationally recognized independence.

partners in the region. It is by making such gestures, which
are today more necessary than ever, that it will make possible the creation of the conditions required for the implementation of the United Nations settlement plan for Namibia.
40. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
41. Mr. MURARGY
(Mozambique): Mr. President,
allow me to begin by expressing my delegation’s deep gratitude to you and to the other members of the Council for
allowing me to participate in these meetings devoted to the
question of Namibia. I also wish, Sir, to add my voice to
previous speakers in congratulating you on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for the month of June.

36. The French Government therefore reacted without
waiting for the announcement by the South African
Government of its decision to set upan interim government
in Namibia. In a statement of 19 April [S/17123, annex], it
recalled its commitment to resolution 435 (1978) and stated
that it would regard as null and void the effects of any
initiative aimed at setting up an interim government in
Namibia. That decision by South Africa casts doubt on its
willingness to abide by agreements and will complicate even
further any move to bring about the rapid application of the
United Nations settlement pl!n.

42. In the same vein, I wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Thailand, for the wisdom and
skill with which he presided over the deliberations of the
Council during the month May.

37. The French delegation wishes to express its extreme
concern over the delays to Namibia’s accession to independence. The continuation of the conflict is causing suffering
to the peoples of the region, and above all to the NamibIaI
people, which continues to be stripped of its rights and to
which my delegation wishes to express its sympathy. I
should like to welcome to the debate Mr. Sam Nujoma, the
representative of the Namibian people. We are particularly
happy that the President of SWAP0 was able last week to
have talks with the French Prime Minister. I am also
pleased to be able to say that today the United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia is in Paris for talks in the course
of which there will be, in particular, an evaluation of my
country’s contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia. The prolongation of the conflict is also fraught
with danger for the stability of the countries of southern
Africa, and particularly the People’s Republic of Angola.
The signing in February 1984 of the Lusaka Agreement,
designed to guarantee the region’s stability and security,
was welcomed. Although there was some delay in its implementation, the Agreement made possible the disengagement of South Af’rican troops which had occupied the
southern part of Angola since August 1981. In the circumstances, one can only be profoundly concerned at the recent
action by South African forces in the north of Angola,
which once again threatens that country’s sovereignty and
introduces new obstacles to a peaceful settlement of the
regional problems.

43. My delegation is also pleased to see at the Council
table Mr. Sam Nujoma, the undisputed leader of the Namibian people.
44. The Council is meeting in response to a call made by
the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries
and by the Organization of African Unity (OAU), through
its Co-ordinating Committee for the Liberation of Africa.
Indeed, this meeting also responds to the call of the whole
international community, which has been awaiting with
impatience the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
45. In the two years sincethe Council last met on this
question,many eventshave taken placewhich have further
blocked the way towards solution of the question of Namibia. All thosehappeningshave lent greater importance
and urgency to the’current meetings.
46. I am addressingthe Council two daysafter the Central
Committee of the Frelimo [Frenre de LibertucaoMocambique]party held its first session
in 1985.Meetingjust before
the commemorationof the tenth anniversaryof the proclamation of the independenceof the People’sRepublic of
Mozambique, the Central Committeedevoted its attention
to the assessment
of the successes
aswell as the difficulties
experiencedin the courseof the decade.As everyonepresent knows, this sessionof the Central Committee is convened at a particularly delicate moment in our region,
characterizedby the intensifiedactsofaggressionand destabilization against our country and other countries.
Attempts to undermineour independence,sovereigntyand
territorial integrity are beingmadeby the imperialistforces
through armed bandits, the new form of mercenarismin
our region. The origin and the activities of thesearmed
bandits, their masters,supportersand their activities are
well known to the Council. This information isavailable in
the United Nations records,particularly thoseof the General Assemblyand the Security Council.

38. South Africa must understand that neither through
the use of force nor by ignoring United Nations resolutions
will it be possible to guarantee the stability of the region and
the security of each State. I stress that threats, destabilizing
actions and the use of force will do nothing to advance a
settlement of the Namibian question or of the problems of
southern Africa as a whole.
39. My delegation appeals once again to South Africa to
honour its obligations and, without any ambition for domination, to set its feet firmly on the path of dialogue with its
5

that in the event of failure by South Africa to comply with
the provisions of that resolution thesecurity Council would
meet immediately to determine the necessarysteps or measures to be taken in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.

47. There is much that could be said about the devastating
consequences of the acts of the armed bandits in my country. However, I did not come here for that purpose. When I
left home, I brought along a specific and well-defined mandate: to reaffirm my Government’s strong and continued
support for the legitimate demands of the people of Namibia-that is, to seeto the full and immediate implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

54. South Africa simply ignored the provisions of the
above-mentioned resolution. Indeed the Security Council
met many times after South Africa had refused to comply
with that resolution. However, the adoption of the measures envisaged in that resolution has been postponed from
session to session.

48. I came with a determination to join my voice with the
voices of those who vigorously, demand that justice and
freedom be restored in Namibia. I bring the solidarity of the
people of Mozambique to the people of Namibia in their
heroic struggle for full exercise of their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence.

55. As time went by, important changes, both at the international level and in the region, occurred in the 1970s. It is
worth while mentioning the collapse of the Portuguese
empire in southern Africa. The participation of these newly
independent States, as well as other independent States of
the region, in the efforts that led to the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), was decisive. The adoption of that resolution constituted a switch to the right direction. For the first
time in its long history, the question of Namibia enjoyed
consensus among the international community, including
South Africa. Following the adoption of that resolution,
SWAPO, the front-line States and the Non-Aligned Movement mobilized all their efforts with a view to implementing
it. Regrettably, during that period the South African regime
has moved from ignoring the resolutions of the General
Assembly and those of the Security Council to acting
against them. It has intensified its aggression against neighbouring States; it has attacked and occupied parts of the
territory of Angola.

49. After so many delegations have spoken so eloquently
or gone into details on the motives behind the nonimplementation of resolution 435 (1978) or set forth the
reasons why the people of Namibia continue to be under
subjugation and exploitation and are deprived of their inalienable right to self-determination and independence, one
would think there wasnothing elseto be said. That is not the
case.
50. While the brotherly people of Namibia are still under
the colonial yoke there will always be a need for a voice of
support and comfort in their heroic struggle.
51. The question of Namibia is one of the longest decolonization issues ever before the United Nations. What made
this question so difficult to solve? That is the key question.
We have answered the question in our statements before the
Council in the past. However, it is our belief that the truth
has to be told as many times as lies are brought out to falsify
realities,

56. The so-called linkage has come to be the name of the
newdilatory manoeuvres adopted by South Africa to block
the process leading to the independence of Namibia. Since
this is not the first time we are referring to this issue, I shall
just quote what the Minister for Foreign Affairs ofMozambique said when he addressed the Council on the question of
Namibia in May 1983:

52. South Africa’s involvement with Namibia dates back
to 1920, when, under the mandate system of the League of
Nations, it wasappointed to administer what until then had
been part of Germany’s African empire. The mandate system was modified into that of trusteeship by the United
Nations. When that occurred, South Africa categorically
refused to enter into a trusteeship agreement, using the
argument that its mandate had expired with the collapse of
the League of Nations, and claimed unrestricted sovereignty over the Territory of Namibia. I would just remind
the members of the Council that the country I represent and
the People’s Repubtic of Angola were then still so-called
provinces of Portugal. Indeed the whole southern African
region was under the colonial yoke, Colonial and racist
harmony was the dominant factor. The only reason
advanced by South Africa at the time for not leaving Namibia was that it wanted unrestricted sovereignty over the
Territory.

“When we adopted resolution 435 (1978) Cuban troops
were already in Angola. At that time, none of the permanent members or any Member of the United Nations
established any linkage between these two realities,
because we were all aware of the reason for the presence
of such forces in Angola.
...

“One might compare the talk about the withdrawal of
the Cuban troops from Angola with a demand for the
return of American troops to Washington at the time
when Hitler wasdecimating the European populations.”
[2443rdmeeting,paras. I19 and 122.j

53. In 1966 South Africa’s mandate over Namibia was
terminated by the General Assembly. Three years later that
decision was endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 269 (1969). A deadline was set for South Africa to
abandon the Territory of Namibia. Moreover, a strong
message was sent to South Africa by the Council, stating

57. My delegation wants to reiterate its strong rejection of
the so-called linkage. This policy is contrary to the spirit and
letter of resolution 435 (1978) and aims at depriving the
people of Namibia of immediate and full exercise of their
inalienable right to freedom, self-determination
and
independence.
6

58. If South Africa is really concerned with the withdrawal of the Cuban troops from Angola, why did it reject
the platform proposed by the Government of Angola? Why
did it send its commandos inside Angola to conduct sabotage against Angolan installations in Cabinda?

strators. Unless vigorous and responsible action is taken by
the Council, and by the United Nations as a whole, a
conflict with unforeseeable consequences is likely to break
out in the region.
63. Given the gravity of the situation in southern Africa,
particularly in Namibia, we demand that the Council
strongly pronounce itself against South Africa’s obstruction of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). We
demand that the Council vehemently condemn South
Africa for its decision to install the so-called interim government in Namibia and that it declare it null and void. We also
deem it fitting and necessarythat the Council stress, once
again, its categorical rejection of the linking of Namibia’s
independence to irrelevant and extraneous issues.We want
a message of unconditional support of hope and comfort to
be sent to the people of Namibia who have great expectations in regard to the outcome of the current series of
meeting of the Council. We take it for granted that the
Council will also reaffirm the legitimacy of the struggle of
the Namibian people against the illegal occupation of their
territory and that it will call upon all States to increase their
moral, diplomatic, material and military assistance to
SWAPO, the sole authentic representative of the people of
Namibia.

59. As far as Namibia is concerned, the only truth is that
South Africa still wants unrestricted sovereignty over the
Territory. All its acrobatics have been aimed at the perpetuation of its domination over Namibia. South Africa cannot, of course, openly state its intentions. The second half of
the twentieth century is marked by the ever growing anticolonial movement the world over. For this reason, even the
most racist, colonialist State in the world, as South Africa
has come to be, would not find it comfortable to make its
colonialist intentions known.
60. The recent decision by the South African Government
to set up the so-called interim government has the sole
purpose of securing covertly an unrestricted sovereignty
over Namibia. Were these manoeuvres to be successful,the
result would be the establishment in Namibia of a government conceived and produced by South Africa for South
Africa. In other words, it would be a government that is not
a government at all, for it would exclude the sole authentic
representative of Namibia, that is, SWAPO, and it would
have no control over the affairs of the Territory. In short, it
would be no more than a puppet government. Consequently Namibia would be a bantustan, and South Africa
would, of course, still have unrestricted rights to plunder the
invaluable resources of Namibia, and so would its allies. As
was the casewith the previous attempt-the so-called Turnhalle Alliance-this new attempt by the regime to further
block the independence of Namibia is doomed to fail and
collapse.

64. I would be remiss in my duties if I concluded my
statement without expressing my delegation’s deep gratitude and appreciation to the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in the search for an immediate solution in regard
to the question of Namibia. We sincerely commend him for
duly accomplishing the mandate given to him by the
Council.
65. I also cannot help associating myself with those who
have spoken before me in welcoming the intensified campaign of people all over the world, particularly here in the
United States and in a number of Western countries,
demanding that greater pressure through legislative and
other measures be exerted against racist South Africa in a
concerted action to bring the illegal occupation of Namibia
and the system of apartheidto an end.

61. There is consensus concerning the fact that the South
African Government would not be in a position clearly to
defy the decisions of the international community if it did
not enjoy the blessing and multiform support of certain
Member States which have interests not only in Namibia
but in the region as a whole. These interests were clearly and
eloquently made explicit in the statements of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba [2584th meeting] and of the
Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia [2583rd meeting] before this Council. We would
simply add that, whatever these interests might be, they will
be better served if a climate of peace and stability is established in southern Africa. The establishment of such a
climate in the region demands that Namibia be independent. It also demands that the acts of aggression and destabilization against Angola and Mozambique ‘be stopped.
Peace demands, in short, that the bloody war imposed upon
us be ended once and for ever. Furthermore, there can be no
peace in the region unless a democratic society based on
majority rule is established in South Africa, a society wherein all citizens, irrespective of colour of skin, race or religion, have equal accessto power and to all spheres of life.

66. The question of Namibia is again before the Council.
It is for this body to assume its responsibilities and ensure
the immediate and scrupulous implementation of its plan as
approved in resolution 435 (1978). The time has come for
the Council to adopt the measures deemed fitting, including
the institution of those provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter, to accelerate the liberation of the people of Namibia. This is the least the Council can do to avoid more
violence in the region.
67. In conclusion, I want to reaffirm our moral. nolitical.
diplomatic and material support for SWAPO,’ ihe sole;
authentic representative of the people of Namibia. We also
wish to reiterate our condemnation of the apartheidsystem
and the policy of bantustanization and reaffirm our moral,
political and diplomatic support for the African National
Congress of South Africa (ANC) in its struggle for an
undivided South Africa, a South Africa for all South
Africans.

62. The actions that have been carried out by the South
African regime are not conducive to peace. Indeed, it
repressesand massacres its own people. Although it claims
to reject violence, it kills peaceful and defenceless demon7

countries should strengthen the industrial base and military
capability of the apartheid regime while their monopolies
continue to plunder the natural resources of Namibia in
contravention of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council as well as the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice and Decree
No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia.2

68. A luta continua.
69. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make a statement,
70. Mr. DINKA (Ethiopia): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to express my sincere gratitude to you and the
other members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to participate in the debate on the Namibian question.
Allow me also to congratulate you on your assumption of
the high office of the presidency for this month and to
extend to you our very best and sincere wishes. We have no
doubt that your experience and diplomatic skill will signficantly contribute to the successful deliberations of the
Council. The delegation of Ethiopia is gratified at the fact
that the issue of Namibia’s independence is being debated at
this critical juncture in the history of the struggle of the
Namibian people under your presidency, as you represent a
country whose unswerving anti-colonial stand and panAfricanist intellectual tradition are well known to us.

75. It is the early realization of the existence of this unholy
symbiosis between the apartheid regime and the Western
countries which prompted the delegation of Ethiopia to
register its serious misgivings when the Western proposal
for the decolonization of Namibia wasfirst made public. In
this connection, the leader of the Ethiopian delegation at
the ninth special session of the General Assembly stated:
“The ultimate goal of the so-called Western plan is to
bestow recognition on South Africa, carve out Walvis
Bay and wrestmore concessions from SWAPO, contrary
to United Nations decisions and the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people.

71. Our appreciation also goes to the representative of
Thailand for the able and serene manner in which he guided
the deliberations of the Council during the month of May.

“We reject the Western plan, not simply because of the
identity of its authorship, but rather because far from
bringing peace it is a scheme engineered to undermine
and destroy the victories and achievements that have
been gained over the long years of bitter struggle against
colonial oppression and exploitation. It is clear that the
Western Five are not ready to use to the full extent the
influence and leverage they have in South Africa . . .“.j

72. The question of Namibia has been on the agenda of
the United Nations since its inception. The United Nations,
through all its major organs, has pronounced itself on
different aspects of the question ever since 1946. The very
first session of the General Assembly rejected South Africa’s request to incorporate Namibia into its territory. From
then on, the racist regime has been engaged in various
manoeuvres aimed at hoodwinking the international community. It will be recalled that it first claimed sovereignty
over Namibia by invoking the right of conquest. When that
position became untenable it reverted to yet other legal
fictions. The international community rejected all the ploys
successively presented by the Pretoria regime. Indeed, the
General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate over
Namibia in 1966 and a year later set up a United Nations
body to administer the Territory until independence. The
International Court of Justice, in its landmark advisory
opinion of 21 June 1971,’ ruled the continued presence of
South Africa in Namibia to be illegal.

76. Similarly, despite the general mood of optimism
which was engendered by the adoption of resolution 435
(1978), Ethiopia remained sceptical. We doubted both the
sincerity of the terrorist-apartheid regime and the readiness
of the Western Five to use the full range of their leverage to
ensure the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) as they
had promised. We sincerely regret that subsequent develop
ments have proved us right.
77. South Africa has not only torpedoed the United
Nations plan for the independence ofNamibia but also used
the intervening period to strengthen its grip over Namibia
by creating further illegal institutions and organizing
puppet political groups while continuing armed aggression
against independent African States. It embarked upon the
massive militarization of Namibia, the creation of tribal
armies, the unceasing military offensive and political repression against Namibians, as well as the conscription of Namibian youth in the armed forces of the racist regime,
contrary to General Assembly resolution 39/50 A of 12
December 1984. To add insult to injury, the Pretoria regime
announced on 18 April 1985 its intention to install a socalled interim administration at Windhoek in total disregard of Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978). The
net result hoped for by the racist Boers is the bantustanization of Namibia.

73. The Security Council on its part has considered the
question of Namibia on several occasions, and adopted
numerous decisions. Resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978),
which approve the United Nations plan for the Territory’s
independence, are only some of the latest, Yet, Namibia
remains under the illegal occupation of the racist-terrorist
regime of South Africa.
74. That Pretoria has been able to occupy Namibia this
long with impunity, in open defiance of the will of the
international community and in clear violation of international law is due to the fact that it is aided and abetted in its
intransigence by the Western countries, which, unfortunately and erroneously, continue to consider that citadel of
institutionalized racism and State terrorism not only as a
political and military ally but also as the bastion of “Western civilization”. It is not surprising, therefore, that those

78. The efforts of the international community towards
the peaceful decolonization of Namibia have been further
frustrated by the negative attitude and behaviour of the
8

Western Five, which have taken the responsibility offaci]itating the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). While
all of them continue to use their veto power in the Council
to shield the racist rkgime from enforcement measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
one of them, the United States, is engaged in direct attempts
at preventing the implementation of the plan by introducing
extraneous issues which are unrelated to the question of the
decolonization of Namibia and are designed solely to sub
vert the sovereign prerogatives of the People’s Republic of
Angola, on the one hand, while espousing the so-called
policy of constructive engagement, on the other. True, the
world has witnessed the ever-increasing array of tricks utilized by South Africa and its allies to delay the independence
of Namibia. It must be noted, however, that none of these
tricks can compare in its deviousness with the malicious
twins-linkage
and constructive engagement.

tion 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966. It must be made clear
in no uncertain terms that henceforth the United Nations
will be the sole forum for any negotiation regarding Namibia. It is also imperative that a time-frame be set during
which the Secretary-General will convene a meeting
between the parties concerned, namely, SWAP0 and the
colonial Power, South Africa, with a view to implementing
Council resolution 435 (1978), which remains the only legal
basis.
84. Furthermore, the Council should impose mandatory
sanctions against South Africa under the provisions of
Chapter VII. It is right and proper that those who fail to
heed the law should be brought to suffer its sanctions. We
hope that the Council will act promptly and decisively in
this regard, not only to accelerate the process of Namibian
independence, but also to redeem its own prestige and
credibility. At the same time, the Council must declare the
so-called interim administration in Namibia null and void
and any and all institutions established under it as unlawful.

79. It is gratifying to note that the stratagem known as the
policy of linkage between the decolonization of Namibia
and the withdrawal of Cuban internationalists from Angola
had been rejected by the Council in its resolution 539 (1983).
Indeed, the formal pronouncements of individual Governments and international organizations clearly show the
existence of a strong consensus rejecting the vicious concepts of linkage or parallelism as well as the policy of
constructive engagement.

85. The proposals just enumerated are, in our view, the
minimum the Council can espouse in the face of the racist
rbgime’s contemptuous defiance of the declared will of the
international community. Frankly, we do not believe that
one more toothless resolution would have any meaning for
an odious rkgime whose response to 22 earlier resolutions of
this Council is well known. The time has come for the
Council to stand up to Pretoria with the kind of courage
commensurate with the challenge.

80. The Secretary-General, who symbolizes the collective
will of the international community, has worked with
admirable consistency and perseverance to discharge his
mandate. His mission has not succeeded because of Pretoria’s intransigence and the encouragement the racists
receive from their Western allies.

86. As to the final victory of the forces of independence
and progress over the forces of racism, colonialism and
imperialism, we have no doubt. Under the banners of
SWAPO-their
vanguard organization and their sole legitimate representative-and
under the leadership of comrade
Sam Nujoma, one of the brightest stars in the African
firmament, the patriots of Namibia will triumph. There is
no doubt that the fate of the so-called interim administration in Namibia will be no better than that of its precursor in
another part of southern Africa, the internal settlement
dreamt up by Ian Smith. Nor will the secalled multi-party
conference in Namibia last longer than did the now defunct
Turnhalle Alliance.

81. We pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts and personal commitment to bring about the full
implementation of the decision of the Council. We salute
SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian
people, and the front-line States for their flexibility and
selfless dedication in support of the efforts of the international community and the Secretary-General. On the other
hand, Pretoria’s consistent policy of deceit, duplicity,
treachery and double-talk, as well as the machinations of
those States which through their action or inaction encourage the apar&idrCgime
to persist in its intransigence while
shielding it with their veto from any punitive measures,
deserve the most severe condemnation of the international
community.

87. In conclusion, I should like to take this opportunity
kindly to call upon the five Western countries, particularly
those with veto power, to join the rest of mankind in
isolating the racist regime and in imposing mandatory sanctions against it. While we demand that they desist from
holding the independence of Namibia hostage to the pecuniary interests of their multinational corporations, we also
call upon them to do what their own people-and, in some
cases, their own legislatures-are demanding. We hope that
they will carefully evaluate their interests in southern Africa
in both the short-term and the long-term perspectives. Inasmuch as Namibia’s independence is intimately linked with
the freedom and dignity of the rest of Africa, we urge them
to evaluate their relations with Africa on the one hand and
those with the racist rtgime on the other. We venture to
hope that this time the lofty ideals of justice will guide them
so that at the end of these deliberations we can say that we

82. My delegation is convinced that as long as the five
Western Powers continue to exhibit a lack of political will to
act the Pretoria rBgime will remain intransigent and there
will be no forward movement in the process of implementing the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. How then could the present impasse be broken to
pave the way for the accession to independence by Namibia?
83. It is the considered view of the delegation of Ethiopia
that the time has come for the United Nations to reassert
itself in the matter since it has the primary responsibility for
Namibia under the provisions of General Assembly resolu9

mibia’s independence-namely, racist South Africa’s
intransigenceand belligerent policies, which, moreover,
pose an economic and military threat to the front-line
States.

have been able to break the cycle of betrayal as regards
Namibia.
88. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Kenya. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement,

94. Kenya has eloquently stated on earlier occasionsand we wishto reiterate here now-that if Namibian independencedoesnot soon becomea reality the consequences
may be too frightful to contemplate. It is therefore the
solemnduty of the international community in general,and
of the Council in particular, to terminate South Africa’s
bizarre policy of violence, which contradicts the very basic
foundationsof peacein the region of southern Africa, and
to put an end to South Africa’s persistent and blatant
disregardof the inalienablerights oftheNamibian peopleto
independence.

89. Mr. KIILU (Kenya): I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for allowing my
country to participate in this important seriesof meetings
devoted to the considerationof the questionof Namibian
independence.I wish to expressto you personally, Sir, our
sincere congratulations on your assumptionof the presidency for this month. It isa matter ofgreat satisfactionto us
that a representativeof an active non-alignedand fellowCommonwealthcountry shouldbePresidentat a time when
the international community is onceagainaddressingitself
to the seriousand critical questionof great importance to
our continent of Africa and to the world at large.

95. There can be no gainsayingthe fact that the Namibian
questionis the Council’s direct responsibility. In this context my delegationwishesto recognize and pay tribute to
the efforts exerted by the Secretary-Generalin the matter,
and alsoto expressits appreciation to the United Nations
Councilfor Namibia and the GeneralAssembly.My delegation is very pleasedat the interest that hasbeen shown in
trying to solve the problem.

90. Our gratitude goesalso to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and to the representativeof Thailand for the efticient manner in which theypresidedover theproceedingsof
the Council during the month of May,
91. The presencehereof an impressivenumber of ministersfor foreign affairs and ministersfrom non-alignedcountries who have come to speak before the Council
underscoresthe importance that the Movement of NonAligned Countries attachesto this issue.It must be sufficiently clear by now that the delay of Namibian
independenceis becoming increasingly intolerable to all
membersof the international community, irrespectiveof
their political persuasionor statures.

96. It must be recalledwith concern that sincethe adoption of resolution435 (1978),the credibility of the Council
hasbeenundermined.The Council hasbeenutterly ineffective in implementingits own recommendations,although
weare constantly told that negotiationsoutsidethe framework of the United Nations are continually being held.
Issuesthat are extraneousto the United Nations plan have
beenraisedin thesenegotiationsand this hasonly servedto
prolong the illegaloccupation of Namibia by South Africa.
Certainly, thesedelays have squarelyfitted in South Africa’sdelaying and obstructive tactics. Let me reiterate once
again Kenya’s unwavering position that resolution 435
(1978)still remainsthe only legitimatebasisfor the independenceof Namibia, without any modification, qualification
or pre-conditions. It is, therefore, gratifying that a vast
majority of the Member States sharesthat view. Unfortunately, the racist South African regime,through obstructive
tacticsand cunning manouevresunder various guises,such
asthe creation of the so-calledMulti-Party Conferencehas
managedto torpedo all attempts to draft the constitution.
for independentNamibia. Thus, prospectsof independence
through the processof negotiation have become increasingly dim and frustrations more marked, The level of tension in the region has heightened,and one can envisage
greater bloodshedand difficulties in the days to come.

92. The current seriesof meetingsof the Council on the
question of Namibian independenceare taking place at a
time when the efforts of the international community to
explore and achievea peacefulsolution to that issueare at
an impasse.Today we are in the seventiethyear of South
Africa’s illegal military occupation of Namibia. It is the
nineteenthyear sincethe United Nations terminatedSouth
Africa’s Mandate over the Territory and assumeddirect
responsibility for it. Yet, despitenumerousresolutionsof
the Security Council and the GeneralAssemblycalling for
the withdrawal of the illegal occupying forces of South
Africa, the Namibian peoplecontinueto languishunder the
tyranny of foreign occupation by the racist regimeof South
Africa.
93. It is alsoimportant to recallthat this is the centenary
year of the heroic struggleof the Namibianpeoplefor their
national liberation. However, notwithstanding a long history of enormoussacrificesand bitter struggleby the Namibian people for their independence,which continuesto
elude them, hopesfor a negotiatedsettlementcontinue to
dwindle-not for lack of a political framework for negotiations, but becauseof the deliberateand obstructive efforts
of the South African regimeto block the peacefulpath to
freedom. Therefore, the immediatetask before the Council
is preciselyto addressitself to this impasse
and to formulate
possiblesolutions to overcome the one obstacle to Na-

97. Over the last 25 years,SWAP0 hasborne the burden
of fighting for the inalienablerights of the Namibianpeople
for freedomand independence.The United Nations recognition of SWAP0 as a national liberation movement and
the sole authentic representativeof the Namibian people
reflects the extensive support and confidence SWAP0
enjoysboth in Namibia and internationally. The Republic
of Kenya, its peopleand Government wholly identify themselveswith the heroic struggleof SWAP0 againstoppression and for the causeof the liberation of its land. We in
Kenya bitterly fought for our cherishedindependence.We
10

d the view that no nation, notwithstanding its size and
ver, should interfere in the affairs of Namibia. Therefore,
ish to reiterate that South Africa violates the basic ideas
i principles of the Charter of the United Nations. To this
I, we wish to make it unabiguously clear that: first, South
‘ica is in Namibia illegally; secondly, the primary responility for the administration of Namibia until the date of
ependence rests solely with the United Nations; thirdly,
exercise of its legal responsibility over Namibia, and
isistent with its Charter provisions to settle disputes by
tceful means, the United Nations adopted a plan for
mibia’s independence as approved by resolution 435
78); fourthly, South Africa has defied that resolution,
ulting in no progress being made towards its
plementation.
In light of what I have already stated, Kenya contends
.t what is at stake is the authority and the status of the
lited Nations itself in respect of Namibia. In the many
n-s that have elapsed, co-operation, flexibility and moderon have been urged on the part of SWAP0 and the
rican States. In this long process, many concessions have
:n made, and in return we have witnessed an even more
:ermined intransigence on the part of the racist regime.
we all are aware, racist South Africa has perpetuated its
ltal and illegal occupation of Namibia in flagrant violan of international law and international public opinion.
nilarly, South Africa has continued to defy all relevant
kited Nations resolutions, including those of the Security
mncil, and persists in its illegal violation of the Namibian
ople’s inalienable right to self-determination. Moreover,
’ its policy of destabilization of neighbouring States and
assive military buildups, which are far in excess of its
:itimate defence needs, the racist regime poses a threat to
ternational peace and security.
1. No one can deny the fact that South Africa has been
sibly emboldened in its continued intransigence on the
testion of Namibia by the wilful and flagrant violation by
‘me countries of the mandatory arms embargo under
solution 418 (1977). Such disregard and collaboration by
ese States with racist South Africa have only served to
,lster that country’s war-machine and put a damper on the
centive to resolve the Namibian question. It is, therefore,
operative for the Council to ensure scrupulous compliance
ith all its resolutions on Namibia in order to prevent any
ich violations. In addition, any links that mayexist,particarly in the realm of supply of arms, communications,
)mmerce and industry, nuclear technology and the per:ived strategic collaboration between States or transnaDnal corporations and the Pretoria regime should be
:vered in order to exert greater pressure on this evil regime
Id isolate it.
30. It is the strong conviction of my delegation that
nless and until all of us demonstrate by deeds, and not
iere words, that we are determined to defend what we
and for, then it would be futile to expect the obstinate
Irants in Pretoria to respect our resolutions, The racist
igime of South Africa continues with impunity to hinder
lamibia’s independence by violating United Nations resoItions. In order to arrest this situation, the international
smmunity must support all efforts geared towards total

liberation of Africa, This support could be demonstrated by
putting pressure on those Governments, firms and institutions that continue to sustain and support South Africa,
101. Kenya views certain recent developments which
impede Namibian independence with grave concern and
attaches considerabIe urgency to the resolution of the problem. The Council, therefore, must live up to its responsibility to ensure the implementation of its decisions forthwith.
Kenya will continue to extend its fullest support to the
people of Namibia in their valiant struggle to free themselves from the yoke of South Africa’s oppressive colonial
domination. We shall continue scrupulously to observe the
sanctions and boycotts against South Africa.
102. Kenya is also similarly committed to support the
United Nations Council for Namibia, in its capacity as the
legal Administering Authority until that Territory attains
independence in accordance with resolution 435 (1978). In
particular, we wish to underscore the importance for the
Namibian people of the Council’s activities aimed at protecting and preserving the natural resources of that Territory from plundering by the racist regime and other hungry
foreign Powers. Furthermore, Kenya believes that mobilization of international support for Namibia through a
worldwide campaign must be strongly maintained and
greatly intensified. In this connection, Kenya endorses the
approach by the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of the Comprehensive Programme of Assistance
to States which are neighbours of South Africa and Namibia. The Government of Kenya through bilateral arrangements has for long been rendering and continues to give
its assistance in various forms, as requested by the
Secretary-General.
103. I wish to reiterate that, in our view, there are only
three parties interested in the critical question before the
Security Council: the struggling and gallant people of Namibia, represented by SWAPO, their sole authentic representative; the oppressive racist regime of South Africa,
which continues to occupy Namibia in defiance of world
public opinion; and the international community, represented by the United N tions, which has direct legal responsibility for Namibia. It rs therefore not only paradoxica1, but
also unacceptable that although both SWAPO, as the sole
authentic representative of the Namibian people, and the
United Nations, acting as the conscience and the will of the
world community, have spared. no effort to achieve a peaceful settlement of the problem, the racist regime of South
Africa, illegally occupying Namibia, should instead have
intensified its arrogant brutality and defiance.
104. Perhaps it is pertinent to recall here, before I conclude my statement, that a few weeks ago the international
community observed the fortieth anniversary of the defeat
of nazism and fascism, which had inflicted untold suffering
and massive loss of life upon mankind. Mankind has vowed
never to allow or tolerate the rebirth of such heinous,
destructive ideologies. In a few months’ time the international community will commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. We are all
without exception looking forward, with unfathomed joy,
to that momentous occasion.

review of the record is tinged with a sense of disappointment, even a feeling of shame, that the ordeal of Namibia
should have lasted so long.

105. I believe it is right and proper amidst all this excitement and joy to pause and ask ourselves how the gallant
people of Namibia will view that occasion, when the United
Nations has miserably failed to deliver to them their welldeserved independence. Surely-and rightfully-the
Namibian people should be among us in our commemoration
of the birth of this august Organization, which for the last 19
years has borne the responsibility for the administration of
Namibia until it achieves independence.

112. It is seven years now since the Security Council
adopted resolution 435 (1978) and with it the United
Nations plan that was to lead to Namibia’s independence.
The plan, which was adopted after protracted negotiations,
was universally endorsed and it raised much hope among
the international community at the time. Namibia was
expected to attain its independence within a year of the
adoption of that plan. We were assured then by its primary
authors, the Western contact group, that if South Africa
failed to live up to its undertakings they would initiate
measures to ensure its compliance.

106. The international community should resolve now
that Namibia will be in its midst as an independent nation
long before it celebrates the forty-first anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. Meanwhile, the international community, through the Security Council, should
condemn in the strongest terms the so-called interim
government soon to be installed in Namibia by the Pretoria
regime, which is once again arrogantly defying the Council
and the international community.

113. Regrettably, resolution 435 (1978) and the United
Nations plan remain a dead letter. Each passing day further
unmasks South Africa’s clear intention not to abide by its
undertakings. The failure of the Council to give effect to its
own resolutions and decisions on the question ofNamibia is
a source of frustration and great concern for Africa and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. It should also be a
matter of concern for the contact group and the international community at large.

107. Kenya is convinced that the irresistable forces of
nationalism that dismantled the great colonial empires of
the past will prevail again in Namibia. We are convinced
that all possible and conceivable means to get South Africa
voluntarily out of Namibia have been examined and
exhausted without positive results. We have therefore come
to the conclusion that the international community,
through the Council, has only one option left: the imposition of sanctions against the racist Pretoria regime. We are
equally convinced that in order to be effective such sanctions should be both comprehensive and mandatory. Kenya
therefore calls upon the Council to assume and discharge its
primary responsibility under Chapter VII of the Charter.

114. Uganda has never had any illusions about South
Africa’s intentions and bad faith in the negotiations concerning this problem. Accordingly, we have consistently
advocated the option of punitive measures under the Charter of the United Nations against that regime. The authors
of the United Nations plan are in a position to ensure that
South Africa complies with the plan rather than opt for
blocking moves of the majority of the members of the
Council to impose those sanctions. South Africa’s failure to
abide by injunctions of the Council has not jolted them into
taking serious measures to bring it to book. Their attitude
gives the impression that they are comfortable with the
continued illegal occupation of Namibia.

108. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Planning and Economic Development of Uganda, Mr,
Sam Odaka. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
109. Mr. ODAKA (Uganda): Let me congratulate you
most warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for
the current month. This is a fitting tribute to you personally
and an honour for your great country with which Uganda
enjoys very cordial and friendly ties. We know that your
personal contribution to the struggle for liberation, and to
Namibia’s cause in particular, is a matter of public record.
We are therefore confident that the Council’s deliberations
under your guidance will be successful.

115. Whenever our delegations have called for effective
measures by the Council against South Africa, with a view
to ensuring Namibia’s independence, the response from the
apologists for the Pretoria regime has been that we should
be patient. We have always been advised that asettlement is
just around the corner, and that therefore we should give
more time in order that South Africa’s friends may persuade the regime to comply with the United Nations plan.

110. We also wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and to the representative of
Thailand for the brilliant way in which they conducted the
business of the Council last month.

116. It may be recalled that in January 1981 the Pretoria
regime affronted the international community when, on the
flimsiest of pretexts, it sabotaged the pre-implementation
talks in Geneva. Appropriately, almost all Member States
were incensed and demanded that the Council assert its
authority. The almost universal call for the imposition of
comprehensive and mandatory sanctions was blocked by a
triple veto in the Council by members of the Western contact group. They again called on all of us to be patient.

111. This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. The question of Namibia
remains one of the few critical issues.That is a sad commentary on what would otherwise be the commendable record
of the United Nations in the decolonization process. The
delay in achieving the independence of Namibia is all the
more agonizing because Namibia has been and remains the
responsibility solely of the United Nations. Thus, our

117. It is 17 years since South Africa’s Mandate over
Namibia was terminated, seven years since the adoption of
resolution 435 (1978) and two years since the Council last
12

deliberated on this problem, yet no settlement is in sight. It
is therefore absurd and unacceptable to accuse us of not
being patient enough on this matter.

embarked on yet more repressive measures. As if to reveal
its true colours, it marked the twentieth anniversary of the
Sharpeville massacre by another massive slaughter of its
indigenous citizens. It felt courageous enough flagrantly to
frustrate the United Nations plan and to launch more
aggressive actions against the front-line States. Constructive engagement has had the effect of undermining international efforts aimed at achieving Namibia’s independence.
Clearly, constructive engagement has hardly any achievement to its credit.

118. The patience of the international community is running out. The time has come for the Council to say to South
Africa that enough is enough. It is for this reason that at the
Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April last, the
Bureau called for the Security Council to meet and

123. Much progress in the direction of detailed procedures for implementation of resolution 435 (1978)had been
achieved by 1983.The only outstanding issue wasthechoice
of an electoral system, regarding which South Africa wasto
communicate its preference. The Secretary-General was
able to report then: “In fact we have never before been so
close to finality on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978)” [S/15943, paro. 24J South Africa has up to
now not declared its preference. It has deliberately sought to
evade the issue.

“act in a decisive manner in fulfilment of the direct
responsibility of the United Nations with regard to Namibia and to take urgent measures in order to ensure that
the United Nations plan as endorsed in resolution 435
(1978) is immediately and effectively implemented without modification
or preconditions”
[S/I7184 and
Corr. I para. 24.

119. I need not labour the details of South Africa’s brutal
acts in the Territory. On Monday [2583rd meeting] the
President of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma, whom I am very happy
to see and who has been in the struggle ever since we met in
Dar es Salaam in 1963, gave the Council a graphic picture of
the prevailing situation, That picture shows that the situation is very grave and continues to deteriorate. It is a picture
of the militarization of Namibia, repeated acts of aggression, intervention and subversion of the front-line States
and systematic attempts to destroy and discredit SWAPO.

124. Instead, extraneous issues, totally irrelevant to the
question of the independence of Namibia, have been
injected into the negotiations, I refer to the so-called linkage. I wish to reiterate Uganda’s condemnation and rejection of this linkage. To approve of the linkage would be to
sanction a basic denial of the sovereign right of the Government of Angola. It would also deny the right ofthe people of
Namibia to self-determination
and independence. One
would have expected everyone, and in particular the Western contact group, to pressure South Africa toabandon this
unreasonable position. It is to us a matter for regret that
inordinate pressures are instead being exerted on Angola
under various guises to implement parallelism and linkage.
It is unacceptable and immoral for a people’s freedom to be
traded and sacrificed at the altar of East-West rivalry.

120. There is evidence that South Africa is deliberately
and systematically obstructing the implementation of the
United Nations plan. The assembling of yet another group
of puppets under the umbrella of the so-called Multi-Party
Conference, with the declared intention of giving them fake
power in an imposed internal settlement, is a clear illustration of South Africa’s intentions-to
abandon the United
Nations plan. We welcome the rejection and condemnation
by the Council and the international community of this
move. The Security Council should now move to ensure
that South Africa’s intentions are thwarted.

125. We find it astonishing that those who expressconcern about the presence of Cuban troops in Angola fail to
condemn South Africa’s aggression against Angola and the
occupation of its territory. It is worth recalling that the
Cuban troops arrived in Angola well before resolution 435
(1978) was adopted. The fact that the resolution makes no
reference, directly or indirectly, to their presence is evidence
that the Council and indeed the authors of the United
Nations plan were clear in their minds right from the outset
that there was no linkage. Indeed, the Council in resolution
539 (1983) rejected linkage.

121. The question which a number of delegations have
rightly asked, and which I should like to repeat, is whether
South Africa’s military strength alone accounts for its
defiant and intransigent attitude. The answer is that that is
not the case. South Africa has been able to act with impunity because of the collaboration of certain Western countries. It has been defiant because of the protective shield
wilfully given to it against any effective punitive measures
being adopted by the Council.

126. South Africa therefore seized the issue of the presence of Cuban troops in Angola as a pretext to delay
implementation
of the United Nations plan. As we all
know, Angola has never posed any threat to South,Africa.
On the contrary, it is South Africa that has proved a constant threat to Angola and other front-line States. South
Africa continues to occupy parts of southern Angola. Its
commandos continue to unleash a campaign of terror on
the front-line States. The latest example of this campaign,
which would have involved destroying the oil installations
in northern Angola, was mercifully aborted. We know of
the military base in the Caprivi Strip being used as a staging-

122. Five years ago the United States Administration
embarked on the policy of constructive engagement. The
explanation then for South Africa’s being lavished with
carrots rather than being subjected to a stick was that the
independence of Namibia would be effected and South
Africa would introduce reforms there. The results of constructive engagement are before all of us to see. South
Africa viewed those measures as a certificate of respectability and acceptance. Within South Africa itself the regime
13

134. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Gora
Ebrahim, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

ground for military action against the front-line
“ate?
Clearly, South Africa intends to keep its hold on Nam!b’a
and use it as a springboard for acts of aggression aga’nst
neighbouring countries. We also categoricallY reject the
notion of a regional policeman.

135. Mr. EBRAHIM:

127. Yet another dangerous form of linkage is being introduced in the scenario for Namibia’s independence bY South
Africa, with the full complicity of its allies. On Monday
[2583rd me&g] the racist representative had no shame In
echoing his Prime Minister, saying that Namibia’s indePendefice would be linked with developments in neighbouring
countries, He even had the audacity to question whether
some of them had exercised their right to selfdetermination. It is very well known that South Africa has
set up and armed groups in neighbouring countries for the
sole purpose of destabilizing them. Very often South Africa
mounts military actions under the camouflage of those
groups. This must not be countenanced.

Mr. President, allow me at the

outset to convey the gratitude of the Pan Africanist Con-

gressof Azania (PAC), the custodianof the genuineaspirations of the oppressedand dispossessed
peopleof Azania, to
you and to the other membersof the Security Council for
extending to us the opportunity to speakin this important
debate. May we alsoavail ourselvesof this opporttinity to
congratulate you on your assumptionof the presidencyof
the Council for the month of June and on the commitment
of your country to the causeof liberation, freedom and
justice. Your country’s support for the just and legitimate
strugglesof the Azanian and Namibian peoplesis highly
appreciatedby our people,and we know that it stemsfrom
deepcommitment and historical ties.

128. Namibia is a unique responsibility of the U.nited
Nations. The United Nations must therefore play a CentEd
role. We are aware of many efforts by other parties to
facilitate a solution. We in Africa are grateful for those
efforts. While we are grateful, they should support and not
supplant the central role of the United Nations. It is irnperative that the United Nations play that central role.

136. More than two decadesago the decolonization struggleon the African continent beganto gain momentumwith
the independenceof Ghana. Over the past two decadesthe
boundary of independentAfrica progressivelyand irreversibly expanded and in 1980reachedthe very last bastion of
Fascist colonialism on the African continent. Since the
independenceof Zimbabwe in April 1980the focus of liberation strugglehasbecomeNamibia and Azania. Although
Azania and Namibia constitute two Territories, the enemy
is one, namely, theminority racist rkgimeof apartheidSouth
Africa.

129. South Africa’s actions constitute a breach of peace.
South Africa is a threat to international peace and security
and it commits acts of aggression which all fall within the
purview of Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Council has a duty to see that its resolutions are complied with. If South Africa does not implement resolution 435
(1978), it should impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII.

137. It is almost two decadessincethe international community, acting through the United Nations, unanimously
terminated apartheidsouth Africa’s Mandate over Namibia
and establishedthe Council for Namibia to lead the Territory to genuineindependence.Yet almost two decadeslater
apartheid South Africa still continuesto occupy Namibia
illegally.

130. I wish to express our gratitude to our SecretaryGeneral, who has exerted great efforts in search of a solution. All Member States should give him the necessary
support
in implementing his mandate.

138. In 1978the Council unanimously adoptedresolution
435 (1978), which clearly spelledout a principled plan for
leading the Territory to genuine independence,and yet
seven years later there are no firm indications that the
colonial rulersof upartheidsouth Africa either areprepared
to or wish to implementthe provisions of that resolution.
On the contrary, the rigime hasannouncedthat on 17June
it is installing a puppet administration in Namibia, in blatant violation of relevant United Nations resolutions,and in
particular Council resolution 435 (1978).

131. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Uganda’s support
for and solidarity with SWAPO, the sole and authentic
representative of the Namibian people in their struggle. me
road may be long and rough, but, considering the history of
liberation, we are confident that Namibia will soon & free
and independent.
132. I am particularly confident because when I addressed
the Council 21 years ago, in 1964, Angola and Mozambique
were not independent. They are now with us, and I was
happy to hear the representative of Mozambique address
the Council this evening. A number of African countries
that were not independent then are now with us, and I
should like to assure the President of SWAP0 and the
people of Namibia that we support them in their struggle,as
we have all along. We want to thank all those who have
supported them and who have supported Africa in its
struggle.

139. Certain facts in this whole scenarioare quite glaring.
First, the South African racist regimeis bent on defying or
ignoring international calls and appealsto put an end to its
illegal occupation of Namibia and its apartheid policiesand
practices in South Africa. It has,moreover, becomeintransigent,as well asmore brutal and aggressive.Secondly, the
racist rigime haspublicly declared, evenbefore this.forum,
that it considersitself a “regional Power” in this part of
Africa, the consequenceof that being that the racist rtgime
will “arrange” the affairs of the region to its specifications
and those of its supporters.

133. We are confident. Let us adopt a resolution that will
give them hope,
14

140. These facts are well known. However, there is ,a
tendency in some quarters to examine truthfully what factors have led to the r6gime’s becoming intransigent and
bellicose in the region. What or who has emboldened it
publicly to declare itself the gendarme of the region? The
truth is that the South African regime has received and is
continuing to receive overt and tacit encouragement to
adopt these belligerent and bellicose postures.

some Western and other countries to impose mandatory
and comprehensive sanctions against the racist minority
rCgime has emboldened it to defy the international community. Thus the accusing finger must be pointed at those who
overtly or tacitly support the rCgime by ensuring it that they,
individually or collectively, will oppose all moves to impose
sanctions against the rigime.
145. Some even attempt to justify their opposition to the
imposition of comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions under the lame excusethat such a move would hurt the
oppressed more than the oppressor. A keen observer would
note that it is the racist rCgime and its selected stooges that
are engage in panic trips through Western and other capitals to plead for the welfare of the oppressed. And yet when
the oppressed and exploited African workers demand union
rights and a fair wage inside apartheid South Africa they are
answered with live bullets, A pathetic member of the racist
rCgime recently claimed that moves in the United States
House of Representatives to impose selected sanctions
would htirt so-called illegal workers from neighbouring
countries, thereby implying that apartheid South Africa is
acting magnanimously in providing jobs. However, what he
failed to honestly state is that the apartheid rulers, through
their so-called new constitution regarded and paraded as a
“step in the right direction” in some circles, have declared
all indigenous Africans, comprising 72 per cent of the total
population, as foreigners in the land of their ancestors. He
also failed honestly to state that Africans are daily arrested
and sentenced for being illegal immigrants in what is said to
be “white” South Africa, comprising 87.3 per cent of the
total land areas of occupied Azania. He also failed honestly
to state that his Government regards such creations as the
Transkei, the Ciskei, etc. as “neighbouring States”.

141. PAC has consistently maintained that the sole cause
of all the problems in southern Africa is the policies and
practices of the uyurtheidrtgime of South Africa. This is the
crux of the problem. Consequently, if there is to be a viable
strategy to resolve the problem in southern Africa, this
objective truth must be acknowledged. It is the peoples of
Azania, Namibia and the region as a whole that need protection from the universally discredited policies pursued by
the minority racist rCgime. It is the peoples of Azania,
Namibia and the region that are thevictims of brutal Fascist
terror unleashed by the rtgime to perpetuate its inhuman
system and repugnant philosophy. It is the peoples of Azania, Namibia and Angola that have their territories usurped
and illegally colonized by the Fascist minority rigime. Yet
certain Western circles, in particular the Reagan Administration, would like the world to believe that it is the illegal,
Fascist, aggressive, intransigent and colonial rtgime ,of
apartheid South Africa that needs protection and/or
guarantees.
142. We began our submission with a categorical statement that in the view of PAC the racist rCgime had assumed
this arrogant and intransigent position, as well as resort to
aggression in the region, precisely because of the overt and
tacit support it received-and continues to receive-from
certain Western quarters, in particular the United States,
the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany.
PAC would like to elaborate on this.

146. The ever-growing demand by the international community for strong measures against the racist rbgime, especially the imposition of mandatory comprehensive
economic sanctions against the rkgime, has sent a wave of
panic in the ruling and exploiting circles and not within the
ranks of the oppressed and exploited. However, PAC
would like further to illustrate that theambiguous positions
deliberately taken by some Western countries have directly
contributed to the racists assuming both an intransigent and
an aggressive posture. Almost a year ago the racist Pieter
Botha visited several Western European capitals and the
Vatican. It was said that in some capitals the visit was
private. It will be recalled that the Organization of African
Unity and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
pleaded with those countries and the Holy See to cancel the
visit. The plea went unheeded. In fact, some of those countries told us that Botha was invited so as to be told that the
authorities in those countries were opposed to apartheid.

143. We in the liberation movement have found both
hypocritical and frustrating the positions adopted by some
Western and other countries when it comes to dealing
effectively with the racist rbgime of South Africa. These
countries claim that they abhor apartheid and therefore are
opposed to it. In the same breath they oppose, even more
strongly, any call for the imposition of mandatory comprehensive economic sanctions against the rtgime, as provided
for under Chapter VII of the Charter OftheUnitedNations,
as well as the only viable method of struggle to which the
peoples of Azania and Namibia were compelled to resort,
namely, armed struggle. These countries oppose apartheid,
oppose imposition of sanctions against the racist rCgime
and oppose the legitimate resort by the oppressed and
dispossessed people to armed struggle to realize their inalienable right to selfdetermination. If one opposes all
three, as many Western and other countries do, what message can such a position convey to the racist rCgime? It can
only encourage it. No criminal can feel inhibited if he or she
is told that we are against his or her criminal acts but at the
same time is also told that we are opposed to meting out any
punishment to him or her.

147. Our struggling people paid dearly and heavily for this
supposed Western diplomatic exerciseof calling an inter’national political skunk simply to tell it that it stinks. Soon
after returning from these Western capitals and thevatican,
Botha and his co-conspirators imposed a so-called new
constitution which, in essence, moved the country from
institutionalized apartheid to constitutionalized apartheid,
and embarked on yet another massacre of our oppressed,

144. PAC firmly believes that the Reagan Administration’s policy of constructive engagement and the refusal by
15

diseifranchised
and dispossessed people. According
to the
statistics released by the rigime itself, it killed moresAzanians in the first five months ofthis year than it did dur’,n! the
whole of 1984. Thus it is abundantly clear that the vlslts to
the Western capitals and the Holy See did not. have a
tempering or educating effect on Pieter Botha and llIs e?tourage but emboldened him to intensify his repression
Internally, become more intransigent over Namibia’s
i+ndepcndence and more aggressive against the front-line
and
neighbouring States.
148. Moreover, it will be recalled that this year marks the
fortieth anniversary of the defeat of nazism in Europe. It
should also be recalled that the leading members
Of the
ruling National
Party of apartheid South Africa
weeTe
interned during the Second World War for pro-N=1
actlv*ties. Although 40 years after the search for Nazi criminals
continues, those very countries engaged in these searches
are conniving with the self-declared Fascists in Warfhefd
South Africa. Nazism was eliminated in Europe
not at a
round-table conference or by rhetorical condemnation
of
the evil ideology, but on the battIefie]d with the sacrifices of
miltions of patriots.
149. Despite the overt and tacit support the rkgime
received and continues to receive,it is in a political quagmjre. Today in oparrheidSouth Africa the regime has been
compelled to resort to the gun to perpetuateits oppression
and colonial occupation. Membersof the Council will no
doubt agree with us that no regimelikesto resort to its last
weapon, the gun, unlessit hasno other option.

mandatory economic sanctionsagainst the racist rtgime.
Failure on their part to take this principled external course
would only delay, but not prevent, the eventual liberation of
Azania and Namibia. Today, the eyes of the oppressed,
dispossessed
and colonized peoplesof Azania and Namibia
are focusedon the Council and its deliberations,and those
peoplesare waiting to seewhether this important body will
truthfully carry out its responsibility or be once more inhibited by the sectarian interests of some of its Western
members.The racist rkgime hasalways stood condemned
beforethe eyesof the African people.After this debate,and
particularly if the Council should fail to invoke the provisionsof Chapter VII of the Charter, those responsiblefor
preventing the adoption of sanctions, a measure long
overdue, will also stand condemned.
153. In conclusion, we of PAC would like to leave those
who are opposedto the imposition of sanctionson the lame
and unfounded grounds that it would hurt the oppressed
morethan the oppressorwith the following thought: Would
they have opposedthe abolition of the abominableinstitution of slavery on the grounds that it would lead to unemployment among the liberated slaves?
154. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Bolivia. I invite her to take a place at the Council
table and to make her statement.
155. Mrs. CARRASCO (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish):It is a pleasurefor me to seeyou, Sir, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago, assumethe
presidencyof the Council.

150. PAC has consistentlymaintainedthat the struggle of
the Azanian and Namibian peoplesis one because the
enemy is the same. Moreover PAC, sinceits inception, has
consistently maintained that the struggle in Azania and
Namibia is for self-determinationand national liberation.
Self-determination is the primary and basichuman right. It
is the starting point of all other rightsand this fundamental
right should under no circumstancesbe compromised for
expediency’s sake or cold-war rhetoric.

156. I shouldalso like to expressmy appreciation to your
predecessor,the representativeof Thailand, for the manner
in which he dischargedhis important responsibilitieslast
month.
157. We all thought we had seena glimmerof hope when
the Council adopted resolution 435 (1978).Yet,, despitethe
efforts of the international community, we are gathered
here once again to deal with one more refusal by the
Government of South Africa to fulfil the mandate of that
resolution-in order words, to give Namibia its independence by withdrawal of all South African troops and the
holding of free electionsunder United Nations supervision.

15I. The Azanian and Namibianpeoplesare demanding
what isjust: the inalienableright to self-determination. This
demand is neither negotiablenor can it be compromised.
Moreover, whilst our people would like to realize our
national liberation peacefully, we are equally aware that
refusal by some key Westerncountriesto impose comprehensive mandatory economic sanctionsagainst the racist
rigime demands that we apply the most viable method of
struggle to realize our just demands.Liberation is never
given by the oppressor; it must be wrested,if need be, by
waging an armed struggle.

158. Many actions have been and are being taken, by
South Africa in its eagerness
to delay the processof independence.My Government hascondemnedall thoseactionsin
a timely fashion, along with the attempts made to create a
link betweenmattersunrelated to the problem and to make
their solution a precondition for implemen$ationof the
resolution. We do soagain, most energetically, today aswe
reject the attempts of the South African rkgime to impose
what hascometo be calledan internal solution in Namibia.

152. We are confident that in the final analysis the peoples
of Namibia and Azania, as well asthe people of occupied
Palestine, will triumph. About this, we have no doubt+
What is in doubt is what role the Westernand other countries that have thus far cushionedthe racist rigime will be
willing to play to ensurea speedyrealization of our respective liberation. If those countriesaresincerein their opposition to and abhorrence of apartheid,then they mus. act
concretely, now, by immediatelyimposingcomprehensive

159. In like manner, my Government rejectsthe so-called
Multi-Party Conferenceon the groundsthat it isa unilateral
and illegal measuredesignedto maintain South Africa’s
control and illegal domination over the Territory of Namibia.
16

160. It is important to mention the declaration adopted by
the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April last [see
S/l7184 and Corr.1, annex], which condemns and rejects
those unilateral actions by the Pretoria rCgime and asks the
Security Council immediately to adopt whatever measures
it deems appropriate to ensure that the Government of
South Africa complies with the provisions of its resolutions,
a stand that we fully support.

other representatives here who expressed kind words to me
on my taking my place in this Council for the first time.
166. It is a matter of some regret for me that some of the
representatives here have deliberately and falsely represented the policies of my country for propagandistic purposes. The United States yieldS to no one in its support of
Namibian independence and that country’s speedy access to
freedom.
167. My country, which first expressed the concept of
self-determination of peoples, has fought two great wars
this century against tyranny. It has annexed no territory and
has enslaved no one. My country was anti-colonial long
before it was fashionable to be so.

161. Furthermore, the Secretary-General recognizes in
his report that the prevailing difficulties have been compounded and been given a new dimension by the recent
decision of South Africa to establish an interim government
in Namibia, and he considers it most important that the
Pretoria Government carefully reconsider the implications
of its decision and desist from any actions which would
contravene the relevant decisions taken by the Council
[S/17242, para. 471. This means that the international community must support the Secretary-General in his efforts to
speed up the process that will lead to the independence of a
people subjugated by a colonialist rkgime.

168. Countries which crush opposition in their owncountry are scarcely qualified to judge the functioning of democracy. The Reagan Administratioh, whether people like it or
not, is the Government of the United States, chosen freely
by the American people in a free election.

162. All these delaying tactics are a way of defying the
international community, and it is urgent that the Council,
with the mandate entrusted to it under the Charter of the
United Nations, act rapidly to reject these illegal measures
and to demand the immediate and unconditional implementation of its resolutions. If not, we will be setting a seal
of approval on the policies of intimidation that the rtgime in
power is carrying out not only against the inhabitants of the
Territory of Namibia, but also by bringing pressure to bear
against neighbouring States.

169. I must say that it was curious for me to hear one
representative attack my country in this respect. I hope that
the Vietnamese delegate’s sympathy for countries occupied
by foreign Powers extends to the neighbouring people of
Cambodia. I was particularly interested in his attempt to
interpret the functioning of American democracy, since he
represents a Government that has never tolerated any opposition. It might be better if he left the interpretation of the
functioning of a free democracy to those who tolerate and,
therefore, understand an opposition.

163. In conclusion, may I reiterate, on behalf of the
Government and people of Bolivia, our support for the just
cause of the valiant people of Namibia, under the leadership
of SWAPO, so that they may exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence with complete enjoyment
of their territorial integrity, including Walvis Bay.

The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

NOTES
’ Legal Consequences for States of the Confinued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (Soufh West Africa) norwirhslanding
Security Council
resolution 276 (1970), Advisor)1 Opinion, /.C.J. Repor&
1971, p. 16.

164. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right of
reply.

2 Decree
No. I for the Protection
of the Natural
Resources
of‘ Namibia,
enacted
by the United
Nations
Council
for Namibia
on 27
September
1974 (Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty$$h
Session, Supplenwnl
No. 24 (A/35/24)),
vol. I, annex
II.

165. Mr. WALTERS
(United States of America): Mr.
President, I should like at the outset to thank you and the

’ Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth
Plenary Meerings, 2nd meeting,
paras,
86 and 87.

17

Special

Session.
