S/2021/159

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 15 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs; Her Excellency Ms. Heidi Grau, Special Representative of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office; and His Excellency
Mr. Halit Çevik, Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Special Monitoring Mission, as well as the statements delivered by the
representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger,
Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “Letter dated 13 April
2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/264)” convened
on Thursday, 11 February 2021. Statements were also delivered by His Excellency
Mr. Leonid Kravchuk, Head of the Delegation of Ukraine to the Trilateral Contact
Group, and by the representative of Germany.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

21-02351 (E) 220221 220321

*2102351*

S/2021/159

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo
I last briefed the Security Council on the situation in Ukraine nearly one year
ago, on 18 February 2020 (see S/PV.8726). At that time, I and many in the Council
expressed cautious optimism about the renewed peace efforts in eastern Ukraine
following the 9 December 2019 Normandy format summit.
The conclusions the leaders of France, Germany, the Russian Federation
and Ukraine endorsed in Paris outlined a series of steps to stabilize the situation
on the ground, including through confidence-building measures and a sustained
ceasefire. The leaders also agreed to support efforts, both in the Normandy Four
and the Trilateral Contact Group, to make progress on the key security and political
provisions of the Minsk agreements.
The Trilateral Contact Group agreed to an indefinite ceasefire, which came
into force on 27 July 2020. The Secretary-General welcomed this development, which
was consistent with his earlier appeal for a global ceasefire. Since then, the United
Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine has reported a significant
decrease in civilian casualties from exchange of fire.
Another encouraging development is the release and exchange of conflictrelated detainees. These are welcome developments. But, as we have seen in recent
weeks, without progress on the related security and political tracks, the overall
situation remains fragile. Indeed, despite numerous pledges, the sides have made
little significant progress on implementing the other agreed political and security
provisions. And while there is relative calm, the humanitarian situation has
not improved.
On the contrary, the coronavirus-disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
compounded the difficult socioeconomic conditions of civilians in conflict-affected
areas, including through the further tightening of already severe restrictions on the
freedom of movement across the contact line.
It has also worsened access-related issues for the United Nations, as well
as shortages of medicine, equipment and medical personnel, particularly in nongovernment-controlled areas. Over 3.4 million people are still in need of sustained
humanitarian assistance. More than half of those in need are women, and 40 per cent
are elderly. The United Nations and our partners are particularly concerned about
vulnerable groups living along the contact line.
Almost 10 months after the contact line was closed to contain the spread
of COVID-19, the conﬂict-affected population continues to pay a heavy price.
Pensioners residing in areas beyond Government control and registered as internally
displaced persons face worsened economic conditions and added health risks. Since
March 2020, they have been unable to retrieve their Government pensions.
Before the onset of COVID-19, people crossed the contact line an average of
1.2 million times each month, for social, health and other services and to maintain
family ties. Currently, only two of the five entry/exit crossing points have been
partially reopened. As a result, the average monthly crossings have dropped to
only 36,000.
In a positive development, two centres providing a wide range of services
opened on the Government-controlled side of the contact line, with more expected
to open at all crossing points this year.
2/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Despite the ceasefire, periodic shelling and small-arms fire continue to
damage or destroy homes, hospitals, schools, roads and water systems. In 2020,
around 60 incidents affected the supply of clean water and sanitation in eastern
Ukraine. Mines and unexploded ordinance continue to claim lives.
Humanitarian access remains a significant challenge for the United Nations
and other international humanitarian actors operating across the contact line. On the
Government-controlled side, reinstating expedited procedures for the clearance of
imported COVID-19-related humanitarian supplies is critical.
In non-Government-controlled areas, humanitarian access has been limited
since 2015, and has been severely restricted since the advent of COVID-19. The
United Nations Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator and the team on
the ground are working to resolve these issues to enable the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the those in need.
We urge all actors with influence to help lift undue restrictions on the freedom
of movement across the contact line and secure the opening of additional exit and
entry crossing points.
More than 120 humanitarian partners aim to assist 1.9 million people under
the new humanitarian response plan, which prioritizes life-saving assistance, basic
services and protection needs. The United Nations seeks $168 million to provide
help to all areas in need.
The United Nations is actively engaged in a range of other critical areas
through the work of the United Nations country team on the ground. This includes
providing medicine and personal protective equipment and sharing expertise with
medical professionals dealing with the onslaught of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Later this month, Ukraine should receive the first delivery of vaccines from the
COVAX facility.
Furthermore, the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine continues its critical protection, monitoring, reporting and advocacy work
on both sides of the contact line. The United Nations is also working with women and
youth civil-society leaders engaged in local peace and dialogue initiatives to promote
national unity. Critical work with more than 1 million people internally displaced as
a result of the conflict also continues. This is particularly important in the light of
the increased socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 on the most vulnerable.
Guided by the Government of Ukraine-United Nations partnership framework
for 2018-2022 and the sustainable peace and development agenda, the United
Nations in Ukraine will continue to support efforts to strengthen social cohesion
and recovery, with a focus on eastern Ukraine.
Until a sustainable political solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine is
found, the situation on the ground will remain fragile. The fact that the ceasefire
has largely held up and that discussions continue in the established formats is no
reason for complacency. Neither is it a substitute for meaningful progress. The risk
of backsliding is real if negotiations become deadlocked.
We therefore are deeply concerned by the increase in security incidents in
several hotspots along the contact line in recent months. This dangerous trend needs
to be quickly reversed.
On 17 February 2015, the Council endorsed, in resolution 2202 (2015), the
package of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. As we have
said before, the package of measures”, together with the Minsk protocol and the
Minsk memorandum, remains the only agreed framework for a negotiated, peaceful
settlement of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
21-023513/40

S/2021/159

The Secretary-General has consistently expressed the strong backing of the
United Nations for the lead role of the Normandy Four and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)-facilitated Trilateral Contact Group in
finding a peaceful settlement to the conflict. Today I reiterate our support for these
mechanisms.
The Council will hear shortly from the Special Representative in Ukraine
of the OSCE’s Chairperson-in-Office, Ambassador Heidi Grau, on the latest
discussions in the Trilateral Contact Group, as well as from the Chief Monitor of
the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission, Ambassador Halit Çevik, on the overall
security situation on the ground. It is essential that we support their critical efforts.
Importantly, the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission should have safe and secure
access throughout Ukraine in order to fully implement its mandate.
Ukraine will mark this year the thirtieth anniversary of its independence. We
reiterate our full support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
As the Secretary-General has consistently affirmed, the United Nations stands
with the people of Ukraine in their search for sustainable peace.

4/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex II
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office,
Heidi Grau
I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to provide the Security
Council with an update on the work of the Trilateral Contact Group.
Considerable developments have occurred since my last report to the Security
Council, in February 2020 (see S/PV.8726).
Travel restrictions imposed after the onset of the coronavirus-disease
pandemic forced us to hold our biweekly Trilateral Contact Group meetings by
video-teleconference from late March. Such restrictions have also made it much
more difficult for Ukrainians to meet relatives on the other side of the contact line.
The Trilateral Contact Group continued its efforts towards the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, in general, and the 2019 Normandy
summit tasks, in particular.
Where do we stand today? On the positive side, with regard to the release and
exchange of conflict-related detainees following the principle “all for all”, another
step was taken in April, when 34 prisoners were released from detention. However,
negotiations later slowed down, with participants accusing each other of failing to
honour their commitments. I very much hope that this year will allow us to move
forward on this vital humanitarian issue.
On another Normandy task — the opening of two additional checkpoints
along the contact line — the participants committed to the parallel opening of two
checkpoints in the Luhansk region by 10 November 2020. After years of relative
isolation, this step would have helped to facilitate people-to–people contacts and
to provide relief, especially to elderly citizens unable to collect their pensions on
Government-controlled territory. Unfortunately, three months after their scheduled
opening, both checkpoints remain unilaterally closed, while negotiations on technical
details are ongoing. And yet I remain optimistic that these questions can be solved
and the checkpoints be opened soon.
The most important step last year was the Trilateral Contact Group agreement
of 22 July on additional measures to stabilize the ceasefire. It brought long-awaited
relief to people on both sides of the contact line. While we have been observing
a worrisome trend towards more ceasefire violations in recent weeks, we must
acknowledge that the number of ceasefire violations observed by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission is still significantly
lower than in the first half of last year.
Not enough progress has been achieved with regard to disengagement
and demining. While participants identified 19 new demining areas and four
disengagement zones in the course of last summer, implementation was made
conditional on indirectly related political issues by some participants of the Trilateral
Contact Group.
It is a source of great concern that progress on humanitarian and securityrelated issues fails due to political considerations. In the first months of 2020, the
Political Working Group undertook considerable efforts to find common ground,
intensively discussing the Ukrainian Law on Special Status and possible ways to
integrate the so-called “Steinmeier formula” into this document. While this work
yielded some results, all discussions in the Political Working Group stalled in
August 2020 when some participants demanded that Ukraine’s Parliament repeal
21-023515/40

S/2021/159

a resolution on local elections before discussion could continue. In an attempt to
overcome that stalemate, participants convened at the end of October to elaborate a
concrete time-bound action plan for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
This is a very challenging task. Regrettably, this discussion in the Trilateral Contact
Group has so far been a dead end. I am grateful to see the involvement of the political
advisers of the Normandy Four, actively searching for ways out of the impasse.
While the Normandy Four leaders did not assign any specific task to the
Working Group on Economic Affairs, the Group continued its indispensable efforts
on a variety of issues, such as the maintenance of vital infrastructure, environmental
threats and pension payments. This work directly impacts people’s daily lives and
well-being on both sides of the contact line.
In conclusion, let me sum up my remarks as follows. The past year brought
a radical reduction of ceasefire violations. But latest tendencies have shown that it
will be difficult to maintain the relative calm on the front line if we remain blocked
on humanitarian and political issues. Therefore, it is high time all sides showed
commitment and responsibility. The mediating team of the OSCE, for its part, will
do whatever it can to move forward on substance.

6/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex III
Statement by the Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission,
Halit Çevik,
I than k you, Madam President, for this oppor t unit y to br ief the
Secu r it y Council.
From my vantage point as the Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and
as Coordinator of the Working Group on Security Issues in the Trilateral Contact
Group, I will provide an update on the security situation in eastern Ukraine, recent
developments concerning the implementation of the Minsk agreements, and the
impact of the conflict on civilians.
I believe we are seeing a window of opportunity for the sides to find a way
towards lasting de-escalation, but we also see that it is narrowing. I further note
with regret that the freedom of movement of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission,
enshrined in the mandate given to us by the 57 participating States of the OSCE,
continues to be impeded.
While the overall security situation along the contact line remains volatile, the
agreement of 22 July 2020 on additional measures to strengthen the ceasefire within
the Trilateral Contact Group was followed by a substantial decrease in the level of
armed violence. After the introduction of these measures in late July, the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission has observed the longest-lasting reduction in violence
since it began systematically recording ceasefire violations. This positive outcome
was a demonstration of political will on the ground.
However, as with previous recommitments and although it was within
a commitment, adherence has frayed over time. On average, only 19 ceasefire
violations were recorded daily from August to October last year, but since November
that number has been gradually increasing.
The average daily number of ceasefire violations recorded by the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in 2021 currently stands at around 87, which is still below the
daily average of 594 ceasefire violations in the months before the July agreement;
but as compared to the summer months the average increased significantly.
Meanwhile, other violations continue, despite commitments from the sides.
Newly built trench extensions and improvements to military structures have been
observed on both sides of the contact line, in contravention of the 22 July agreement.
The SMM also continues to observe the presence of heavy weapons and military and
military-type positions in residential areas, putting civilians in harm’s way.
In summer 2020, the working group on security issues saw a period of progress
that led to broad agreement on a range of important security-related conclusions
from the Normandy Four summit, held in December 2019 in Paris.
In particular, an agreement in principle was reached on demining areas and
an updated mine action plan; four new disengagement areas were identified; and
certain progress was made on a draft addendum that would clarify several aspects of
the framework decision on disengagement.
Agreement on the additional measures to strengthen the ceasefire and the
decrease in armed violence that followed their adoption in July also provided an
opportunity for constructive dialogue.
However, an important constraint has emerged, since the sides were not able
to agree on a joint coordination mechanism to follow up and investigate alleged
21-023517/40

S/2021/159

breaches of the additional measures, with a view both to de-escalation and addressing
impunity. That mechanism could serve as an important confidence-building measure,
which is so far lacking on the ground.
I regret to say that discussions in the working group on that issue have reached
an impasse, as negotiating positions have hardened over time.
Despite unanimous calls within the working group to take action against
impunity, the sides have yet to show their commitment to that principle by taking
action on facts of violations confirmed by SMM reports. Such actions would be
an important first step toward accountability as part of the implementation of the
July additional measures. Moreover, they would help reverse the erosion of political
will that has led to an impasse in the working group and could prevent any further
deterioration of the situation along the contact line.
According to information corroborated by the SMM, 24 civilians were killed
and 107 injured in connection with the conflict in 2020. Eight were killed and 32
injured after the additional measures had taken effect.
While 64 civilian casualties were caused by small-arms fire or shelling with
heavy weapons last year, I note that all but three took place before the introduction
of the additional measures in late July. That is a powerful demonstration of how
sustained ceasefires can save civilian lives and improve security conditions in
communities that have already endured years of conflict — seven years in this case.
And yet, mines, unexploded ordnance (UXO) and other explosive devices
continued to take a heavy toll on the lives of civilians. Such objects caused 16 deaths
and 51 injuries in 2020, with men and boys most affected. It is a testament to the
continuous threat faced by civilians that those objects caused 92 per cent of civilian
casualties occurring after the July measures took effect.
Bearing in mind the suffering that mines and UXOs inflict on civilians even
when the shelling stops, it is crucial that the sides implement their commitments to
conduct mine action, including humanitarian demining.
The emergence of the coronavirus pandemic last year has made life even
more difficult for civilians living on both sides of the contact line. Since March
2020, civilians have been able to cross the contact line between Governmentand non-Government-controlled areas of Ukraine at only two of the five official
crossing points. Only one of those is accessible on a daily basis, and there was a
lockdown for approximately three months during the first phase of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
Despite the agreement in principle reached in the Trilateral Contact Group
last summer to open new crossings at Zolote and Shchastia, civilians cannot use
those locations. The SMM has observed that the Zolote and Shchastia entry-exit
checkpoints have been operational since 10 November in Government-controlled
areas, but corresponding checkpoints in non-Government-controlled areas are not.
The ability of civilians to use those crossing points would alleviate considerable
hardship, facilitate humanitarian crossings and enable people-to-people contacts,
including dialogue initiatives. Between March and December 2020, the number of
crossings recorded by the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine dropped by more
than 92 per cent compared with last year, a development that threatens to separate
people in the long term. During that period, there were 903,000 crossings. The
corresponding number for the previous comparable period was 11.99 million.
It is against that background that it is even more lamentable that the sides have
not been able to agree on the opening of two new crossing points in the Luhansk
region. Existing and new crossing points need to open as soon as possible.
8/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

During these challenging times, it is also all the more important that the critical
infrastructure that civilians rely on to meet their basic needs remain operational,
unaffected and protected from violence.
The SMM continues to facilitate dialogue between the sides and to monitor
localized ceasefires to allow for the repair and maintenance of critical infrastructure.
Last year, such activities facilitated repairs to nearly 120 gas, water and electricity
infrastructure objects, benefiting 6 million civilians.
Unfortunately, the Mission continues to observe ceasefire violations in close
proximity to several critical infrastructure sites. Of particular concern is the situation
near the Donetsk filtration station, which supplies water to nearly 400,000 people
on both sides of the contact line. The SMM continues to record ceasefire violations
within a 5-kilometre radius of the filtration station on a near-daily basis.
Even more concerning is the fact that the SMM regularly observes shooting
during scheduled shift changes of workers that are known to the sides, despite
the specific security guarantees issued by the sides to enable the functioning and
maintenance of the facility. Although the SMM regularly reports on those ceasefire
violations, we have not seen a cessation of such occurrences.
Despite the operational challenges posed by the pandemic, the SMM
continues to maintain a robust presence throughout Ukraine and to provide
objective and impartial information about the situation on the ground through its
monitoring and reporting.
In accordance with its mandate, the SMM also continues to monitor and report
on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms on a daily basis.
Freedom of movement, which is enshrined in the Mission’s mandate and
the Minsk agreements, is essential for the SMM to serve as the eyes and ears of
the international community in Ukraine. Yet despite the commitments undertaken
by the sides to ensure the SMM’s unrestricted freedom of movement, the Mission
remains hampered by persistent obstructions, particularly in areas outside
Government control.
The disparity is remarkable. More than 95 per cent of all freedom-of-movement
restrictions experienced by the SMM in 2020 took place in non-Governmentcontrolled areas. A substantial part — 46 per cent — of those violations took place
in the southern part of Donetsk region and in areas close to the uncontrolled border
with the Russian Federation.
Attempts to restrict SMM use of technical monitoring assets have also
continued throughout the past year, on both sides of the contact line. In 2020,
SMM unmanned aerial vehicles were targeted by gunfire on 70 occasions and were
subjected to GPS signal interference 700 times.
Impediments are unacceptable in any circumstance. Yet in the current
epidemiological context, in which the SMM relies on technical assets to offset
temporary reductions in the availability of ground patrols, they have an especially
pernicious effect on the Mission’s continued operations.
The year 2020 was rife with unforeseen challenges, yet productive dialogue
at the negotiating table has led to a period of stability and relative calm along the
contact line. That is once again a demonstration of the fact that if there is political
will and it is reflected on the ground, the situation on the ground can improve,
particularly for civilians affected by conflict.
At a time when heightened tensions on the ground are threatening the progress
already achieved, it is imperative for the signatories of the Minsk agreements to
21-023519/40

S/2021/159

adhere to their commitments and uphold the additional measures they agreed to
last July.
Political progress and reduced violence reinforce each other. The window of
opportunity for further political progress that opened last summer must remain open
for the ceasefire to be sustained, and vice versa.
In parallel, systematic violations of the SMM’s freedom of movement should
come to an end. The Mission faces a narrow corridor in which to carry out its mandate
due to those constant impediments.
Should that trend continue, the Mission will be increasingly constrained in its
ability to monitor the situation on the ground and to report objective and corroborated
information, which otherwise could support renewed efforts at the negotiating table
to maintain the ceasefire.
In that regard, I would like to express our appreciation to the Council for its
active interest and support, which contributes to the Mission’s continued efforts to
reduce tensions and foster peace, stability and security.
I take this opportunity to also express my thanks for the close cooperation
that the SMM enjoys with the United Nations in Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in the
field, and I thank the Special Representative, Ambassador Grau, for her leadership
and her tireless efforts to facilitate a diplomatic resolution to the crisis in and
around Ukraine.

10/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Her Excellency Ms. Heidi Grau, Special Representative of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-inOffice; and His Excellency Mr. Halit Çevik, Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, for their briefings.
Signed in February 2015 and endorsed by the Security Council, the Minsk
II agreements have played a vital role in the political mediation of the Ukrainian
crisis. Tomorrow will mark the sixth anniversary of the signing of the agreements.
Regrettably, many provisions thereof have yet to be implemented, and there has been
no fundamental progress in the political settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
China calls on all parties concerned to implement the agreement in earnest,
remain committed to the direction of the political settlement, seek a comprehensive
solution to the crisis through dialogue and consultations, promote peace, stability
and development in Ukraine, strive for a harmonious relationship among all ethnic
groups in Ukraine and promote peaceful coexistence between Ukraine and the
countries of the region.
China has consistently held an objective and impartial stance on the Ukrainian
crisis. We respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries, including
Ukraine. We oppose any external interference in Ukraine’s internal affairs. We have
always believed that military solutions offer no way out. Dialogue and negotiation
are the only way to resolve a crisis. China will continue to play a constructive role in
the political settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.

21-0235111/40

S/2021/159

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Ambassador Sven Jürgenson
I am grateful to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
important and comprehensive briefing. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-inOffice, Ms. Heidi Grau, as well as OSCE Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) Chief
Monitor Mr. Halit Çevik for their updates on the activities on the ground. We fully
support the tireless efforts made within the Trilateral Contact Group.
Estonia reaffirms its strong support for Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders, including
territorial waters. We condemn the illegal annexation of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the City of Sevastopol and the occupation of certain territories of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
Unfortunately, Russia has neither acknowledged nor reversed its actions. On
the contrary, for the seventh year in a row the Russian Federation has continued
blatantly to violate the fundamental principles of international law, in particular
the Charter of the United Nations, as well as a number of bilateral and multilateral
agreements and commitments, including the Helsinki Final Act and the Budapest
Memorandum. Therefore, Russia’s actions are not only a European concern but a
global one, as they pose threats to international peace and security.
We deeply regret the fact that the Russian Federation keeps violating the
Minsk agreements and the conclusions of the Paris Summit, particularly regarding
the withdrawal of heavy weapon; 91 per cent of all violations of the withdrawal
of heavy weapons have been recorded in non-Government-controlled areas. Even
during the coronavirus disease pandemic, when the humanitarian situation has been
severe, ceasefire violations have been regularly recorded, and their number has even
increased since November.
Since the beginning of the conflict between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine, more than 30,000 people have been injured and over 13,000 killed, including
298 passengers on flight MH-17. The BUK missile system utilized to bring down
flight MH-17 belonged to the armed forces of the Russian Federation, according to
the independent and impartial joint investigation team. That was a heinous crime
that yet again constitutes a grave breach of international law and proves that Russia’s
actions are of serious global concern.
We support the efforts made by the OSCE and Trilateral Contact Group to
facilitate the implementation of the Minsk agreements. We commend Ukraine’s
political will and constructive approach to finding ways to achieve a solution to the
conflict. However, security remains the basic element of de-escalation and a lasting
solution. A 400-kilometre-long uncontrolled border between Ukraine and Russia is
a gateway for a free flow of Russian weaponry and military personnel that only adds
to the tense and fragile situation in Donbas.
Therefore, we once again underline Russia’s responsibility and call on the
Russian Federation, as a party to the conflict, to fully implement its commitments
undertaken under the Minsk agreements, including those entered into at the
Normandy summit held in Paris in 2019.
We also urge the Russian Federation to immediately stop fuelling the conflict
by providing financial and military support to the armed formations that it backs,
and we remain deeply concerned about the presence of Russian military equipment
and personnel in the non-Government-controlled areas of Ukraine.
12/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

We support the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission’s valuable work. We are
concerned that the SMM’s freedom of movement has been restricted, despite the fact
that Russia, as a signatory to the Minsk agreements, has agreed on the need to ensure
the SMM safe and secure access to the entire territory of Ukraine, including Crimea.
International human rights law also continues to be severely violated in the
annexed and occupied areas. Violations are targeted at persons belonging to any
minority, group or organization that dissents from the views of the Government
of the Russian Federation. Deprivation of civil and property rights through forced
passportization and conscription are violations of international law and run counter
to the spirit of the Minsk agreements. Such violations must stop immediately. All
persons detained illegally must be released and international human rights monitoring
mechanisms and non-governmental organizations given access to the annexed and
occupied territories.
Finally, we reiterate our call on Russia to abide by international law and to
uphold its international commitments.

21-0235113/40

S/2021/159

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the Special Representative of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office and the Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine for their briefings.
After seven years of hostilities, we cannot accept the continuation of this
conf lict while millions of women and men still suffer the consequences of the
war. That is why France, together with Germany, remains fully mobilized within
the Normandy format in order to finally reach a just and lasting settlement, in
line with the last summit of Heads of State and Government, held in Paris on 9
December 2019.
First, we welcome the progress made since that summit, particularly the
prisoner exchange. We welcome the reduction in violence since the parties renewed
their commitment to the ceasefire in July, and we express our concern about the recent
spike in violations. France regrets that the implementation of essential measures for
the populations, such as demining and the opening of new crossing points, remains
blocked in the Trilateral Contact Group because of the intransigence of the de facto
authorities, with the support of Russia.
Secondly, we condemn in the strongest terms all impediments and restrictions
of movement to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, as well as any action that
undermines its security. The coronavirus disease pandemic cannot be used as a
legitimate pretext to prevent the implementation of its mandate, especially in the
areas that are not controlled by the Ukrainian Government.
Thirdly, we condemn the obstruction of the work of humanitarian actors. In
eastern Ukraine, 3.4 million people continue to be in need of assistance. The pandemic
has only made them more vulnerable. Respect for international humanitarian law is
an obligation that applies to all. We are also concerned about human rights violations
and abuses, as reported by the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine, under the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The
perpetrators of those violations must be prosecuted and tried for their crimes.
Lastly, I want to say that we do not accept Russia’s rhetoric, which consists of
blaming Ukraine alone for the blockades and making unfounded accusations against
France and Germany, as the Russian Permanent Representative just did. Do I need
to remind him of Russia’s responsibility in this conflict, which has caused more than
13,000 deaths and 30,000 wounded since 2014?
Russia has clearly accepted its binding responsibility towards the peaceful
settlement of the conflict and the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It is
part of the Trilateral Contact Group, with Ukraine and the OSCE, as well as the
Normandy format. We call upon Russia to assume its responsibilities and exert
greater influence on the de facto representatives of the areas not controlled by the
Ukrainian Government.
We reiterate our appeal to the Russian and Ukrainian sides to make progress
in the full implementation of the Minsk agreements. Beyond immediate measures,
that also means progress in the implementation of the political dimension of those
agreements as well as on the definition of the political and security conditions for
14/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

the organization of local elections, as agreed by the Heads of State and Government
at the Normandy summit in Paris.
France and Germany are firmly committed to the realization of a just and
lasting peace and the restoration of full Ukrainian sovereignty over Donbas.

21-0235115/40

S/2021/159

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Special
Representative Grau and Chief Monitor Çevik for their useful briefings on the
occasion of the sixth anniversary of the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, endorsed unanimously in resolution 2202 (2015).
The peaceful settlement of disputes in a manner that ensures international
peace, security and justice forms the very foundation of international law. Peace is
at the very heart of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, Article 33 provides Member States a number of alternatives to choose
from to resolve their disputes.
When parties to a dispute come to mutually negotiated agreements, such
agreements even take precedence over resolutions adopted by the Security Council,
since those agreements are not externally imposed but are mutually agreed between
the parties concerned, and therefore have every chance of success.
We believe that the Minsk agreements provide a basis for a negotiated and
peaceful settlement of the situation in eastern Ukraine. We also believe that meetings
under the Normandy format will further facilitate the resolution of the issues related
to the implementation of the provisions of the Minsk agreements, including its key
security and political aspects.
India welcomes all efforts aimed at reducing tension in the region and hopes
that all sides will constructively work together to find political and diplomatic
solutions to the issue.

16/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I would like to thank Under Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Grau
and Ambassador Çevik for their helpful and informative briefings today.
This is the first opportunity we have had to address these issues since we
joined the Security Council, so I want to underline from the outset that Ireland is
a strong and consistent supporter of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The full implementation of the Minsk agreements and the related conflict-resolution
efforts in the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group are important
priorities for us.
A number of commitments made under the Minsk agreements are still
outstanding. We therefore call on the sides to fully implement the Minsk agreements
and honour their commitments in full. We commend the tireless efforts of
Ambassadors Grau and Çevik in the Trilateral Contact Group. We see the July 2020
additional measures to strengthen the ceasefire as a welcome breakthrough that has
actually led to an improvement in the security situation.
However, it is clear from what we just heard from the briefers this morning
that the ceasefire cannot be taken for granted. The importance of establishing a
functioning mechanism for investigating ceasefire violations cannot be overstated.
A first positive step would be the Russian Federation’s return to the Joint Centre for
Control and Coordination.
After almost seven years of conflict, the humanitarian situation in Ukraine
remains deeply concerning, with millions of people still requiring humanitarian
assistance. Civilians, who were already suffering hardships, now compounded by
the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and a fragile economy, have seen
their freedom of movement severely constrained due to what is almost the complete
closure of crossing points at the line of contact. That includes individuals being cut
off from family, jobs, health care and pensions, as well as thousands of people with
pressing humanitarian needs, who remain unable to cross that contact line. As is too
often the case in conflict situations, we know that women are disproportionately
affected by these restrictions, and female-headed households often lack access to
social benefits and support. We must do more to support them.
We call for an end to the indiscriminate shelling of residential areas and critical
civilian infrastructure and for the parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law. Furthermore, we urge action to address the issues of mines and
unexploded ordnance.
Ireland is concerned that there are continued violations of Trilateral Contact
Group agreements, including the recent building and extension of trenches and
the presence of heavy weapons near residential areas in the region. We are also
very concerned by the reduction of access for humanitarian organizations to nonGovernment controlled areas.
Ireland therefore calls for the easing of movement restrictions to avoid
exacerbating what is already an acute humanitarian crisis. We urge the Russian
Federation to implement its commitments made at the Normandy Four summit in
Paris, as well as in the Trilateral Contact Group, so that the Shchastia and Zolote
entry-exit crossing points become fully operational and all closed crossing points
are reopened.
Humanitarian operations in non-Government controlled areas must
also be facilitated, in adherence with international humanitarian law and other
international standards.
21-0235117/40

S/2021/159

We also remain concerned about serious human rights violations and abuses
linked to the conflict in eastern Ukraine, as reported by the Monitoring Mission of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We are deeply disturbed that the freedom of movement of the Special
Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
continues to be restricted. Let me recall that all signatories to the Minsk agreements
agreed on the need for the Special Monitoring Mission’s safe and secure access to
the entire territory of Ukraine. It is also imperative to stop the practice of smallarms fire and signal interference with the Mission’s unmanned aircraft and technical
assets. We underscore that those responsible for any wilful damage to the Mission’s
assets should be held political and financially accountable.
Finally, Ireland calls on all sides to create the necessary environment
to enable the implementation of the Minsk agreements to achieve a sustainable
political settlement of the conf lict, and we call on the parties to act constructively
within the Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy format. Women on the
ground are leading the way in the ongoing peacebuilding work on the front lines to
facilitate dialogue between communities. Making space for those women and for
civil society in the peace process will be key to enabling effective and sustainable
conf lict resolution.

18/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael K. Kiboino
Kenya thanks Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Heidi Grau, Special Representative of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairpersonin-Office, and Mr. Halit Çevik, Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission, for their briefings.
We welcome the encouraging developments, particularly the January meeting
of the Normandy format, which held discussions concerning the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, the consensus reached at the group leaders’ summit in
Paris in December 2019, as well as the release of conflict-related detainees. The full
implementation of commitments under the Minsk agreements, including the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements, remains critical to
achieve a sustainable resolution of the situation.
Kenya commends the OSCE’s efforts in Ukraine to carry out its mandate by
monitoring the implementation of the 2015 Minsk agreements, which were endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015).
Kenya notes with concern the humanitarian situation in the conflict-affected
areas, as the hardship resulting from the protracted conflict has been compounded
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, including related response measures such as
the months-long closure of crossing points. We call for the urgent de-escalation of
tensions and the relaxation of virus-related restrictions in order to create a conducive
environment for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those most in need,
including elderly citizens, women, children and persons living with disabilities.
At the same time, we urge all relevant actors to facilitate safe, timely and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in need of assistance, in accordance
with humanitarian principles, and to allow international actors to fulfil their
mandates effectively.
In conclusion, we encourage all parties to intensify diplomatic efforts and focus
on achieving an inclusive, sustainable and peaceful solution based on cooperation
and dialogue, within the Normandy format, which remains the most promising path
to long-term peace and stability.

21-0235119/40

S/2021/159

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Under-Secretary DiCarlo, Ambassador Grau and Ambassador Çevik
for their briefings.
I must say that we have been following closely the progress in the situation
in Ukraine and the implementation of the Minsk agreements. We welcome the entry
into force of additional measures to strengthen the ceasefire. However, we regret that
there has been no significant progress in the political process.
We welcome the efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy Four
summit to stabilize the situation in the zone of conflict, implement the provisions
of the Minsk agreements and make progress in talks on additional buffer zones. We
encourage the parties to continue to support these processes.
This package remains the agreed framework for a comprehensive, negotiated
and peaceful settlement of the conflict. In that regard, we reaffirm the importance
of complying with the provisions of resolution 2202 (2015). We also believe it is
essential that the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe has full and secure access in order enable it to fully carry out
its mandate.
Sustained political will is required from all parties to preserve the achievements
made and prevent possible setbacks that could even lead to a resurgence of violence.
We believe that there is no military solution to the crisis and that diplomatic and
political efforts must be intensified to reach a solution.
Mexico reiterates the need to respect the unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, in accordance with international law, especially the principles set out in
the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we also recall General Assembly
resolution 68/262.
The repercussions of the conflict in Ukraine, now entering its seventh year,
affect the civilian population most of all. Mexico expresses its concern that 3.4
million people are in need of humanitarian assistance. Special attention should be
given to vulnerable groups, the elderly and people with disabilities, who represent,
as we have heard, about 40 per cent of the affected population. This is the highest
percentage in the world for these demographic groups in a humanitarian crisis.
That is why we are closely monitoring the impact the restriction of
movement along the line of contact has on them, and we reiterate the importance
of respecting international humanitarian law. It is a priority to guarantee the safe
passage of vulnerable groups with urgent humanitarian needs, as well as access for
humanitarian personnel so they can distribute aid across the line of contact, taking
into consideration, above all, the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Mexico calls on the parties to comply with the agreed commitments with
respect to landmines, unexploded ordnance and other explosive devices. There are
more than 2 million people living in mine-contaminated areas. The impact of these
mines and other explosive devices on the civilian population, and especially on
children, is a matter of concern. Likewise, gender equity and the participation of
young people in all stages of the peace process must be guaranteed.
Mexico favours sustainable peace as a guiding principle in the comprehensive
management and resolution of conflicts. It therefore hopes that efforts between
20/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

the parties will be redoubled, as well as efforts aimed at making progress in the
implementation of the set of measures that will unblock the political impasse in the
conflict. Otherwise, there is a risk that only responses that address the problem in
a partial manner will continue to be provided when, in reality, the issue requires a
comprehensive solution.

21-0235121/40

S/2021/159

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I thank Ms. Heidi Grau, Special Representative of the Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and
Mr. Halit Çevik, Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, for their
excellent briefings.
In 2019, the summit held in Paris under the so-called Normandy format, whose
agreed conclusions provided for measures to stabilize the situation in the conflict
zone and implement the political clauses of the Minsk agreements, gave rise to hopes
of positive developments in the relaunch of the peace process in Ukraine. Today the
prevailing situation in Ukraine is due no doubt to the lack of significant progress in
the implementation of the summit conclusions and resolution 2202 (2015). Indeed,
the lack of a political solution to the Ukrainian crisis continues to create uncertainty
about the future of the people living along the line of contact, as evidenced by the
risk of disruption in the provision of basic services and the rise in unemployment.
In addition, increased fighting, the presence of landmines and explosive devices
and the use of heavy weapons are terrorizing the civilian population, particularly in
areas where fighting is more intense.
In this context, it is necessary for the various actors to inject a new dynamic
into the peace process, in particular by creating conditions conducive to the full
and effective implementation of the political and security clauses of the Minsk
agreements. The deleterious security climate in conflict-affected areas continues
to bear upon the lives of 3.4 million people in need of humanitarian assistance and
protection services and of 1.4 million internally displaced persons. To better respond
to this humanitarian challenge, we urge the parties to implement the civil-military
mechanism to provide security guarantees and facilitate humanitarian notifications
for the safe passage of humanitarian goods and personnel.
In conclusion, the Niger calls for the intensification of efforts within the
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group to promote a peaceful and lasting
settlement of the conflict in Ukraine.

22/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations, Trine Heimerback
I thank the briefers for their briefings.
At the outset, allow me to reiterate Norway’s strong support for Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, including the Crimean peninsula and the
adjoining territorial waters.
Norway condemns Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and remains deeply
concerned by the presence of Russian military equipment and personnel in areas
held by Russian-backed armed formations in eastern Ukraine. We urge Russia to stop
fuelling the conflict by ceasing immediately to provide financial and military support
to the armed formations. Furthermore, we condemn Russia’s illegal annexation of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and call on Russia
to reverse this act. We also call on Russia to discontinue the simplified passport
application procedure for residents in eastern Ukraine, which further undermines
Ukraine’s sovereignty.
The conflict in eastern Ukraine must be resolved by peaceful means. We
strongly support the negotiation efforts under the so-called Normandy format and of
the Trilateral Contact Group. Norway calls on all parties to uphold their commitments
in order to consolidate the ceasefire and engage constructively towards resolving the
conflict. And as we all know, women are key to peace. We call on all parties to ensure
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all aspects of peacebuilding.
The sharp reduction in ceasefire violations observed by the Special
Monitoring Mission (SMM) of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe since the strengthened ceasefire entered into force on 27 July has been a
major achievement. Norway remains concerned by unmet humanitarian needs in
the non-Government-controlled territories. We call on the parties to ensure safe and
unrestricted humanitarian access to the conflict-affected population in line with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
For the majority of the past year, the people in the conflict-affected areas
have faced severe restrictions at crossing points along the line of contact, which
has reduced their access to necessary services. Children living in the conflict zone
remain particularly vulnerable. In this respect, Norway urges all parties to implement
the Safe Schools Declaration. Furthermore, landmines, unexploded ordnance and
other explosive devices continue to pose a grave threat to civilians. We call on all
parties to refrain from laying landmines and contribute to mine clearance.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is frequently used to justify
restrictions on the SMM’s freedom of movement. The SMM has implemented
measures to protect its members and the population from COVID-19. We urge all
parties to provide the SMM unrestricted access to all parts of Ukraine’s territory, in
accordance with its mandate. We are further concerned by the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission’s reports of serious human rights violations and abuses in
eastern Ukraine. We call on Russia to facilitate full and unrestricted access to the
whole of Ukraine for international human rights monitoring bodies.
Let me conclude by reiterating Norway’s support for the negotiations in the
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group efforts aimed at facilitating
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. We commend the political will and
constructive approach shown by Ukraine, and we urge Russia to reciprocate by
implementing the provisions to which it has committed.
21-0235123/40

S/2021/159

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Grau and Mr. Çevik for their briefings. We welcome
the participation of Mr. Leonid Kravchuk, the first President of independent Ukraine
and the representative of his country at the Trilateral Contact Group, in today’s
video-teleconference. We also welcome the participation of Germany, a member of
the Normandy quartet. I cannot see German representative Christoph Heusgen on
the screen, but I am sure he is here with us. I welcome him back.
Tomorrow will mark six years since the adoption of the package of measures
for the Implementation of the Minsk agreements on a settlement in Ukraine. It is
well known that this document was signed not on the first day of the internal conflict
that flared up after the notorious Maidan events, but after nine months of tense work
and uneasy concessions that Kyiv, Donetsk and Luhansk had to make. Those six
years have given no answer to the following two important questions. How exactly is
Ukraine going to resolve the conflict peacefully? What is Kyiv’s vision for the future
special status of Donbas within Ukraine? Indeed, all prospects for a settlement
depend directly on answers to these two questions, because once Kyiv started to
use force, in 2014, and the Ukrainian military began to fire on residential areas, the
people of Donbas ceased to feel any connection to Ukraine.
We regularly draw attention to this situation because, in 2015, the Security
Council efficiently endorsed the hard-won Minsk compromise by adopting resolution
2202 (2015), thereby incorporating the package of measures into international law.
The Trilateral Contact Group was supposed to become a unique platform for direct
dialogue among the three Ukrainian sides in the presence of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Russia. As Ms. DiCarlo rightly
mentioned today, there is no other internationally recognized format of settlement
for the Maidan-provoked internal conflict in Ukraine.
At the same time, Kyiv and our Western partners are presenting our
legitimate and understandable wish to draw attention to the need for Ukraine to
implement the Minsk package of measures as “Russian propaganda” and “spreading
fake information”. I am unfortunately certain that we will hear similar accusations
today, as well as mantras that it is Russia that has allegedly failed to implement the
Minsk agreements.
I would like to take advantage of Ms. Grau’s presence at today’s meeting to
kindly ask her to give a direct answer to the following questions. Is there any mention
of Russia in the text of the Minsk package of measures apart from the signature of
our representative on the document alongside that of the OSCE representative? Could
Ms. Grau tell us what obligations are laid upon Russia by the agreements? It would
be good for the new members of the Council who have not yet had the opportunity to
dig into the Ukraine case to hear her answer.
I would also like to take this opportunity to ask the briefers to give direct,
non-evasive answers to our questions regarding Ukraine’s alleged implementation
of the Minsk package, which our Western and Ukrainian colleagues will be telling
us about. Has Ukraine ensured pardon and amnesty by enacting the law prohibiting
the prosecution and punishment of persons in connection with the events that took
place in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, pursuant to
paragraph 5 of the Minsk package of measures? In this regard, what can one say
about the fact that Kyiv has not closed criminal files even against those subject
to detainee exchange and that there have been instances of second detentions?
Has Ukraine reinstated control of the local sector of its banking system in the
24/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

conflict-affected area, in accordance with paragraph 8 of the Minsk package? Has
there been dialogue on modalities for local elections and the future regime in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as stipulated in paragraph 4 of the Minsk
package? And finally, has Ukraine carried out any constitutional reform? Has a new
constitution been enacted that includes decentralization as a key element? According
to paragraph 11 of the package, that should have happened by the end of 2015. Has
permanent legislation been adopted with regard to the special status of certain areas
of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in line with measures as set out in the footnote
to paragraph 11? I would remind Council members that these two steps must precede
the reinstatement of full control of the State border by Ukraine.
Furthermore, I would ask Ms. Grau to tell us if the so-called Steinmeier
formula, which was articulated in the Normandy format as early as October 2015 in
order to help Ukraine implement paragraph 11 of the Minsk package of measures,
has been incorporated in Ukrainian legislation? We would also be interested in
hearing comments by the briefers on draft legislation dedicated to Kyiv reinstating
control over this region, which was recently published by the Ukrainian Ministry for
the Reintegration of Donbas.
The drafters of this legislation thought in strategic terms. They have figured
out ways to be able to keep violating the Minsk agreements for the next 25 years. The
legislation is silent as to both direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donetsk and Luhansk
and about negotiating special status for Donbas with them. Instead, it contains
fantasies about creating some kind of “international administration” and holding
elections only two years thereafter. Does anyone think the people of Donbas will
agree to this form of international occupation of their homeland? Most important,
how does such a plan comport with provisions of resolution 2202 (2015)?
In parallel to that, we have to state that Kyiv’s desperate unwillingness to
observe its obligations under the Minsk package of measures is not a secret even by
Ukraine’s leadership. For example, in May and December 2020, President Zelenskyy
claimed that “the Minsk agreements are needed not to settle the conflict, but to
preserve sanctions against Russia”. In a January 2020 article, First Deputy Prime
Minister of Ukraine and Head of the Ukrainian delegation to the Trilateral Contact
Group, Oleksii Reznikov, said that Kyiv was willing work to reform the Minsk
agreements. He believes that the agreements are “more a political and diplomatic
arrangement than an international treaty”.
Furthermore, Mr. Reznikov is convinced that the term of the agreements
expired on 31 December 2015. At the same time, Mr. Reznikov wonders whether
“Russia can be persuaded to accept amending the Minsk agreements or completely
changing the settlement format”. He seems to forget that Russia is not the only
one to support the Minsk agreements as the only basis for an internal Ukrainian
settlement, the Security Council, in the presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12,
dated 6 June 2018, reiterated the need for resolution 2202 (2015) and the Minsk
package of measures to be strictly observed. At the same time, without batting an
eye, Mr. Reznikov claims that “Ukraine has implemented almost all the agreements
made at the summit held in Paris under the Normandy format”. The fact that Kyiv
has thoroughly implemented not a single one of its Minsk obligations does not seem
to faze him.
Instead of implementing the Minsk agreements, Kyiv keeps spinning tales
of ongoing Russian aggression; Ukraine blames everything on that. Nevertheless,
no one has cared to provide a shred of proof of this so-called aggression, which
is actually not a surprise. Furthermore, Mr. Apakan, Ms. Grau’s predecessor,
unambiguously stated at a similar meeting two years ago that the Special Monitoring
Mission had not and did not establish the presence of any Russian military units in
Donbas. I expect to hear Ms. Grau confirm this fact again today.
21-0235125/40

S/2021/159

We know too well that Kyiv only pretends to be implementing the Minsk
agreements. Donbas representatives shared that information with the Council at an
informal Arria Formula meeting that we organized on 2 December 2020. Incidentally,
the Ukrainian delegation and its Western sponsors, including Normandy format
members France and Germany, avoided the event. It would be good if today we
could also listen to the representatives of Donbas, since they are parties to the
settlement process.
Interestingly, the members of the Normandy format, namely, France,
Germany and others, do not reject direct dialogue with Ansar Allah— affiliated
with the Houthis in Yemen — the Syrian opposition and the Venezuelan opposition,
or unrecognized State entities in the eastern Mediterranean for that matter. However,
they get nervous when it comes to initiatives aimed at direct communication between
Kyiv and the real inhabitants of Donbas, as envisaged by the Minsk agreements. Is
it not you who keep stressing the importance of finding political and diplomatic
solutions through an inclusive dialogue? Where are your principles in this case?
We thank the delegations that did not shy away from participating in our Arria
Formula event. To those who did, I must say that the actors who side with only one
party to the internal Ukrainian conflict and, contrary to the established facts, indulge
their sickly fantasies about the “Russian aggression” cannot be called mediators.
Rather, you are accomplices in Kyiv’s crimes against the Donbas population.
In conclusion, if Ukraine wants to normalize the situation in Donbas, Kyiv
needs to make every effort to ensure that the people living in certain areas of Donetsk
and Luhansk are not afraid of returning but, on the contrary, are eager to do so. So
far, as we learned from the Donbas representatives,
“Ukraine is absolutely indifferent to the people of Donbas and is interested
only in territories, or it demonstrates aggressive intentions ... [T]here is
already an enormous chasm between Donbas and Ukraine.”
Judge for yourselves: Ukraine’s laws and legislative initiatives in the area
of language policy that have been adopted over the past six years undermine the
legitimate right of people to speak their native language; besides, they restrict and
cleanse the media space. The education reform is also inherently discriminatory.
The Venice Commission of the Council of Europe affirms that. As recently as in
September 2019, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy swore that he would not shut down
any television channels or infringe upon freedom of speech. However, his recent
unconstitutional decision led to the closure of three opposition television channels,
which caused a surge of public discontent, even to the point of raising the question
of impeachment. The reaction of our Western colleagues to that was startling. While
advocating for the freedom of speech, they still collectively welcomed that step.
What about the draft law on internment or the forced resettlement of Russian
citizens, which, in fact, seeks to legalize concentration camps on the territory
of Ukraine? What about the initiative to introduce liability for concealing the
citizenship of other States? How is it supposed to work when the people in Donbas
have no opportunity to renew their Ukrainian passports?
All those initiatives directly infringe upon the rights of those living in Donbas
and deprive them of any motivation to reconnect with Ukraine. Russia has nothing
to do with that.
I will not even mention the widespread glorification of Nazi henchmen in
Ukraine. In the run-up to the International Day of Commemoration in Memory of the
Victims of the Holocaust, we circulated document S/2021/81 in the Security Council.
It contains a long list of cases of the glorification of Nazi accomplices, based on
26/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Twitter posts of the Head of the Ukrainian Jewish Committee, Eduard Dolinskyi.
The scale of that cancerous tumour that has infected Ukraine is astounding. But
neither the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe nor our Western
partners show signs of due concern. It is blatant double standards.
Ukraine should not waste time on excuses and dubious geopolitical games,
but rather start to change, ensuring due respect for human rights, the rights of ethnic
and language minorities and the freedom of the media, as, incidentally, was the
case in pre-Maidan Ukraine. Kyiv should focus on the faithful implementation of
its obligations under the Minsk package of measures, in close coordination with
Donetsk and Luhansk, rather than keep repeating and hiding behind the lies about
a war with Russia. Is Ukraine ready to move towards peace and comply with its
obligations? Are our Western colleagues ready to unambiguously demand that it
should do so? Unfortunately, there are ever fewer signs of that. I count on your
principled position today, and I hope that our Ukrainian colleague Leonid Kravchuk
will give us at least some cause for optimism.

Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: English]
I would like to comment on some remarks made today and some questions
asked. Actually, this video-teleconference could not surprise us in any way. We know
who says what about this conflict and in what way. Today Ms. Grau did not answer the
question that we had asked. She said the discussion about the parties to the conflict
was ongoing. But my question was not about the discussion but about whether Russia
was mentioned as a party to the Minsk agreements. I can answer that if Ms. Grau was
not able to. Russia is not mentioned as a party to the Minsk agreements.
I listened to the statements of my friend Christoph Heusgen with great pleasure.
I truly miss him here at the Council. He mentioned the Budapest Memorandum. I
said that I was ready to have separate bilateral consultations in a group of his choice
to discuss the Budapest Memorandum, its history and its sponsors. That is worth a
separate conversation, but I can briefly cover it to satisfy curiosity as to our position.
When we commented on it at the time, we said that, under the Budapest Memorandum,
Russia was not obliged to force a part of Ukraine to stay within it against the will of
the local population and that the provisions of the Budapest Memorandum did not
cover circumstances that resulted from internal political or socioeconomic factors.
But let us put the Budapest Memorandum aside for the time being.
Mr. Heusgen played with notions, speculating who had been occupied by
whom. Was it Russia that had occupied Ukraine or, Christoph would sarcastically
ask, was it Ukraine that had occupied Russia? There is a simple answer to that:
Ukraine occupied Ukraine, and it is waging war on its own territory.
I listened carefully to Mr. Kravchuk, Ukraine’s representative to the Trilateral
Contact Group. By the way, he was announced for this meeting as Ukraine’s envoy
to the Contact Group rather than just the representative of Ukraine. That raises a
legitimate question: where are the other representatives to the Trilateral Contact
Group, including the representatives of certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk?
Mr. Kravchuk spoke a great deal about Ukraine’s efforts to implement the
Minsk agreements and comply with the decisions of the Normandy summit. In words
it sounds as if Ukraine is actively committed to implementing the agreements. He
mentioned that Ukraine put forward a proposal, a road map, for the implementation
21-0235127/40

S/2021/159

of the Minsk agreements. Unfortunately, what he forgot to mention is that three
quarters of that road map contradict the Minsk agreements that Ukraine allegedly
abides by.
To my regret, I did not hear answers to questions that we had asked in our
statement: how to assess the claims of Ukrainian officials regarding the Minsk
agreements? How to assess what Mr. Kravchuk said in numerous interviews that
he recently gave? He is an experienced and respected person, and it feels rather
awkward to me to cite what he said regarding the Minsk agreements, the people of
Donbas and what he thinks should happen in that area.
You said Ukraine was ready to demine a location at the contact line, mentioning
that the Russian side refused to demine the territory on its side. Well, Russia takes
part in mine action in many places: Syria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh.
We are ready to help should Ukrainian authorities ask us to. But we cannot demine
anything on a territory where we are not present, which fact Mr. Çevik confirmed
today yet again.
Speaking of Mr. Çevik’s comments, I heard him address the death toll among
civilians. But that is not the only figure cited today. I think it was the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom who said that 3,500 civilians had fallen victim
to the conflict since its beginning. I would like to ask Mr. Çevik to elaborate on this
statistic and share the percentage ratio of how many civilians have died on each side.
I did not quite understand the question of my French colleague as to the
elections-related obligations resulting from the December 2019 summit that Russia
had not implemented. As far as I understand, these agreements reiterated the formula
of the Minsk Agreements and mentioned the “Steinmeier formula”. So it is we who
call on Ukraine to comply with these provisions.
I could say a lot more, but I am not sure the format of this meeting would
allow us to do so. Let me just reiterate how important it is to continue addressing
this issue in the Security Council. As for those Council members who keep repeating
memorized phrases about what Russia must do to end the conflict, we will keep
making the following point to them. Their mediation will be successful only once
they start to work seriously and insistently with the Ukrainian side to have it
implement the Minsk obligations.

28/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
We welcome our briefers today and thank them for their presentations.
We begin by expressing our concern that the conflict in eastern Ukraine,
especially in the Donbas region, has continued for almost seven years. Despite some
positive progress in 2019, such as the swapping of prisoners and peace talks, the
ongoing crisis continues to cause suffering to the civilian population, including
through displacement, attacks on schools and hospitals and loss of human life. A
cessation of hostilities is essential for peace and security, and we encourage the
parties to adhere to the ceasefire agreements, which is necessary for reaching a
sustainable solution.
We recognize the steps taken in 2020 by the Trilateral Contact Group in
Ukraine to reach a new ceasefire agreement on measures to strengthen the ceasefire
regime along the front line in Donbas. We welcome the continued work of the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine in facilitating and monitoring localized ceasefires
and enabling repairs and maintenance of civilian infrastructures.
We emphasize our support for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements, as it remains the basis for a political solution to the conflict in Donbas.
We hope that all parties will recommit to the peace process and fully implement all
of the measures agreed in the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group in
order to achieve immediate progress and lasting peace.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its full support to the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine in their efforts to continue encouraging all parties to fulfil their obligations
under all agreements. We also underscore the importance of ensuring safe and
unimpeded access to monitors.
In conclusion, we re-emphasize the need for full implementation of the
Minsk agreements and respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law.

21-0235129/40

S/2021/159

Annex XV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Heidi
Grau and Ambassador Halit Çevik for the valuable briefing on the situation in
eastern Ukraine.
Today, as we commemorate the sixth anniversary of the Minsk II agreements,
which constitute the legal framework for achieving a peaceful settlement in eastern
Ukraine, we hope that our meeting will actively contribute and give impetus to
efforts aimed at ending this crisis.
Committed to upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, Tunisia reaffirms its firm stance, which is based on respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and on non-intervention in their
affairs, as these principles underpin peaceful relations between States.
In that context, we affirm our support for the efforts of all parties concerned to
reach a comprehensive and lasting solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine through
dialogue and negotiations, in accordance with the Minsk agreements, under the
auspices of the Normandy Four and the Trilateral Contact Group, and on the basis of
resolution 2202 (2015).
In that regard, we welcome the positive developments that occurred in
the second half of 2020, particularly the continuation of prisoner exchanges, the
establishment of new disengagement zones and the opening of new crossing points
along the line of contact, as well as the relative commitment to the ceasefire since
the measures to reinforce it went into effect last July, although multiple violations
were not recorded. We believe that continuing to take such steps will help to bolster
confidence-building measures, create conditions conducive to resolving this crisis
peacefully and alleviate the suffering of the affected population.
In this context, my delegation underscores that the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has a vital role to play in advancing efforts
to resolve the crisis. We express our appreciation and support for the efforts of
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and the continued work of the
Trilateral Contact Group and its various working groups.
We once again call for the comprehensive and permanent ceasefire to
be honoured, heavy weapons to be withdrawn and the Minsk agreements to be
implemented fully.
In addition to the economic and social toll of the conflict, the difficult
humanitarian situation in areas near the line of contact has deteriorated as the
repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic persist. All international parties
must therefore make concerted efforts to provide the necessary health care and
vaccinations, especially to the most vulnerable groups in the region, and ensure safe
access and effective distribution of humanitarian assistance to more than 3.4 million
people in need of food and basic services, while respecting international humanitarian
principles and standards, guaranteeing freedoms and protecting fundamental human
rights, including the rights of people belonging to national minorities.
In conclusion, in the context of the growing challenges to international peace
and security, I once again stress that it is necessary to accelerate the implementation
of all the agreements that have been concluded and the outcomes of follow-up
30/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

meetings, in order to achieve a comprehensive and lasting peaceful resolution to the
crisis in eastern Ukraine, and thereby bring stability and prosperity to the peoples
of the region.

21-0235131/40

S/2021/159

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I would like to start by thanking our briefers. The United Kingdom reiterates
its support for the Minsk agreements, the road map that they provide for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine and the French and German efforts
through the Normandy process.
The significant reduction in violence is welcome but the ceasefire remains
fragile. Russia continues to supply arms and personnel to its proxies. Russia and
its proxies continue to block new entry and exit points along the line of contact
and the full implementation of plans for disengagement and demining. We agree
that local elections must pave the way for the special status of Donbas. Yet Russia
will not support the security conditions needed to enable those elections. Russia
claims that it is not a party to the conflict but it instigated, and continues to fuel,
the conflict. Nearly 3,500 innocent civilians have died and 3.4 million are in need of
humanitarian assistance.
We remind Russia of its obligations. It must withdraw its military personnel
and weapons from the territory of Ukraine, cease its support for the armed formations
that it backs and stop access restrictions and intimidation of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission in areas held by
its proxies. Russia’s objective is to undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We urge Russia to match the political will demonstrated by Ukraine so that
real progress can be made.
I reiterate the United Kingdom’s enduring support for Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders
and territorial waters. The Ukrainian people deserve peace. We will hold Russia to
account for that.

32/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex XVII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Rodney Hunter
I thank the briefers for their presentations today. The United States is deeply
grateful for the work of regional multilateral institutions, the Security Council and
our partners and allies to bring peace, prosperity and stability to Ukraine.
In 2014, Russia occupied Crimea and instigated a conflict in the Donbas region.
Russia has blocked meaningful progress in diplomatic negotiations, while arming,
training, funding and leading its proxy forces and supporting the self-proclaimed
“authorities” on the ground. Since 2014, Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine have
led to the deaths of more than 13,000 people. Its actions have displaced 1.5 million
Ukrainians and left an additional 3.4 million in need of humanitarian assistance.
Russia has stepped up its efforts to destabilize Ukraine and undermine
Ukraine’s sovereignty over the past year. Russia continues to deny that it controls the
conflict in eastern Ukraine and falsely presents itself as a mediator to the conflict,
even though it is, in fact, the instigator.
We have witnessed Russia act disingenuously towards negotiations as well.
President Putin agreed at the 2019 Normandy summit to take steps to improve the
humanitarian and security situations on the ground. However, Russia subsequently
sought to hinder the implementation of those very same steps at the Trilateral
Contact Group, both directly and through its proxies. Russia stalled the opening
of new civilian crossing points along the line of contact and blocked additional
exchanges of detainees. President Putin has even refused to endorse the agreement
on measures to strengthen the ceasefire that Ukraine secured through the Trilateral
Contact Group last July.
Meanwhile, Russia escalated its oppression of any dissent to its brutal
occupation of Crimea. The United States continues to condemn the human rights
abuses taking place under Russia’s repressive occupation. We urge Russia to release
the more than 100 Ukrainian political prisoners whom it is holding and to end its
campaign of intimidation against Crimean Tatars and opponents of the occupation.
The United States reaffirms its unwavering commitment to Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We will never recognize Russia’s attempted
annexation of Crimea. As a result, United States sanctions on Russia in response
to its aggression in eastern Ukraine and its occupation of Crimea will remain in
place unless, and until, Russia reverses course. We continue to support the Minsk
agreements as the way forward in eastern Ukraine. The resolution to the conflict
must be a diplomatic one that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We are also greatly concerned by the restrictions on access that Russia and
its proxies continue to impose on humanitarian workers and the personnel of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission. That is especially troubling, as it comes at a time when vulnerable conflictaffected populations face even greater threats to their lives and livelihoods due to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Russia and its proxies have used the guise
of COVID-19 mitigation measures to further limit the life-saving operations of
humanitarian actors, contrary to humanitarian principles and the OSCE’s mandate
in Ukraine.
Russia must immediately cease its aggression in eastern Ukraine and end its
occupation of Crimea. We call on Russia to withdraw its forces from Ukraine, cease
its support for its proxies and other armed groups and implement all the commitments
that it made under the Minsk agreements. We further call on Russia to grant and
21-0235133/40

S/2021/159

facilitate safe, timely and unhindered access to all humanitarian personnel and
OSCE and United Nations monitors throughout the Ukrainian territory that Russia
controls, including parts of Donetsk, Luhansk and occupied Crimea.
The United States looks forward to continuing to support its Ukrainian
partners in their efforts to uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty and restore its territorial
integrity. To that end, we welcome Ukraine’s Crimean Platform initiative, and we
hope that like-minded partners will consider joining that diplomatic effort to push
back on Russia’s aggression and make clear that the international community will
not tolerate Russia’s brutal occupation.

34/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-inOffice Heidi Grau and Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission Halit
Çevik for their insights on progress in implementing the Minsk agreements and on
the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.
Viet Nam reiterates its principled support for the settlement of all disputes
through peaceful means, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
the fundamental principles of international law. In pursuing that, the legitimate
interests of the parties should be taken into account. We therefore support efforts
to that end, including the achievement of a lasting and peaceful solution in Ukraine
through the implementation of the Minsk agreements. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the following three points.
First, the signing of the Minsk agreements in 2014 and 2015 and the
Normandy format meeting on 9 December 2019 were encouraging signs of efforts
and commitments by the leaders to stabilize and resolve the situation in the conflict
areas. We take note of the positive progress made in the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, including the release and exchanges of prisoners and the ceasefire
agreement reached in Minsk on 27 July 2020.
Secondly, while commitments have been made, it is regrettable that reports
on the situation on the ground continue to show a concerning picture. Hostilities are
ongoing on a daily basis, causing a devastating impact on the lives of civilians and
the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine, including the coronavirus disease
response. Such actions run counter to the Minsk agreements. With the conflict now
in its seventh year, we remain concerned at its deepening impact on the lives of the
population and the stability and development of Ukraine and the region. The more
prolonged the conflict, the harder it will be to resolve the situation.
Thirdly, in order to create conditions conducive to seeking a peaceful settlement
to the conflict, we urge the parties to refrain from further violence and hostilities,
avoid damaging impacts to the population, utilize existing mechanisms and build
upon recent progress. We stress the need for all parties to engage in constructive
dialogue in order to resolve existing challenges, build trust and implement the
agreements in order to stabilize the situation for peace and development in the region.
We also call on the international community and countries to continue supporting
the parties in their efforts for dialogue and the implementation of the agreements and
providing humanitarian assistance to people in need.

21-0235135/40

S/2021/159

Annex XIX
Statement by the Head of the Delegation of Ukraine to the Trilateral
Contact Group, Leonid Kravchuk
[Original: Russian]
I thank you, Madam President, for the opportunity to participate in this debate
on an issue of great importance to my country and, I think, to the security of Europe.
I also thank the briefers and members of the Security Council who expressed
support for Ukraine and provided an assessment of developments related to Russian
aggression. That assessment makes it clear that the Kremlin has not decided to
definitively put an end to the conflict. The aggression continues. People are dying.
The suffering of civilians is intensifying.
My task today is to present first-hand information on the implementation of
the Minsk agreements. Allow me to briefly review the dynamics of the situation.
Ukraine is taking practical steps to resolve the conflict and overcome Russia’s
opposition to the negotiation process. I want to stress that many of those steps would
not have been possible without the support, both bilateral and multilateral, of our
partners, including at the United Nations.
As already mentioned by some members of the Council, on 9 December 2019
the leaders of the Normandy Four adopted a number of important measures to be
implemented by the parties to the conflict.
The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic was also important. Ukraine was one of the first
countries in the world to support it, for obvious reasons. And I ask you, Ms. DiCarlo,
to convey my gratitude to the Secretary-General.
What has been done in practice?
We have been able to agree on the completion of the disengagement in three
pilot sites. We have initiated four new disengagement sites.
Ukraine initiated a permanent — 24/7 — consultation format within the
Trilateral Contact Group after the COVID-19 pandemic started. We know that the
situation with regard to COVID-19 in the occupied territories is very difficult and
that Ukrainians are suffering because of the occupying Government’s failure to
provide the necessary health services.
Ukraine has extended for another year — until 31 December 2021 — the
law on the special status of local self-governance in certain areas of Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.
At the initiative of the Ukrainian delegation, a plan of joint steps aimed at
the implementation of the Minsk agreement was presented to the Trilateral Contact
Group. That document contains practical proposals aimed at ending the conflict and
is fully in line with the letter and spirit of the Minsk agreements.
In December 2019 and April 2020, we agreed on the mutual release of detainees
and were able to release many of our nationals from captivity.
Ukraine has endorsed, ad referendum, the Trilateral Contact Group framework
agreement on mine action, as well as the finalized demining plan for the 19 agreed
areas. The Russian side refuses, under various pretexts, to complete the demining
work there, as well as in the four new disengagement sites.
On the humanitarian track, two new entry-exit checkpoints, in Zolote and
Shchastia in the Luhansk region, were finally opened on 10 November 2020.
36/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Unfortunately, their functioning was interrupted from day one by the occupying
Government of the Russian Federation.
Ukraine also increased the level of representation in the Trilateral Contact
Group by including senior Government officials and heads of parliamentary
committees, as well as prominent representatives of the public from among the
internally displaced persons in certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
As you can see, just a cursory listing of some of the main steps we have
taken together with our partners over the past 12 months is indicative of Ukraine’s
concrete efforts to resolve the situation in Donbas.
Unfortunately, Russia has not reciprocated those efforts. On the contrary,
the number of ceasefire violations by Russian illegal armed groups increased
significantly in January and February, leading to new combat casualties among
Ukrainian servicemen.
Owing to the artificial obstruction of the work of the Trilateral Contact Group
on the political track, there has been no progress in the consideration of Ukraine’s
working proposals regarding the implementation of the political aspects of the
general agreed conclusions of the Normandy Four summit in Paris on 9 December
2019. There is still no adequate response from the Russian side to our actions on
other fronts. Obstruction and blocking are becoming almost the norm for the Russian
delegation in the Trilateral Contact Group.
The aforementioned negotiation process is taking place against the backdrop
of the harsh reality of Russia’s ongoing aggression. Russia is showing disrespect for
the principles and norms of international law. We see restrictions on the freedom of
movement in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine, as well as a lack of safe
and reliable access to the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, including to the temporarily uncontrolled
segment of the Ukrainian-Russian border and temporarily occupied Crimea. The
illegal crossing of the non-controlled segment of the border by Russian cargo and
road convoys, which deliver weapons, ammunition and personnel to the temporarily
occupied territory, has become a common practice.
I must say that no one is currently misled by Russia’s attempts to convince the
international community that there are no Russian troops, weapons or mercenaries
in Ukraine. In fact, the Russian Federation has turned certain areas of Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, as well as Crimea, into major military outposts.
Russia continues to issue hundreds of thousands of Russian passports to
Ukrainian citizens living in the occupied territories. Donbas is on the brink of an
environmental disaster, and not only because of air and soil pollution and explosions
of munitions and mines, but also because of radioactive emissions. I would remind
you that in 1979 a nuclear explosion was carried out by the Soviet Government in
the territory of the Yunkom mine, which is now in temporarily occupied Donbas.
After the explosion, a radioactive cavity was formed in the mine, from which water
was constantly pumped out to prevent radiation from reaching the surface and
groundwater. Almost three years ago, the occupying administration stopped pumping
groundwater, and radiation is already leaking into the aquifers for drinking water.
In addition, as a result of Russian aggression, the International Atomic Energy
Agency has not been able to verify locations in the occupied territories where nuclear
material is used since 2014. Ukraine is making concrete efforts, but so far we have
not received a response from the Russian side to our respective request, which is of
great concern to us.
21-0235137/40

S/2021/159

I am convinced that while we discuss the implementation of the Minsk
agreements we should also think about the future, when the conflict is, I hope, over.
Together with the Security Council and the Secretariat, we need to look strategically
at the future of Donbas. Let us continue our hard but much-needed work. Together
we can do a lot. As Head of the Ukrainian Delegation to the Trilateral Contact Group,
I am ready for close interaction every day. I invite everyone to continue constructive
dialogue, and I am pleased that your Ambassadors in Ukraine are working closely to
that end by providing the necessary assistance to our country.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate that United Nations
peacebuilding work in occupied Donbas can be a very important part of our
cooperation aimed at restoring basic infrastructure, the rule of law, governance and
transitional justice. I hope that reintegration will come about soon, the sooner the
better. Let me assure you that Ukraine will continue to make the necessary efforts to
resolve the conflict. We expect the same approach from the Russian side.

38/40

21-02351

S/2021/159

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
Today Germany is speaking to the Council as part of the so-called Normandy
format. Before I start, I would like to align myself with what my colleague and
friend, French Ambassador Nicolas de Rivière, said earlier.
Russian Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia already alluded to Germany and to our
role in the Security Council. I would like to start my intervention by actually going
back to one of his predecessors on the Security Council. On 19 December 1994, the
then Russian Permanent Representative, Sergey Lavrov, asked the President of the
Security Council to register the so-called Budapest Memorandum as a document of
the Security Council.
The first paragraph reads: “[t]he Russian Federation reaffirms its commitment
to respect the independence and sovereignty and the existing borders of Ukraine.”
Ukraine at the time trusted the Russian commitment and gave up its nuclear arsenal,
which was stationed on its soil. Twenty years later, Ukraine had to pay a very high
price for the good faith it had in the Budapest Memorandum and in Russia: Russia
invaded Crimea and eastern Ukraine. It was staged by Russia as an internal uprising.
But we know from President Putin himself, who decorated the Russian soldiers who
participated in the assault, that those indeed were Russians who invaded Crimea and
eastern Ukraine. That is something we missed in the presentation today by Russian
Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia.
I also would like to recall the saddest moment in the Russian assault of
Ukraine: 17 July 2014, the day of the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
when 300 people died. At the time, the Russian military commander on the field,
Mr. Igor Girkin, went public and rejoiced about the downing of the plane, which he
thought was a Ukrainian plane. Mr. Girkin still lives in freedom in Russia instead
of standing trial in The Hague, where the families of the victims are asking for
accountability for that horrible attack on Flight MH-17. I also missed that in the
statement by the Russian Ambassador, Vassily Nebenzia.
The Russian Ambassador mentioned the Minsk agreements and quoted a
number of paragraphs, but he did not quote any of the first and most important
paragraphs. The first paragraph is on the ceasefire. I was in Minsk. After long
negotiations, the ceasefire was set for midnight on 15 February, six years ago. At that
time, however, the attack of Russian soldiers in Ukraine did not stop, because the
Russian militias were not able to conquer a very important logistical hub, the city of
Debaltseve. Hence they continued to fight for more than two days until the Russian
armed forces were able to do just that.
The second paragraph is about the withdrawing of heavy weapons. Until today,
the Russian heavy weapons have not been withdrawn from the line of command and
control, in violation of the Minsk agreements.
The third paragraph is about effective monitoring. That task was given to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). And we heard again
that until today the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) cannot
do its job. The SMM does not have free access, cannot effectively monitor what is
happening on the ground and, in particular, cannot observe the Russian-Ukrainian
border in the area, which is not controlled by the Ukrainian Government. Therefore,
day after day, Russia can ship soldiers and armaments into Luhansk and Donetsk.
In the latest SMM report, we read that 94 per cent of all incidents affecting the
operationality of the SMM are the responsibility of the separatists. I would like to
21-0235139/40

S/2021/159

take this opportunity, also in the presence of Mr. Çevik, to thank the SMM for its
important work on a very difficult job.
Let us go back to the Minsk agreements. Paragraph 7 is on the safe distribution
of humanitarian assistance. We heard today about the difficulties that humanitarian
organizations encounter when attempting to deliver support to the occupied
territories. We heard a lot about the difficult circumstances of the people living in
those areas.
Paragraph 10 is on the withdrawal of foreign armed formations. Until today,
there are still Russian forces in eastern Ukraine. They may not have the official
stamp of the Russian army, but the Russians continue to be there, and without Russia,
Luhansk and Donetsk could not survive.
When listening today — and I listened very carefully to the Russian
Ambassador — I always have the impression it was Ukraine that invaded Russia,
and not the other way around: that Russia in fact invaded Ukraine.
Yes, there are problems in the Ukrainian Government, which have been there
from the very beginning. I went to Kyiv. I talked to members of the Rada. There is
not a lot of trust in Russian commitment, and one understands why. There are doubts
when you look back to the non-implementation of the Budapest Memorandum.
Therefore, it is not easy for the Rada to approve all the laws and regulations that are
brought forward by the Government. The Rada is not the Duma, where Government
decisions are basically rubber-stamped. This is democracy.
On another occasion we heard the Russian Ambassador lamenting about the
fact that only Belarus and China participated in their December Arria Formula
meeting on eastern Ukraine, but nobody else wanted to listen to the separatists. We
were reminded again today by the former Ukrainian President that the composition
of the Trilateral Contact Group — which is there to resolve the issue and to
implement the Minsk agreements — is Russia, Ukraine and the OSCE. Instead
of trying to give legitimacy to those puppet regimes in Luhansk and Donetsk,
they should concentrate on doing their job. They should finally open Zolote and
Shchastia, instead of telling fantasy stories. They should stop the restrictions on the
movement of the SMM on a daily basis and stop wilfully damaging SMM property.
And Russia should stop issuing Russian passports to large numbers of Ukrainian
nationals. This clearly contradicts the spirit of the Minsk agreements, but is also a
violation of international law.
Unfortunately, the way that Russia behaves in Ukraine is part of a pattern
that we regularly see here in the Security Council, disrespect for international law
and international humanitarian law. We see this in Syria with the backing of the
murderous Al-Assad regime, the undermining of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the bombing of hospitals. We see it in the militias that are stationed in Libya.
And we have seen the poisoning of Mr. Skripal and Mr. Navalny.
Let me end with a recent quote by Chancellor Merkel on the latest Russian
move. She said, “[w]e are witnessing another facet of Russia’s detachment from the
rule of law.” I hope that one day we will see a reversal of this trend.

40/40

21-02351
