UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/662*
14 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 9 JUNE 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Please find attached herewith the report of the Inter-Agency Needs
Assessment Mission that I dispatched to Kosovo and other areas of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia between 16 and 27 May 1999 (see annex).
Given the current relevance of its findings, I would be grateful if you
could bring it to the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

* Reissued for technical reasons.
99-17578 (E)

140699

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 2

Annex
Report of the Inter-Agency Needs Assessment Mission
dispatched by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

CONTENTS
Page
I.

Introduction:

Background and objectives of the Mission .......

3

II.

Executive summary .............................................

5

III.

Recommendations ...............................................

7

IV.

Overview of the crisis ........................................

11

V.

Principal findings of the Mission .............................

15

Appendix I:

List of participants .............................

28

Appendix II:

Mission itinerary ...............................

29

Appendix III:

Map ............................................

32

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 3

I.

INTRODUCTION:

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES OF THE MISSION

1.
The escalation of violence in Kosovo since late 1997 resulted in massive
population displacement, numerous civilian casualties and enormous suffering for
civilian populations. The humanitarian and human rights situation remains
grave. With the commencement of air strikes by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in late
March 1999, the Kosovo crisis gained new, unexpected proportions. The present
report covers the period immediately preceding the most recent and encouraging
political developments. These are taken into account in the formulation of
recommendations, but not in the main body of the report which reflects the
Mission’s actual findings.
2.
Objectives. Against this background, the Secretary-General proposed, and
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia agreed, that a United
Nations Inter-Agency Needs Assessment Mission be dispatched to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia from 16 to 27 May 1999.1 The Mission was led by
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Sergio Vieira de Mello. The primary objective of the Mission, as
set out by the Secretary-General, was to provide an initial assessment of the
emergency needs of civilian populations and of the medium-term rehabilitation
requirements in the country in light of the approaching winter. While Kosovo
was the principal focus of the Mission’s work, the situation of the civilian
populations affected by the conflict in the rest of the country was also part of
the Mission’s concerns. Given the short time-frame and various security and
political constraints, the Mission was intended as an initial assessment of the
nature and magnitude of the needs, to be followed by a more in-depth
inter-agency needs assessment, as well as sectoral evaluations by relevant
agencies.
3.
Itinerary. The Mission covered almost 3,000 km. in 11 days, travelling to
the Provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina in Serbia, as well as to other areas in
the Republic of Serbia and to the Republic of Montenegro. From 17 to 20 May,
the Mission visited Belgrade, the cities of Pancevo and Novi Sad, in the Serbian
Province of Vojvodina, and the towns of Aleksinac, Surdulica, Cacak, Kragujevac
and Nis in central and southern Serbia. From 20 to 23 May, the Mission
travelled around Kosovo, visiting Pristina, Podujevo, Urosevac, Djeneral
Jankovic, Kacanik, Gnjilane, Stimjle, Prizren, Djakovica, Kosovska Mitrovica and
Pec, as well as several villages around these town centres. From 23 to 24 May,

1
Organizations and offices participating in the Mission were the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Labour
Organization (ILO), the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP/UNHCS), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the United Nations Mine Action Service in the Department of
Political Affairs, the World Food Programme (WFP), the World Health Organization
(WHO) and Save the Children Fund, representing the non-governmental organization
community. A list of participants is contained in appendix I.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 4

the Mission visited Rozaje, Podgorica and Ulcinj in the Republic of Montenegro,
before returning to Belgrade, via Mount Zlatibor and Uzice, for final meetings
with federal authorities on 26 May. The Mission met with a wide cross-section
of Yugoslav society, including federal, republican, provincial and local
authorities, among them a significant number of opposition politicians,
refugees, internally displaced persons, doctors, plant managers, teachers,
villagers, journalists and many ordinary citizens. Meetings were also held with
members of the diplomatic corps in Belgrade, as well as with international
humanitarian organizations, national non-governmental organizations and members
of civil society.
4.
Cooperation of government and access. The Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia responded promptly and positively to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal and provided access to the country and support to the
Mission, despite the state of war, especially through the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Zivadin Jovanovic, and his colleagues. NATO headquarters
cooperated fully in ensuring the Mission’s safety. The Mission travelled widely
and received adequate access to Montenegro and Serbia. In Kosovo, access and
freedom of movement were more than expected, but less than requested. Most
importantly, the Mission had the opportunity to make random stops and
unscheduled spot checks and to conduct interviews in Kosovo. The Mission
acknowledged the fact that it was granted access to the Kosovo province, despite
the state of war. The local government - named the "Provisional Executive
Council" and presided over by Mr. Zoran Andjelkovic - was cooperative and
pragmatic. Security forces, on the other hand, were less so (access was denied,
inter alia, to the village of Talinovac, with returning internally displaced
persons and a number of other villages and areas with presumed internally
displaced person concentrations). Security concerns put forward by the
Government, including those related to the safety of the Mission, were often
neither understandable, nor convincing. It was pointed out repeatedly that the
Mission was authorized and prepared to take risks and that denial of access to
several areas gave rise to serious questions as to the fate of civilians
presumed to be assembled therein. It was evident that the main decisions at the
field level were not being taken by civilian authorities. The Mission attempted
to access areas alleged to be under Kosovo Liberation Army influence, in order
to verify the condition of internally displaced person populations. In one
instance, the Mission received assurances from KLA that the visit could take
place. The following day, coincidentally, both the Government and KLA,
respectively, refused and strongly advised against the visit, both alleging
security reasons. The area in question was Sedlare, north-west of Stimlje.
5.
Despite restrictions imposed on its movements in Kosovo, the Mission was
able to form what it believes is an accurate opinion on the situation prevailing
in that province as well as of preceding events.
6.
The Mission wishes to express its gratitude to the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and to the doctors and staff of the Belgrade
Central Hospital for the exemplary emergency assistance and treatment provided
to two of its members, seriously injured in a vehicle accident on 18 May 1999.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 5

II.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

7.
Magnitude of the crisis. While the conflict in Kosovo is at the core of
the latest crisis in south-eastern Europe and the suffering and massive
displacement of refugees and internally displaced persons from and within Kosovo
have to date been its most visible consequences, numerous other factors,
including the aftermath of the break-up of the former Yugoslavia, the impact of
the long-standing pattern of abuses of human rights, the effect of years of
severe sanctions and the aerial bombardment by NATO, have left the whole country
and indeed the region, severely debilitated. In addition to immediate
humanitarian needs of the refugees, internally displaced and other civilian
populations, the socio-economic, environmental and physical toll of the conflict
throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and beyond is immense and has
created a new type of complex humanitarian emergency. The challenges presented
by this emergency in a comparatively developed environment exceed the
humanitarian purview, or for that matter, the experience and capacity of any
single agency and oblige the United Nations to bring the full range of its
expertise, as well as strategic partnerships with other actors, to bear. It
will require, before and especially after a settlement of the Kosovo conflict is
achieved, comprehensive action by the United Nations, the international
financial institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC) and non-governmental organizations in order to address all the
aspects of the crisis.
8.
Kosovo. The crisis in Kosovo has resulted in the mass forced displacement
and deportation of hundreds of thousands of civilians, wholesale destruction of
property and means of livelihood, wanton lawlessness and violence, thousands of
documented killings, countless as-yet undocumented deaths, and immeasurable
human suffering. Throughout the Mission, it was made clear to Yugoslav
interlocutors, at all levels, that this was at the very core of the present
conflict, and hence of its solution. Today, over 850,000 Kosovo Albanians have
fled the Province for neighbouring countries and into the Republic of Montenegro
and several tens of thousands have gone further afield. An unknown number of
Serb residents and Serb refugees temporarily resettled in Kosovo are also said
to have fled to other areas of the Republic of Serbia. Refugees who have
arrived in neighbouring countries have given consistent accounts of civilians
being subjected to systematic and extreme human rights violations by security
forces, of executions, of forced eviction from their homes, deportations,
arbitrary detention, acts of sexual violence and burning of homes. Many have
also reported being stripped of their identity and other documents as they left
Kosovo. Within Kosovo, it is estimated that hundreds of thousands may be
internally displaced. It is also estimated that the entire population remaining
in the province is in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. Those internally
displaced persons whom the Mission came across, were living in miserable
conditions, often close to their homes, but fearful of return. They stated that
their most pressing needs were for physical security and basic survival items
and services, in that order. All the arguments put forward by officials of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Government, however plausible and legitimate,
cannot explain its failure to exercise its obligation to protect its own
citizens against generalized acts of violence prohibited by and punishable under
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 6

international law, believed to have been largely committed by its own agents. A
sudden change of the situation on the ground, for example, the deployment of an
international force and the return of Kosovo Albanian refugees and internally
displaced persons - could cause the departure of Serb resident minorities from
Kosovo. Every effort must be made to assure their security.
9.
Country-wide problems. Throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a
result of NATO air strikes, numerous civilians have suffered injury and loss of
life, while large-scale destruction of and damage to physical infrastructure and
means of production has had a devastating impact on industry, employment, the
environment, essential services and agriculture. Among the most vulnerable and
neglected are the more than half a million Croatian and Bosnian Serb refugees
from previous conflicts. Prior to the Kosovo conflict, they constituted the
largest refugee population in a single European country. Their plight should
not be overshadowed by the recent crisis. These refugees deserve assistance
from local authorities and the international community, as well as an urgent
solution to their plight. In the Republic of Montenegro, the cumulative effect
of the break-up of the former Yugoslavia, of the socio-economic consequences of
sanctions and of Belgrade’s economic, financial and political stance, have
brought the economy to the brink of collapse. This has also undermined the
Republic’s absorptive capacity with respect to the internally displaced persons
from Kosovo, who, together with refugees from the Bosnian conflict, comprise
15 per cent of its total population.
10. International response. The United Nations, intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations must quickly establish a
substantial presence throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, primarily in
Kosovo. This is essential in order to mount a relief operation comprising
protection, food assistance, health care, nutrition, emergency rehabilitation,
and to carry out more detailed, sectoral assessments. In this context, the
international community will require guarantees regarding free access to all
areas within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, clearance of goods, mechanisms
for distribution and security for agency staff, particularly radio
communications. In Kosovo, such a presence must be sufficiently strong,
credible and dissuasive to provide refugees and internally displaced persons the
necessary confidence and security that constitute a pre-requisite for their
return. The forthcoming winter will cause tremendous hardship for millions of
civilians throughout the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in
particular Kosovo, given the wide-scale damage to housing, infrastructure and
essential services. It is imperative to ensure a coordinated approach in
meeting the short-term relief and rehabilitation needs of refugees, internally
displaced persons and affected vulnerable populations. Planning for medium and
longer-term needs must also begin now and a smooth and equitable transition from
relief to reconstruction and development activities will be essential.
Neglecting the overall picture and the need for a carefully balanced regional
strategy may, again, endanger the attainment of the ultimate goal, namely a new
regime conducive to the overcoming of the culture of intolerance, and achieving
reconciliation, cooperation, peace, security and prosperity in south-eastern
Europe. Broader European and world security considerations call for such an
approach.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 7

11. The rapidly changing political environment and the current indications of a
possible political solution to the latest crisis, further strengthened the
findings of the Mission and have added urgency to the implementation of its
recommendations. Most importantly, if followed through, the positive political
process will remove the single most daunting obstacle to wide-scale emergency
relief and rehabilitation activities, by improving the overall security
situation for international humanitarian protection and assistance efforts.

III.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Regional, integrated strategy. In order to be effective and to engender
durable solutions, assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
including to Kosovo, must be undertaken as an integral part of a broader,
region-wide strategy, which would encompass all the countries and regions
of south-eastern Europe. This strategy, whether packaged as a "Marshall
Plan for the Balkans", or under any other designation, should, on the one
hand, truly cover the entire region, and on the other, be coordinated with
and integrated into, the overall activities of the United Nations,
including its peacekeeping and peace-making efforts. The United Nations
Regional Coordinator should promote such a strategy, in synergy with all
actors.
Comprehensive international approach. With the Kosovo crisis the world is
confronted with an entirely new and complex pattern of a humanitarian
emergency occurring in a comparatively developed environment, involving a
multitude of actors, causes and factors, and affecting extensive
geographical areas. The totality of these factors belie a situation, the
remedies of which exceed the experience, knowledge and capacity of
humanitarian institutions alone. It will require, before and especially
after a settlement is achieved, an unprecedented, comprehensive analysis
and joint effort on the part of the United Nations, regional organizations,
and the non-governmental community. Piecemeal approaches or excessively
cumbersome, externally imposed solutions will not do. Conditions must also
be created for international financial institutions eventually to play
their essential role.
Re-establish an international presence. The United Nations, cooperating
with intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations,
should urgently re-establish the necessary humanitarian and development
presence in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including in Belgrade,
Pristina and Podgorica, in order to mount a comprehensive relief operation
and to carry out more detailed sectoral assessments in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, in particular in Kosovo. From the security standpoint, all
United Nations organizations should be located in common premises in all
three cities, but especially in Pristina, with sub-offices being opened as
the security situation permits. In Kosovo a clear distinction must be made
between the pre-peace and post-peace scenarios:
A. Prior to a peace settlement the United Nations Kosovo office would be
responsible for relief assistance in all accessible areas of the Province
for gradually widening such a space, for contingency planning and for
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 8

eventual implementation of operations to support the return and
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced persons, for
preparations for the coming winter and other emergency and rehabilitation
needs.
B.
As part of a peace settlement humanitarian, short and medium-term
refugee and internally displaced person reintegration and rehabilitation
activities should be given the highest priority under the leadership of a
single entity as an integral component of an eventual and hopefully unitary
civilian implementation structure (as was, for instance, the case in
Cambodia). This entity would have a clear responsibility for inclusive
humanitarian coordination, interface and complementarity with a likely
military peacekeeping force as well as with rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development components and agencies. A small operational inter-agency
planning and coordination cell with secondees from different key
operational agencies should be established in advance of its actual
deployment, under the lead humanitarian agency and with support from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Such a cell would be
responsible for joint planning and for coordination and allocation of tasks
among all humanitarian organizations, as well as for coordination with
other civilian components and the military contingents.
In both scenarios A and B, the legal and administrative procedures to
facilitate the work of non-governmental organizations within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia need to be established. Among the priority issues
will be access to all areas within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
clearance of goods, mechanisms for distribution and monitoring, and
security for agency staff, including radio communications. An early and
favourable resolution of the case of the three Co-operative for American
Relief Everywhere, Inc. (CARE) Australia staff detained by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities is urgently required and the United
Nations should continue to actively seek their release.
Justice. An individual and collective sense of justice is one of the
pillars of reconciliation, hence of tolerance and peace. The International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia must be enabled, forthwith, to
carry out its mandate in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and must, in
particular, form part of any international presence in Kosovo from its
earliest stage.
Human rights. Any agreement to resolve the Kosovo crisis should provide an
adequate basis for future observance of human rights and the establishment
of effective human rights institutions in Kosovo and throughout the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. There must be a substantial capacity for human
rights programming. This is essential in order to meet both the longer
term needs of working with authorities in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to improve national human rights capacity, as well as the
immediate needs involving protection, monitoring and inquiries regarding
missing persons. The International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia should form a part of any peacekeeping mission in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia from its earliest stage.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 9

Assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons. In the context of
a peace agreement, the needs of all refugees and internally displaced
persons, including those from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, must be
addressed. New displacement of Serb civilians from Kosovo occur as a
result of the conflict in that Province. The United Nations should
consider establishing a systematic assistance programme for all refugees
and internally displaced persons in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as
well as other vulnerable members of the local population. The Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities accepted the Mission’s proposal to
dispatch an urgent inter-agency mission, including FAO, ILO, IOM, UNDP,
UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP and WHO and to conduct an evaluation of categories,
numbers, needs and other assistance criteria. In the case of Kosovo, UNHCR
would lead such a mission, the modalities of which would vary radically
depending on whether a political solution is found.
Emergency assistance to civilians throughout the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Among the most vulnerable groups in need of immediate
assistance are refugees and the displaced, children, the elderly, women,
the institutionalized and the unemployed. Modalities for the regular
dispatch of humanitarian convoys to assist these vulnerable groups in
Kosovo and in other parts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as
discussed with the Federal authorities, need to be defined. Until access
to all areas and all vulnerable populations is permitted, alternative
strategies, for example humanitarian air drops, may be required.
Women and children. The impact of the conflict on children throughout the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, especially in Kosovo, is immeasurable and
urgent attention should be focused on their recovery and developmental
needs. Children affected by the crisis suffer in specific ways, not least
through physical and psychological trauma, loss of education and separation
from their families. Evidence of acts of sexual violence being perpetrated
against women and young girls is growing.2 UNICEF should take the lead to
ensure that appropriate strategies are incorporated within humanitarian
assistance programmes.
Winterization. Should refugees and internally displaced persons return in
the coming weeks, winterization plans for them and for the non-displaced
populations in Kosovo are an obvious priority. Emergency rehabilitation
needs should also be addressed throughout the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia before the coming winter, including restoration of water supply,
of heating and power generation, particularly in areas where survival needs
are threatened, for example hospitals and other social institutions. Also
agricultural inputs, including seeds, should be provided to those able to
initiate winter crops.
Support to Montenegro. Immediate and direct budgetary support should be
provided to Montenegro before the situation there deteriorates further.
Increased humanitarian assistance to refugees and internally displaced
persons is also necessary, provided Federal authorities agree - as
requested by the Mission - to lift the blockade on direct assistance
routes.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 10

A smooth transition from short-term assistance to longer-term
rehabilitation and reconstruction. An integrated approach to support the
reintegration of the returning and affected local populations, and the
transition from relief to development must be adopted from the outset.
This should be facilitated in a Kosovo peace scenario, by the mechanism
suggested above. In other parts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the
Regional Coordinator, UNDP and the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)
should assume responsibility for coordination and the gradual involvement
of international and local agencies, bilateral donors, government and local
authorities and representatives of the community and civil society. In
Kosovo, FAO, ILO, IOM, UNDP, UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP and WHO should commence
preparations for an integrated area development approach to the return and
reintegration process. Major efforts must focus on the agricultural
sector, as well as income generation, employment and rehabilitation.
Reconstruction and development. The United Nations and its specialized
agencies should seek strategic partnerships with the European Union, the
Bretton Woods institutions, and other major actors, including
non-governmental organizations and bilateral donors, to prepare
reconstruction plans for Kosovo, as soon as possible. Reconstruction
should ultimately extend to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as a whole:
economic, social and environmental programmes will have to be carried out
to repair the damage caused by the conflict. Civil society and community
relations development will require encouragement and substantive support.
Employment. The conflict and the destruction of the industrial
infrastructure, as a result of air strikes, have created a colossal
unemployment problem, vastly expanding the number of civilians living in
poverty throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in particular in
Serbia. The United Nations with FAO and ILO, and other intergovernmental
and non-governmental institutions, should quickly plan with the relevant
local bodies major emergency employment promotion schemes to absorb these
vulnerable groups as early as possible. Such projects would also reduce
the likelihood of the irregular migratory floods out of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in the months ahead.
Environment. Given the gravity of potential environmental consequences of
the conflict and NATO bombing in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
their regional ramifications, a more detailed assessment of the full extent
of the environmental impact is urgently required. A fact-finding mission
should be undertaken involving UNDP, ECE, UNEP and Habitat.
Agriculture. FAO should take the lead in conducting agricultural sector
reviews, particularly in Kosovo, and in assisting in the establishment of a
sustainable food security and coordination system.
Health. Health services have been disrupted due to years of sanctions, and
damage to hospitals and primary health-care centres throughout the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, especially in Kosovo. In addition, the civilian
population’s ability to access health services has been undermined because
of damage to transport infrastructure and lack of power. Rehabilitation of
hospitals and primary health-care centres (including the primary school
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 11

health-care institutions network), and provision of urgently needed
supplies, are therefore high priorities. Special attention should also be
paid to re-employment and training of medical staff.
Governance. Developing governance programmes for the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and, in particular for Kosovo in the context of a possible
transitional administration is a recommended priority area for the United
Nations. Projects aimed at the strengthening of macroeconomic management
capacity, legislative systems, the legal framework, the judiciary, civilian
police and election management capacity, along with mechanisms for
political reconciliation, public administration and civil service reform,
inter alia, must be explored, particularly in Kosovo, taking advantage of
national human resources, experience and skills. Progress must be nurtured
from within.
Mine action. The presence of a large number of mines represents a severe
impediment to the safe return of refugees and displaced populations to
their homes. The United Nations should consider establishing a coordinated
mechanism for integrated mine action as soon as possible. Landmines and
unexploded ordnance will present a significant obstacle to the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to Kosovo, and the normalization
process. Unexploded ordnance, as a result of the NATO air campaign and
possible booby-trapping by departing Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces,
are also likely to require early specialized and systematic search and
neutralization or destruction.
Small arms. The complex issue of small arms and light weapons - including
disarmament, weapons collection and destruction, registration or transfer must be addressed in a coordinated manner, taking into account the regional
dimension of the problem and with a view to the development of a
sustainable peace process, with emphasis on a disarmament campaign in
Kosovo.

IV.

OVERVIEW OF THE CRISIS

12. Background. The current crisis in Kosovo has complex historical, political
and socio-economic roots. Long-standing, systemic violations of civil,
political and human rights led, in turn, to an escalating pattern of violence
and retaliation. In particular, a pattern of serious human rights abuses
against Kosovo Albanians has been documented by the Special Rapporteurs of the
Commission on Human Rights, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and other independent observers since 1993.
13. By late March 1998, following an increase in the hostilities between
Serbian special police and the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), the United Nations
estimated that 20,000 persons had been internally displaced, primarily Kosovo
Albanians but also Serbs and others. The period between April and June 1998 saw
an increase in armed incidents that increased the number of displaced persons
and triggered refugee flows into Albania. Attacks on police and others
associated or sympathizing with Serbian authorities also grew, as did reported
kidnappings, hostage-taking and summary executions. By 30 June 1998, UNHCR
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 12

estimated that 76,300 persons had been displaced, 52,900 within Kosovo, 13,400
into Montenegro, and 10,000 refugees into Albania. Within Kosovo, delivery of
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons became increasingly
difficult, given the level of violence and risks of travel.
14. Late June, July and August 1998 saw significant changes on the ground, and
fierce exchanges between KLA and Serbian forces. In the face of Serbian
government gains, KLA returned to isolated strikes against police, which
prompted retaliation by security forces against the ethnic Albanian population.
By the end of August, open fighting by KLA and retaliatory action by government
security forces had reportedly led to the death of 700 civilians, the
destruction of entire villages and, as UNHCR reported, the displacement of over
240,000 persons, the vast majority of whom - 170,000 - were displaced within
Kosovo. There were also 20,000 internally displaced persons in other parts of
Serbia, 34,000 in Montenegro, 14,000 refugees in Albania, roughly 1,000 in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and growing numbers of asylum-seekers in
western European countries. August and September 1998 brought discoveries of
killings, including the massacres of civilians.
15. The Holbrooke-Milosevic accord of 13 October 1998, followed by the
agreements between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Government and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on one hand, and NATO
on the other, brought a temporary lull in the fighting. The deployment of the
OSCE Kosovo Verification Mission and the withdrawal of Serbian/Yugoslav forces
instilled a measure of confidence that a ceasefire would hold and that political
negotiations could prosper. This permitted the gradual return of some of the
displaced to their homes and the implementation of a major humanitarian
protection and assistance operation. At the same time, on the political front,
intensive efforts were undertaken by the Contact Group and other States to bring
about a political solution, culminating in the Rambouillet negotiations.
Unfortunately these efforts did not reach the political settlement which had
been hoped for.
16. In December 1998, fighting broke out again in Kosovo and intensified.
Displacement started anew, and re-displacement accelerated. The burning of
homes and destruction of villages by Serb forces, which had not occurred since
September 1998, started again and KLA actions in the form of killings and
disappearances, as well as attacks on police and other security forces,
intensified. From January through March, the violence increased and penetrated
the region’s cities. Violations of the October ceasefire continued in a pattern
of almost daily targeted killings, punctuated by episodes of large-scale
violence involving Kosovo Albanian paramilitary forces and Serbian police,
security forces, or the Yugoslav Army. One such violent outbreak, at Racak,
left 45 people dead on 15/16 January 1999. Pristina erupted with café bombings,
and it appeared that at least one casualty every day was found along a Kosovo
roadside. By 24 March 1999, UNHCR estimated that there were some 260,000 (old
and newly) displaced persons in Kosovo.
17. The Kosovo crisis entered a new phase with the commencement of NATO air
strikes in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 24 March 1999. In the first
eight days, UNHCR reported that some 220,000 persons were forcibly expelled from
Kosovo to Albania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro.
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 13

While the number of those fleeing to or displaced within Serbia was not known,
it is known that displacement had occurred creating additional humanitarian
needs. Today, UNHCR estimates that over 850,000 persons have fled Kosovo into
neighbouring countries, and several tens of thousands have gone further afield,
including to countries in Western Europe.
18. Kosovo. The humanitarian needs of the internally displaced and other
civilians remaining in Kosovo are urgent and immense, with food and the
provision of primary health care as the major priorities. internally displaced
persons interviewed gave accounts which corroborated those given by refugees in
neighbouring countries and by displaced civilians in Montenegro: all spoke of
being driven from their homes by various means of pressure, ranging from direct
eviction by masked, armed groups or Yugoslav military and police, to shelling
and burning of their villages by Yugoslav military. The Mission witnessed
burning houses, and met with columns of internally displaced persons leaving or
returning to their villages in tractors and on foot, in what appeared to be
involuntary movements organized by official authorities. The damage caused to
towns and villages was very disturbing, with houses, apartments and shops
belonging to Kosovar Albanians having been systematically burned and/or looted.
Members of the Mission who had been present in Kosovo earlier in 1999 were of
the view that the destruction of Albanian properties since that time had been
extensive and widespread. Along with the re-establishment of adequate
conditions of security, this reconstruction and rehabilitation task will present
a major challenge to the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
The damage witnessed, taken together with the testimony of internally displaced
persons and refugees interviewed, indicated to the Mission that unjustifiable
and deliberate force, far exceeding legitimate counter-insurgency measures has
been and continues to be used by the Yugoslav security forces against the
civilian Albanian population in Kosovo.
19. Overall situation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The conflict in
Kosovo and the NATO air campaign have significantly debilitated the fragile and
precarious socio-economic state of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which had
already been weakened by the break-up of the former Yugoslavia, previous
conflicts and sanctions. In addition to the human costs of the conflict,
evidenced notably by numerous civilian casualties, the destruction of major
industries by the air bombardment, as well as damage caused to infrastructure
and essential services such as water and electricity supply, health services,
education, communications, heating, the damage to land and river transportation
links and the loss of trade, have caused tremendous economic and social hardship
for the civilian populations. Large numbers of persons, especially in densely
populated centres of Vojvodina and southern Serbia where the air strikes have
been particularly intensive, are reported to have moved to seek shelter in what
are perceived to be "safe" locations outside cities. Children, in particular,
are being sent away from their parents and have not resumed the school year
since the start of the NATO campaign. Severe restrictions on fuel have
effectively brought civilian Serbia to a standstill, and many parts are often
without electricity and water. Agricultural production, dependent as it was on
inputs such as fertilizers that are no longer available, due to the destruction
of some of the most important fertilizer plants, is bound to suffer in the
medium term. Environmental damage following air strikes on a number of chemical
plants and refineries and its possible regional effects require urgent
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 14

specialized evaluation and action. Most notably, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is now facing an unemployment rate of crisis proportions, which will
likely result in increased need for humanitarian assistance to large groups of
vulnerable civilians lacking adequate income or social protection.
20. Republic of Montenegro. Montenegro is suffering from socio-economic
problems similar to the rest of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a result
of the recent border closures and sanctions. Montenegro has so far escaped from
wide-scale NATO air strikes and the resulting heavy damage to industry,
infrastructure and employment. The situation in the Republic has been made more
difficult by the Federal restrictions on the entry of goods, including
humanitarian assistance, into Montenegro through its port at Bar or from
Croatia. This is creating an additional strain in the already tense situation
of internally displaced persons from Kosovo, who, together with refugees from
previous conflicts, represent 15 per cent of the total population. Montenegro’s
main sources of income are presently depleted while the relatively small
industrial and agro-industrial sector is also facing difficulties. As a
consequence, the government budget is nearly bankrupt requiring emergency
financing.
21. Refugees. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to host the second
largest refugee population of any country in Europe, with over 500,000 refugees
from the conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, who are living in
extremely difficult conditions caused by the general economic situation and
inadequate international attention and assistance. Additional assistance for
this group of Serb refugees will also be required, as well as a reaffirmation of
their fundamental rights to permanent solutions, equal to those of refugees from
Kosovo - first and foremost repatriation, so as to avoid setting double
humanitarian standards in the region. The possible early solution of the Kosovo
Albanian refugee and internally displaced persons problem would create a unique
opportunity to promote durable and fair solutions to other lingering
humanitarian problems in the region.
22. General economic considerations. The outbreak of the conflict in
Yugoslavia has added a new dimension to the already unfavourable external
environment for many transition economies, worsening further their short-term
economic outlook. The conflict-related economic damage already incurred is
quite substantial. Neighbouring countries (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, Romania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)
have lost important markets as well as traditional supplies in Yugoslavia. The
transport links to and from the south-eastern part of Europe have been severely
impaired: navigation along the Danube has been paralysed by the destroyed
bridges and all traffic through Yugoslavia (ground, rail and air) has been
brought to a halt. The negative effects are especially strong for the
international trade between western Europe, the main trading partner, and the
countries locked in the Balkan region (in particular Bulgaria, Romania and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): as the available alternative routes are
of limited capacity, this has resulted in the interruption of important trade
flows. In addition, the loss of the Danube as a waterway will have a
pan-European negative impact with the costly interruption in shipments for all
the riparian countries. Tourism, an important source of employment and income
for the region, will again be negatively affected this summer.
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 15

23. The conflict has undoubtedly increased investors’ perception of risk in the
whole area surrounding the zone of the conflict and this will restrain access to
international financial markets and raise borrowing costs for the affected
countries, which in general are badly in need of fresh finance. The inflow of
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to this region - an important force for economic
restructuring as well as balance of payments support - is also likely to be
curbed. The fact is that the conflict will have a significant negative economic
impact on all the countries of south-eastern Europe, most of which were already
in a precarious state.
24. The above considerations reveal an entirely new and complex pattern of
humanitarian emergency occurring in a comparatively developed environment,
involving causes, actors and factors, and affecting geographical areas that
exceed the experience, knowledge and capacity of humanitarian institutions
alone. It will require, before and especially after a settlement is achieved,
an unprecedented, comprehensive analysis and treatment on the part of the United
Nations, the international financial institutions, regional organizations, and
the non-governmental community in order to address - fairly, equitably and
promptly - all its facets. Only then will south-eastern Europe stand a chance
of reversing the destructive trends of the past and turning to the peaceful and
prosperous future that its nations and people deserve.
25. With this prospect in mind, the United Nations will need to expand and
strengthen its humanitarian and developmental presence in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. It is critical that the United Nations puts in place mechanisms
that will bring the whole gamut of the Organization’s expertise to bear on the
task of the emergency relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction. While the
needs are vast, the resources the United Nations can mobilize, coordinate and
bring to bear will foster the kind of multidisciplinary approach on which a
successful peace process depends. The United Nations should create strategic
partnerships with the European Union, the Bretton Woods institutions and other
major actors, including non-governmental organizations. The combined United
Nations expertise must be mobilized to prepare for and coordinate a regional
reconstruction and development plan. The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expressed the hope that the United Nations would fully re-engage
itself without delay.
26. The above findings were shared and discussed in a frank manner with Federal
Ministers upon conclusion of the Mission.

V.

PRINCIPAL FINDINGS OF THE MISSION
PROVINCE OF KOSOVO

General situation
27. Apart from some city centres, where there are very few people and
practically no vehicles on the streets, Kosovo is a panorama of burned houses,
untended farms, wandering livestock, empty villages, and looted shops. In
addition to government officials, the Mission interviewed internally displaced
persons, representatives of many ethnic groups, different political parties, and
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 16

residents who have remained in their homes. Their accounts were all consistent
that, in the parts of Kosovo visited by the Mission, the period from 24 March to
10 April was a rampage of killing, burning, looting, forced expulsion, violence,
vendetta and terror. After the first 10 to 15 days of NATO attacks, the pace
and intensity of developments differ from village to village. However,
residents of Kosovo recounted having witnessed expulsions, burning of homes and
business properties, looting, forced disappearances, and summary executions. In
Pristina, local authorities moved to control the scope of the rampage after the
first 10 to 15 days. Authorities acknowledged to the Mission that capital
crimes have not ceased in Pristina, but that they are so far attributed to
"unknown perpetrators".
28. The Mission saw widespread, systematically damaged, abandoned Albanian
homes, shops and businesses in the areas of Kosovo visited. In some areas,
approximately 80 per cent of the homes had been burnt. Two separate incidents
of house burning witnessed by the Mission in areas where no fighting was
occurring undermined official explanations that this damage had been caused in
firefights between Serbian forces and KLA. In one town visited, Kosovska
Mitrovica, where large sections of the town had been burnt and looted, the head
of the regional government admitted that the police had cleared many ethnic
Albanians out of the city to prevent their homes and shops being used by KLA.
This explanation was consistent with refugee accounts. Of the towns and cities
visited by the Mission, exclusive of Serb-majority villages, only Pristina and
Prizren municipality appears to have been spared the wholesale destruction of
property and means of livelihood of Kosovo Albanians. An early and thorough
investigation must be carried out by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia.
29. Throughout Kosovo many thousands of ethnic Albanian families have abandoned
comfortable homes, businesses or farms. The internally displaced persons whom
the Mission encountered were living in appallingly miserable conditions, often
close to their homes. Those interviewed told the Mission that Serb forces would
not allow their return. Others claimed that they would be harmed if they
returned. Anti-Albanian and pro-Serb slogans painted on buildings were evident
in all areas where Albanian evacuations have occurred. With some exceptions,
mosques generally remained undamaged, even in areas where there were large
levels of destruction. There was evidence of soldiers occupying abandoned
homes, schools and in one instance, occupying a defensive position around a
mosque.
Refugees and internally displaced persons
30. Urosevac. On 21 May 1999, the Mission encountered and interviewed members
of a group of approximately 200 Albanians in Urosevac, part of a larger group of
about 1,500 persons, who had been prevented from leaving for the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia by local authorities at the train station. They said that
they wanted to leave Kosovo owing to fear of Serbian police present in their
village and the general climate of insecurity. On questioning the authorities
as to why the group had been prevented from leaving, members of the Mission were
told that the authorities of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had
closed the border and would not allow refugees to enter. Moreover, there was no
need for the group to leave as their village, Talinovac, was safe. Despite
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 17

those reassurances, the Mission’s requests to visit the village were later
rejected by the authorities on security grounds.
31. Djeneral Jankovic. The Mission also visited Djeneral Jankovic, on the
border of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on 21 May. While 1,260
refugees were reported by UNHCR to have crossed into the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia on 21 May, at the time of the Mission’s visit, the border
was deserted. The Mission saw roughly 200 tractors and wagons parked below an
embankment at a cement factory metres from the border. Those typical refugee
vehicles were packed with personal belongings and appeared to have been
abandoned by the refugees prior to crossing the border. Questioned by the
Mission as to why the refugees had not been able to take the vehicles with them,
Serbian authorities claimed that this was because the border of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had been closed and when it reopened, the
refugees had crossed on foot. Moreover, some of the tractors could not cross
because they were not legally registered (the Mission, however, sighted
registration plates on a number of the vehicles).
32. Kacanik. While Albanians previously made up 70 per cent of the population
of Kacanik, at the time of the Mission’s visit on 21 May, all of the Albanians
were gone, save for four sick and elderly Albanian men who had been left behind
living in the mosque. The impression was that the evacuation by the Albanians
was very hasty. Livestock, family pets, valuable household possessions,
personally valuable items, such as photograph albums and personal documents,
were all left behind. In one apartment, a pot of tea ready to be consumed had
been left on the table and fresh laundry still hung from the line on the
balcony. Several Roma teenagers informed the Mission that the Albanian
population had been forcibly evicted by the military and would suffer grave
consequences if they returned to the village.
33. Podujevo area. On 22 May 1999, the Mission visited two villages near
Podujevo, some 25 km north of Pristina, where internally displaced persons were
reportedly located. Many clashes occurred in this area between the KLA and the
military during January and February 1999. At the village of Svetlje, the
Mission found a large group of internally displaced persons, to whom the Mission
was able to speak in the absence of government officials. The information
provided by the internally displaced persons in Sajkovac, the other village
visited, mirrored that received in Svetlje. The following accounts were given:
(a) The internally displaced persons estimated that some 70,000 of the
estimated 120,000 pre-bombing population in and around the area of Podujevo had
left, with up to 20,000 internally displaced persons still living in the general
Sajkovac area, with many more hiding in the mountains and hills surrounding
Podujevo;
(b) The internally displaced persons came from the town of Podujevo and
over 40 other villages in the surrounding area. The majority of those who had
left had been forced by the military or police to leave their homes. Many were
forced at gunpoint by masked men in military uniform. Summary executions were
also reported. Most were forced to leave a few days after the NATO bombings
started. Others had left due to shelling or shooting attacks on their villages;

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 18

(c) Some had wanted to go to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia but
had been stopped in Pristina by police and forced to move to these villages.
Others said that Kosovo was their home and that they had no intention of
leaving. Most initially fled to the mountains, where they spent up to a month
before deciding to try to return home. When attempting to return, the
authorities moved them instead to various strategic pockets of land chosen by
the military. Svetlje and Sajkovac were two such villages where the military
had forced people to stay and where there appeared to be no significant KLA
presence. While many wished to return home, they were prevented from doing so
by the military. There was no freedom of movement outside the village. Many
men of various ages were present in both villages;
(d) Internally displaced persons claimed that over the past 5 weeks, 20
people had died of illness, 5 of whom were children. There were however, no
signs of malnutrition;
(e) The internally displaced persons did not think that there were any
Albanians remaining in Podujevo. This appeared evident during the Mission’s
visit to Podujevo, although many were seen walking towards the market near the
centre. Like many villages visited, many Albanian homes and businesses had been
looted and destroyed. The town resembled a military garrison;
(f) Displaced persons appear to be surviving on the goodwill of the local
population and by purchasing food at high prices from soldiers. They have no
access to medical care, and in Sajkovac where the internally displaced persons
represent seven times the local population, there are no additional facilities
for water and sanitation or shelter. While the Kosovo authorities claimed to
have established a huge humanitarian assistance programme for the needy, they
were not able to provide any details of the programme to the Mission. All of
the internally displaced persons interviewed insisted that they had not received
any assistance whatsoever;
(g) The internally displaced persons estimated that they numbered between
14,000 and 18,000 and that police were sending more and more people to the
villages each day. The people were housed in burnt houses, barns, sheds,
schools, garages and trailers. A thin layer of straw covered with blankets
provided sleeping accommodation in cramped conditions. Some 30 people were
sleeping together in a room or shed in many instances;
(h) Many reported having witnessed killings by soldiers and police.
Several spoke independently about a massacre which had occurred at a village
called Kolic. Another pointed out a building containing the remains of three
people who had been killed and burnt. The danger of mines prevented the Mission
from inspecting that spot;
(i) The internally displaced persons were generally frightened and
concerned about their safety and welfare. Despite their fears, most people
appeared intent on returning home and expressed their belief that the majority
of those outside Kosovo would do likewise, if they received protection;
(j) On the way back to Pristina, the Mission spoke to two groups of
internally displaced persons heading towards Podujevo on a tractor. They
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 19

reported that they wanted to leave Kosovo but had been instructed by Serb police
to go to Sajkovac.
34. A small group of displaced persons who had survived an alleged NATO air
strike at Korisa also reported that they were prevented from returning to their
homes by Serb police. While the Mission also visited Gnjilane (eastern Kosovo),
Stimjle (south of Pristina), Djakovica, Prizren (western Kosovo) and Kosovska
Mitrovica (northern Kosovo), particularly the latter four towns were mostly
deserted and did not afford the opportunity to speak to more internally
displaced persons. Abandoned tractors and trailers on the road between
Djakovica and Prizren bore mute testimony to a recent exodus of refugees.
Despite repeated requests to visit various villages where the Mission had
information about large concentrations of internally displaced persons (Sedlare,
Pagarusa, Petrov and Magura, situated in the contentious area of Kosovo between
Pristina and Prizren/Djakovica, as well as areas north-west of Podujevo and east
of Pec) the Mission was not granted permission to visit those areas. In the
case of Sedlare, both KLA and the Government discouraged the Mission from
attempting to enter the area.
35. Refugees in Kosovo. The Yugoslav Red Cross informed the Mission that most
of the refugees in Kosovo (97 per cent from Croatia) had fled anew after the
NATO bombardment started (UNHCR has confirmed that refugees in Kosovo had
already been leaving the region owing to the uncertainty of the political
situation prior to 24 March). On 23 May 1999, the Mission visited a destroyed
refugee collective centre in Djakovica, which had apparently been the target of
a NATO air attack. A huge crater was visible next to the collective centre, and
the building itself was virtually destroyed. Four refugees were reportedly
killed in the attack. The eventual return of Kosovo Albanian refugees and
internally displaced persons may cause the displacement towards Serbia proper of
an unpredictable number of Serbs currently residing in Kosovo.
Health
36. The impact of the conflict has seriously compounded the earlier poor public
health situation in Kosovo. The provision of primary health care by the State
health care services has been limited by several factors including reduced
numbers of health staff (approximately 50 per cent), lack of medical supplies
and equipment, interruption of immunization activities, and difficulties in
access to medical services. The disintegration of the Albanian local network of
the Mother Theresa Association, due to the destruction of their health posts and
displacement of their volunteers, has drastically reduced the provision of basic
medical services to the Albanian community. Hospitals in Kosovo are generally
functioning and the overall bed occupancy rate is lower owing to the decrease in
the general population, but priority is given to treatment of trauma and war
related injuries. People suffering from any form of disability and residing in
institutions are at the greatest risk, for example residents at Stimjle
psychiatric hospital are living in appalling conditions without proper care.
All institutes of public health continue to function but with a reduced staff
and lack of necessary resources to perform a sustained epidemiological
surveillance. No epidemics have been reported so far (although this may be due
to under-reporting given the circumstances on the ground). The previous
structure of coordination involving all partners in health (international and
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 20

local non-governmental organizations) co-chaired by WHO and the Institute of
Public Health of Pristina has ceased to function and coordination currently is
centralized at Ministerial level and recognizes only the Yugoslav Red Cross for
the implementation of humanitarian relief assistance. Médecins sans Frontières
Greece is the only non-governmental international agency working in Kosovo and
is obliged to work through this structure.
37. There are urgent and pressing needs within the health sector both in
addressing current demands and in the prevention of longer term consequences
related to decreased resources and lack of access to health care. Among the
most urgent needs are an inclusive structure for coordination, immediate
rehabilitation of health posts and hospitals, provision of drugs and other
essential items, training and support for staff and efforts to improve access,
in particular in the area of maternal and child health.
Food and agriculture
38. The impact of the conflict has been particularly severe in Kosovo where
agriculture accounted for over 40 per cent of the economy before the war, with
more than 60 per cent of the population living in rural areas. As a result of
massive displacements and/or departures of the population, destruction of farm
buildings, agricultural machinery and equipment since March 1998, drastic
reductions are expected in crop and livestock production, worsening the food
deficit situation in the province. Other critical factors are increasingly
scarce supplies of fertilizer, the decimation of livestock population and damage
which is reported to large irrigation systems financed by the World Bank. Acute
food shortages and nutritional problems, coupled with difficult distribution and
access, are likely to affect internally displaced persons remaining in Kosovo
and returning refugees and internally displaced persons.
39. Emergency and rehabilitation needs in the agriculture and farming sector
will be considerable in Kosovo. Household food and nutritional surveys should
be undertaken as soon as possible and restoration of the most basic productive
assets, including land, livestock and farming equipment, together with emergency
provision of agricultural inputs, will be crucial to the successful return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
Women and children
40. In any conflict-torn society, the effect on women and children is
especially painful and pernicious. In Kosovo, children have been affected on a
scale ranging from disruption of schooling to witnessing killings or themselves
being the victims of attacks. Some children are exposed to multiple threats;
two children the Mission interviewed in Korisa had been forced from their home
by police, survived the NATO air strike and are still prevented from returning
to their home which they can see on a nearby hill. They receive no support and
were visibly terrified as NATO planes flew overhead and bombs were heard to land
nearby. In addition to providing for survival needs, immediate humanitarian
assistance must include measures to support such children and their families,
and to address the developmental needs of children, involving efforts to restore
normality through introduction of play and recreation, and informal education.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 21

41. Many women in Kosovo have lost everything, and now find themselves as heads
of households for the first time, faced with the difficult responsibility of
trying to provide food, shelter and protection for themselves and their
surviving relatives. Women from rural and traditional families, many of whom
have lost their male relatives, will face particular problems in reintegration.
The situation of women in the overcrowded internally displaced person villages
near Podujevo was of particular concern to the Mission. While it was not
possible to conduct detailed interviews, when asked about the existence of
sexual harassment/violence in such crowded conditions and where many men were
present, one woman described the situation as "a catastrophe". A recent UNFPA
report suggests that sexual violence has been systematically perpetrated against
Kosovo Albanian women. This is an issue requiring further investigation.
Assistance programmes will need to integrate the needs of women and children in
all aspects, including post-trauma rehabilitation projects, in accordance with
United Nations policies in this regard.
Mine action
42. A significant number of landmines have been laid in the province of Kosovo
since early 1998. The impact of landmines and unexploded ordinances in Kosovo
remains unclear because of the lack of detailed information provided to the
Mission. What is clear, however, is that landmines and unexploded ordnances
will present a significant obstacle to the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and the normalization process, as well as the socio-economic
development of the province. Irrespective of the actual level of danger, survey
and clearance will need to be conducted in many areas prior to resettlement and
reconstruction. Until this is done in areas where the presence of landmines and
unexploded ordnances is suspected, refugees and internally displaced persons
should not be encouraged to return. A coordinated mechanism for integrated mine
action will need to be established as soon as possible.
43. Appropriate clauses on landmines and unexploded ordnances should be
incorporated into ceasefire and peace agreements or any other agreement reached
with the Yugoslav authorities. Such clauses would, for example, stipulate that
the parties to the conflict are responsible for providing information (including
maps) and when feasible, for clearing the mines that they have laid and must
desist from using mines. With regard to clearance, responsibility may include
"actual clearance" or "assistance in clearance" if this is deemed necessary and
appropriate within the context of the overall peace settlement. At the very
least, it will require that parties to the conflict provide immediately all
relevant information on landmines laid, including minefield records and
technical information on types and characteristics of mines used.

REPUBLIC OF SERBIA (excluding Kosovo)
General situation
44. The Mission was shown much physical destruction and damage caused by NATO
air strikes in all areas of Serbia visited. The Yugoslav Red Cross gave figures
of 700 civilian deaths and 6,400 civilian injuries, with many more having lost
their houses in the attacks. The Mission was unable to verify the accuracy of
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 22

these statistics. The largest number of civilians are said to have been killed
or wounded in many of the cities/towns the Mission visited - Aleksinac,
Surdulica, Cacak, Kragujevac, Pancevo and Nis. The overall state of the
economy, closure of industries due to direct war damage or indirect
consequences, such as lack of raw materials, loss of trade and damage to
transportation links, has led to the growing impoverishment of the Serbian
population. Damage to essential services, such as water, electricity, heating,
health services, education, and transportation, have caused tremendous hardship
for the civilian population. Humanitarian assistance will be required for the
most vulnerable. Emergency humanitarian and medium-term rehabilitation
assistance is required, especially in view of the coming winter.
Employment and migration pressures
45. Apart from physical damage, unemployment was the key problem identified in
all the Serbian towns and communities visited during the Mission. The
destruction of major industries and damage to essential services has resulted in
the bulk of workers becoming jobless overnight. According to government
information, an estimated 600,000 employees have been made redundant by damage
to or complete destruction of industrial facilities. These redundancies will
also have an impact on some 2 million dependants. The inability of the
unemployed to meet their basic needs could trigger further hardships unless
special efforts are made to address the problem quickly. While some strategies
have been adopted, including paid-compulsory leave in most of the State-owned
enterprises, these are inadequate to deal with the sheer scale of the
unemployment crisis. The need for employment creation schemes to reduce the
suffering of the unemployed, and to promote their social inclusion, requires
urgent attention. Meeting this challenge in the context of economic collapse,
drastically reduced labour demand, and decline in gross domestic product is a
daunting task.
46. Among the relevant measures are emergency employment schemes including
employment-intensive public works programmes and provision of micro-finance and
other business support services for self-employment. External and other support
to the social insurance system, which is currently unable to meet the regular
payments of social benefits to the unemployed and pensioners, is required to
reduce the growing vulnerability of the affected groups. Assistance is also
needed to support survival strategies by the local people themselves, as well as
institutional capacities of the trade unions, the employment exchanges and
private employers to cope with the problem. There is an acute need for
strengthening social dialogue and the involvement of the trade unions and
employers in this process, to ensure that the labour dimensions are seriously
considered.
47. Unless remedial measures are put in place, the current situation is bound
to result in growing emigration pressures. As draft-aged males are not allowed
to leave the country due to general mobilization, and with the current
difficulties in obtaining visas for traditional countries of Yugoslav labour
migration, there is a strong risk that increased numbers, particularly the young
and well educated, will resort to using human traffickers in the region. There
is a need to establish proper migration channels and to foresee measures to
prevent and reverse the brain drain.
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 23

Refugees and internally displaced persons
48. The Yugoslav Red Cross provided the Mission members with information about
internally displaced persons in Serbia. The Yugoslav Red Cross alleged that
there were 1,200,000 temporarily or permanently internally displaced persons
within Serbia requiring humanitarian assistance. As there was very little
concrete information about the specific internally displaced person population
in the towns visited by the Mission, a more systematic survey is necessary
promptly to evaluate numbers and needs. The Mission agreed with the Federal
authorities to dispatch an inter-agency Mission as a matter of priority to do
this, in view of the coming winter.
49. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia hosts over half a million refugees from
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, which constitutes the second largest refugee
population in Europe. Most are living in precarious conditions and many still
depend on at least partial humanitarian assistance (e.g. food, hygiene items and
heating fuel). The process of return of these refugees to Croatia is extremely
slow, due to bureaucratic difficulties and problems associated with the return
of property on the Croatian side. According to refugee leaders interviewed, the
NATO campaign has exacerbated the refugees’ precarious situation by slowing the
integration of refugees into Yugoslav society, interrupting the resettlement of
refugees to third countries and preventing the regular flow of humanitarian aid
on which refugees depend.
50. One refugee collective centre close to the city of Novi Sad was visited by
the Mission on 18 May 1999. The collective centre was illustrative of the over
500 collective accommodations throughout Serbia - precarious living conditions,
overcrowded dormitories and not much of a future by way of self-sufficiency.
The refugees were from Croatia, and wanted to return home as soon as possible,
but could not, owing to the alleged destruction of their property. UNHCR
continues to carry out repatriations and resettlement, albeit on a limited
scale, since the NATO air campaign. These durable solutions are crucial and
must be continued. A solution to the Kosovo Albanian refugee and internally
displaced person question would provide an opportunity for also addressing the
many unresolved refugee and internally displaced person problems in other parts
of the former Yugoslavia.
Health
51. The health-care system has faced economic difficulties as a consequence of
the country’s impoverishment since the beginning of the 1990s. The situation
has been compounded since the NATO air strikes, with frequent power cuts and
lack of fuel jeopardizing the viability of adequate treatment of lifethreatening conditions in hospitals (e.g. incubators in neonatology, assisted
respiration, intensive care unit monitoring equipment, etc.). Damage to the
chemical industry has left the domestic pharmaceutical producers without basic
raw materials, resulting in shortages of essential drugs. The destruction of
public water supply systems in major urban areas has increased the risk of
waterborne diseases. It also has had an impact on the overall hygiene
conditions in health institutions, particularly in maternity departments. A
comprehensive technical assessment should be carried out to assess the impact of
environmental hazards on public health.
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 24

52. Preventive health-care activities, as well as curative health-care
programmes have been curtailed for many reasons, including direct damage to
health-care structures, destruction of the communication network, and
insufficient supplies. Loss of income from health insurance resulting from
unemployment will reduce funds available to the health service. According to
government sources, since the beginning of the conflict with NATO, access of
children and women to primary health-care services has been reduced by more than
70 per cent and access to referral institutions has been reduced by 90 per cent.
Coordination is now centralized under the Federal Minister of Health.
53. Immediate support is required to rehabilitate damaged health facilities,
support the capacity of hospitals to treat trauma and war injuries among the
civilian population and support immunization activities by providing vaccines.
Food and agriculture
54. The conflict is increasingly taking a toll on agricultural and
agro-industrial production, as well as on family food security. In the medium
to long term, the agricultural sector will be operating under strained
conditions, owing to the combined effects of the sanctions, damaged
infrastructure and further economic deterioration. The heavy damages inflicted
to power plants, road infrastructure and agro-industries by recent bombings will
disrupt and significantly reduce agricultural performance in the medium and long
term, both in the farm sector and food industry. In particular, destruction of
the major fertilizer plants in the country is likely to result in reduced
yields. In the absence of an early peaceful solution to the conflict, the
population may face food shortages.
55. Rapid repair of vital infrastructure, such as power plants and major
motorways and bridges will help to alleviate the situation. Means to allow
imports of fertilizers, fuel and other essential agricultural inputs may be
necessary following a peace agreement.
Environment
56. A large number of industrial facilities (allegedly more than 80 at the time
the Mission took place) have been attacked and destroyed in the NATO air
campaign. Damage to oil refineries, fuel dumps and chemical and fertilizer
factories, as well as the toxic smoke from huge fires and the leakage of harmful
chemicals into the soil and the water table have contributed to as yet
unassessed levels of environmental pollution in some urban areas, which may in
turn have a negative impact on health and ecological systems. For example, the
Mission visited Pancevo, 15 km north-east of Belgrade, where the destruction of
a petrochemical plant has resulted in the release of various chemical fluids
(such as vinyl-chloride, chlorine, ethylene-dichloride, propylene) into the
atmosphere, water and soil. This may pose a serious threat to health in the
region, as well as to ecological systems in the broader Balkans and European
region. Many of the compounds released in these chemical accidents can cause
cancer, miscarriages and birth defects. Others are associated with fatal nerve
and liver diseases. A proper scientific and technical fact-finding mission
under UNEP’s lead is urgently called for.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 25

57. The pollutants which have been released could also have a negative effect
in the short and long term on the nutrition chain. The lack of protective
substances, as well as fertilizer, could also endanger the survival of certain
plants. Land, rivers, lakes and underground waters may be polluted due to the
spillage of petrochemicals, oil spills and other chemicals. The ability of the
local authorities to undertake decontamination and recovery in an
environmentally sound manner is hampered by shortages of material and equipment,
as well as fear of further air attacks. The Mission recommended above should
also assess the extent of the impact.
Women and children
58. The adverse effects of the conflict in Serbia, direct effects of the air
strikes, and indirect effects as a consequence of unemployment, economic
uncertainty and fears about the future, have taken a particularly heavy toll on
women and children. Adolescent children were reported to be finding the
situation particularly difficult - one child interviewed was visibly shaking as
he described bombing which had taken place some weeks before. Education is a
critical factor in restoring a sense of normality and routine for children.
Disruption of all levels of education is extensive across Serbia. In most of
the areas visited, children had not attended school regularly since the
beginning of the air strikes as educational institutions are closed. A number
of schools have been affected by so-called "collateral damage". Some
kindergartens are operating for working mothers but on the whole, children do
not have access to recreational facilities, play or education. It was not
possible fully to assess the scale of damage to schools, but there are clearly
immediate needs with regard to provision of school materials and rehabilitation
of damaged buildings. In addition to restoration of regular schooling, there is
a need to provide facilities such as youth centres and kindergartens, which
allow children to engage in recreational activities and receive necessary
psychological support. Training for staff working in such facilities should
also be provided.

REPUBLIC OF MONTENEGRO
General situation
59. The Republic of Montenegro is suffering from socio-economic problems
similar to Serbia as a result of the United Nations sanctions. Montenegro has
so far escaped from wide-scale NATO air strikes and the resultant damage to
industries and employment.
60. One of the major problems identified by the Mission was the blockade
imposed by the federal authorities on humanitarian assistance entering
Montenegro through the port of Bar or from Croatia (e.g. a large convoy of
humanitarian aid including medical supplies destined for internally displaced
persons had been blocked by the federal authorities for 10 days inside
Montenegro). The halting of all traffic is stretching the food supply to its
limits, as production in the Republic of Montenegro meets only a minimal amount
of its food needs, while its population had increased by 10 per cent with the
influx of internally displaced persons from Kosovo in the past few months. The
/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 26

Mission requested the federal authorities to lift the restrictions, given the
magnitude of the need for assistance in Montenegro.
Refugees and internally displaced persons
61. Security concerns for internally displaced persons from Kosovo created by
the increasing influence of the federal military in Montenegro were one of the
main problems identified by the Mission. At the time of the Mission’s visit,
the federal military was intervening in most matters which were previously
within the sole competence of the Montenegrin police. Various security
incidents between the military and internally displaced persons had occurred in
Rozaje, an Albanian border community accommodating internally displaced persons,
including during the Mission’s visit. On 25 May 1999, the military separated
and detained 73 men from a group of roughly 490 newly arriving internally
displaced persons from Kosovo at the Montenegrin border, on suspicion of KLA
membership. The fate of the men was of serious concern to the Mission, as in
the previous weeks, the military had detained, beaten and seriously abused a
similarly sized group of Kosovar male asylum-seekers. While the Montenegrin
authorities have always been willing to help and intervene in such cases, their
own authority has been seriously undermined by the military.
62. Rozaje. On 23 May 1999, the Mission visited two collective accommodations
for internally displaced persons from Kosovo in Rozaje. Most of them originate
from towns and villages located on or in the vicinity of the main road from
Kosovska Mitrovica to Pec. The internally displaced persons’ accounts of their
experiences in Kosovo corroborated those given by the internally displaced
persons in the Podujevo area in Kosovo. The large presence of federal military
in the area has created serious security concerns for the internally displaced
persons (in one incident on 8 April 1999, several internally displaced persons
were killed). As a result, UNHCR has commenced moving the internally displaced
persons to safer areas in Ulcinj further south.
63. Ulcinj. On 23 May, part of the Mission visited Ulcinj, an Albanian
community in the south of Montenegro, where a number of internally displaced
persons from Kosovo, who had been detained previously by the federal military
when trying to transit Montenegro for Albania, were interviewed. The internally
displaced persons, all men, gave an account of being separated from the women
and children by the federal military at a checkpoint close to the MontenegrinAlbanian border. For three days they had been bussed around between Serbia and
Kosovo before being sent back to Montenegro. While in the custody of the
military, they had been robbed, beaten and some sexually abused, before being
released and moved to Ulcinj.
Health
64. As in Serbia, Montenegro has had large problems in maintaining the
functioning of the health-care system under the current circumstances,
particularly because of difficulties in providing enough medical supplies to
sustain quality primary and secondary health care. Significant levels of
assistance will continue to be required from UNICEF and WHO (which are urgently
providing support to the system) to keep it running.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 27

Women and children
65. The education service has struggled to cope with the most recent influx of
internally displaced persons from Kosovo. UNICEF, UNHCR and the Montenegrin
authorities signed a memorandum of understanding in February 1999 on education
for all displaced primary school-aged children. Under that agreement, UNICEF
coordinates a non-formal education programme. It is critical that this kind of
support is maintained and that services are provided to internally displaced
persons which address the development needs of children.
66. As noted in the section on Kosovo, women in Montenegro face the particular
challenges confronting women in conflict situations, with those confronting
refugee and internally displaced person women even more acute. While the
Mission was not able to conduct a detailed gender assessment, humanitarian
assistance programmes throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must
incorporate and mainstream gender issues in all sectors.
Employment and migration pressures
67. Montenegro’s main sector for labour absorption - tourism - has been
adversely affected by the conflict, with few tourists (especially those from
outside the country) now visiting the region. The sector’s labour force has
shrunk to a mere 30 per cent of its pre-war size. The relatively small
industrial sector is also facing difficulties. The reduction in tourism has
further shrunk employment openings in other services and also government and
community revenue for development. The high levels of unemployment and other
economic hardships could trigger extensive and irregular migration and social
tensions unless efforts are made to generate employment through emergency
employment schemes, support for small and medium enterprise promotion, and
skills retraining programmes.
Budget support
68. The Montenegrin Government, namely the Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs, called the Mission’s urgent attention to the loss of virtually
all income, bringing public coffers to the brink of bankruptcy. An appeal was
made for early fiscal support from international sources.

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 28

Appendix I
Participants in the Inter-Agency Emergency Needs Assessment Mission
to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

Participant

Organization

Sergio Vieira de Mello
Mission leader

Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator

Omar Bakhet

UNDP

Nils Kastberg

UNICEF

Ramiro Lopez da Silva

WFP

Rashid Khalikov

OCHA

David Chikvaidze
Spokesperson and assistant to mission leader

United Nations Secretariat

Eduardo Arboleda

UNHCR

E. Kirsten Young

UNHCR

Bakary Kante

UNEP

Peter Schatzer

IOM

Stephane Vandam

WHO

Frank Dutton

UNHCHR

Barbara Davis

UNHCHR

Loretta Sonn

FAO

Terence Burke

United Nations Security Coordinator

Vladimir Jankola

United Nations Mine Action Service

Eugenia Date-Bah

ILO

Sarah Uppard

SCF (representing all NGOs)

Thomas Bryant

United Nations Security Officer

4 translators

Local

11 drivers

On loan from UNMIBH

Mr. Yuzi Oksamitniy

UNICEF

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 29

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 30

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 31

/...

S/1999/662
English
Page 32
Appendix III

-----
