United Nations

S/PV.6713

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6713th meeting
Wednesday, 8 February 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/72)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-22578 (E)

*1222578*

S/PV.6713

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2012/72)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Serbia to participate in this
meeting. On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, to
participate in this meeting. Mr. Zarif is participating in
today’s meeting via video teleconference from Pristina.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/72, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Edmond Mulet.
Mr. Mulet: The report before the Council
(S/2012/72) details the situation in Kosovo and related
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) from 16 October 2011 to
15 January 2012.
While the situation on the ground has calmed
down since the Security Council’s last meeting on
UNMIK (see S/PV.6670), it remains fragile. In
presenting this first UNMIK report of 2012, I would

2

like to take the opportunity to look ahead to a year in
which renewed attention from the Security Council is
merited — even as other pressing matters demand its
scrutiny and concern. I believe that such attention will
be essential if we are not to squander real opportunities
to resolve long-standing differences and consolidate
long-term peace and stability in the region.
First, let me touch on the situation in the northern
part of Kosovo, which is well documented in the report
before the Council. The clashes in an ethnically mixed
neighbourhood in northern Mitrovica on 9 November
2011, and the clashes on 23 and 28 November 2011
between Serb demonstrators and Kosovo Force
(KFOR) soldiers, marked a very tense start to the
current reporting period. However, as the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina was resuming in
Brussels following a three-month hiatus, all sides
renewed their efforts to stabilize the situation on the
ground and focused their attention on achieving results
through good faith engagement.
On 29 November 2011, Serbian President Boris
Tadić publicly called for the dismantling of all Kosovo
Serb roadblocks in the north. Although some municipal
leaders in the north have continued to disregard that
message, notably those belonging to Serbian opposition
parties, discussions on the ground — variously
involving UNMIK, the European Union (EU) Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and KFOR — have
resulted in a relative stabilization of the situation.
As a result of those coordinated efforts to calm
tensions in the north, KFOR’s ability to conduct
essential operations there has substantially improved
compared with the previous reporting period. The
northern Kosovo Serbs, while continuing to protest
EULEX transport by helicopter of Kosovo officials to
the northern crossing points, have nonetheless recently
begun to allow EULEX greater freedom of movement,
including as part of KFOR convoys along the major
routes in the north.
Alongside these modest improvements, however,
other significant political challenges continue to
emerge. At present, local leaders in the north are
proceeding with plans to conduct a referendum next
week on the acceptance by the local Kosovo Serbs of
the Kosovo institutions. This is despite clear opposition
to this initiative from Belgrade, as well as from some
of the Kosovo Serb leaders residing in the south. This
is another case where close cooperation between all

12-22578

S/PV.6713

stakeholders on the ground will be crucial to ensuring
that potential tensions are kept under control and
common messages are conveyed.
The Head of UNMIK, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Farid Zarif, recently conveyed to
local leaders in the north that they must seek
legitimacy through elections that are in conformity
with applicable laws. Although UNMIK is no longer in
a position to administer such elections in Kosovo, it
will be ready to facilitate them, along with
international partners, so long as a fitting modality can
be found and agreed upon. Assisting in the matter of
ensuring legitimate municipal representation in the
north must be a joint and immediate priority of the
international community, in the earliest practicable
time frame.
This reporting period also saw considerable
progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, both through new agreements
reached and through the implementation of previous
agreements. The dialogue restarted in November under
challenging circumstances, but positive results were
achieved during sessions in November and early
December, demonstrating that practical agreements,
designed to alleviate daily problems, are achievable. In
particular, the agreement on the integrated management
of crossing points, while awaiting the finalization of
detailed implementation modalities, represents an
important breakthrough and an encouraging signal of
goodwill from each party.
It is noteworthy that, during the period when
Pristina and Belgrade maintained an intensive
engagement in this process, tensions on the ground
decreased considerably and the potential for stability
increased. It is therefore crucial that the sides maintain
their commitment to engaging in a constructive
dialogue, and that we continue to help to ensure that
peaceful conditions are maintained on the ground in
order to avoid unnecessary interruptions. The Council’s
active assistance in encouraging both parties to move
more resolutely towards viable solutions on the issues
that divide them is therefore extremely important.
Special Representative Zarif, in his briefing to
this Council in November 2011, called upon the parties
to show “goodwill, pragmatism, boldness, courage…
and full statesman-like responsibility” (S/PV.6670,
p. 5). I would like to renew this call and note that,
recently, there have been some tentative yet

12-22578

encouraging signs of readiness by the political
leadership, both in Belgrade and in Pristina, to elevate
the quality of their public discourse and use more
conciliatory language. I hope that this represents the
beginning of a trend that will grow during the year, in
spite of the political obstacles faced by each side. Key
international stakeholders can and should play a
decisive role in ensuring that these positive gestures
are translated into concrete actions.
The attention of the Council is presently drawn to
other urgent crises. However, I would be remiss should
I not take the opportunity today to say that the state of
affairs in Kosovo still carries a number of risks that
could become more entrenched with each passing year.
Optimistic assumptions that a durable solution will
simply evolve, even without a clear vision from a more
united engagement of the international community, are
belied by dynamics on the ground. This is particularly
true, but not limited to the developments we witnessed
in northern Kosovo during the last quarter of 2011.
We are certain that these dynamics can be
harnessed, but also equally certain that that will be
possible only if renewed energy and focus are applied
by all those with the means and interest to do so. As
the European Union steps forward in a leadership role,
achieving political progress equally demands better
cohesion of the efforts of all engaged international
actors.
Therefore, today I would like to urge all
stakeholders to take stock of their current engagements
in Kosovo. The financial cost of maintaining the
international presences in Kosovo is high. It includes,
in broad terms, some $47 million annually for UNMIK;
around €140 million for EULEX; €23 million for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
as well as combined annual operational costs to NATO
and to KFOR troop-contributing countries that bring
the total close to half a billion dollars.
We should each be asking whether these
considerable expenditures are being applied as
rationally and efficiently as they could be and, even
more importantly, whether they are contributing in a
coordinated fashion towards a solution under which
such expenditures can safely be reduced in the
foreseeable future. In the course of 2012, it is critical
that we do not miss the opportunity of jointly
addressing fundamental issues of efficiency, as well as
of common political purpose and vision. This new year

3

S/PV.6713

could be the time to reexamine our assumptions and to
seek fresh approaches.

volatile, and “carries a continued risk of… an
escalation of inter-ethnic tensions” (ibid.).

Finally, I would like to thank the members of the
Council for their support to UNMIK and for their
efforts to tackle the problems outlined in the present
report. We hope that they will maintain that support,
especially by helping to promote the greater
international unity of purpose and efficiency of effort
needed for progress to be made during 2012.

After a series of incidents in late November,
conditions in northern Kosovo began to slowly
improve, and “tensions in the area subsided by the end
of the reporting period” (ibid.). For the Serbian
community in the south, the situation unfortunately did
not get significantly better, as the trend of violent
incidents continued apace and the number of returnees
remained very low. The Christmas visit of President
Tadić to the Visoki Dečani monastery, during which he
made an appeal for a comprehensive peace between
Serbs and Albanians, was met with organized protests
throughout Kosovo, including attacks on his convoy.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
At the outset, I would like to greet the new
members of the Council and to appeal to them to
continue to refrain from recognizing any solution to the
Kosovo problem that is not the product of an
agreement between the parties. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Edmond Mulet for his statement and
acknowledge Special Representative Farid Zarif, who
joins us today via a video link. We look forward to his
return to this Chamber for our next meeting.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is a crucial pillar of
peace and stability in the province. We concur with the
Secretary-General’s call on the Council to “support [...]
its role, especially in facilitating engagement between
all stakeholders and containing tensions and
confrontations on the ground” (S/2012/72, para. 56). In
this context, the Secretary-General adds,
“it remains crucial that initiatives undertaken by
the international actors operating within the
framework of the United Nations and resolution
1244 (1999) are strategically aligned and closely
coordinated” (ibid.).
The Secretary-General’s overall assessment of
developments in the last quarter of 2011 is that “risks
to peace and stability from the Kosovo issue continue
to confront the people on the ground and the
international community” (ibid., para. 52). His report
goes on to emphasize that the situation remains

4

In its executive capacity, EULEX made some
positive contributions to the administration of justice in
Kosovo. It brought to trial a number of high-profile
cases in the areas of organized crime and corruption,
targeting a number of senior officials and controversial
public figures in Kosovo.
In the second half of the reporting period the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina resumed. Some
breakthroughs were made, despite what the report
called, in reference to this process, “challenging
circumstances”.
North Kosovo remains volatile as a result of
attempts to unilaterally alter the reality on the ground,
in violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and against the
will of the majority Serb population. The unfolding
consequences of attempts to impose outcomes through
the use of force continued to dominate the political
climate during the first half of the reporting period.
This resulted in the setting up of road blocks,
demonstrations and clashes. We swiftly and
unequivocally condemned the violence. We also called
on all the stakeholders to resolve problems through
peaceful negotiations and to refrain from any action
detrimental to the establishment of a safe and secure
environment. In early December the situation began to
de-escalate, in part thanks to the efforts of UNMIK,
which facilitated what the report terms “a new security
coordination forum” that involves local Serb leaders,
KFOR, EULEX and the OSCE.
As in the previous reporting period, a number of
incidents directed against ethnic Serbs in South
Kosovo

12-22578

S/PV.6713

“continue to affect negatively the perception of
security. This is particularly the case when the
incidents are not … followed up by effective
action on the part of law enforcement bodies.”
(S/2012/72, para. 29)
The report notes several categories of crimes
committed against Serbs in South Kosovo, including
murder, assault, home invasion, burglary, stoning of
vehicles, arson, theft of farm equipment and attacks on
pilgrims and returnees. The gravest crime took place in
Dobruša, an isolated Albanian-majority village in the
South Kosovo municipality of Istok. A family of
Kosovo Serb internally displaced persons (IDPs) had
gone to visit their abandoned property for the first time
in many years. They were greeted by an ethnic
Albanian neighbour, who then went back into his
home. Soon thereafter, the report informs us, he opened
fire on the Kosovo Serb returnees with an automatic
rifle, killing one and injuring the other two.
The report also indicates that acts of desecration
and vandalism against the Serbian Orthodox church,
holy sites and cemeteries continue to take place. Such
hate crimes severely hamper reconciliation efforts.
They also keep the rate of IDP returns at very low
levels; according to the report, they are down 51 per
cent in comparison to the same period the year before.
Serbia agrees with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that recent developments regarding
privatization are cause for great concern.
In 2002, UNMIK established the Kosovo Trust
Agency (KTA) for the purpose of facilitating the
implementation of economic reconstruction and
development of Kosovo. As it privatized a number of
Kosovo-based Serbian companies, funds were held to
provide compensation to rightful owners. A reduction
in the Agency’s powers and responsibilities was never
endorsed by this Council, and its jurisdiction remained
beyond the scope of the process of UNMIK’s
reconfiguration, which took place over the course of
2008. During that period, the authorities in Pristina
established an institution called the Kosovo
Privatization Agency, forcibly taking over many of the
KTA’s functions.
As paragraph 26 of the report informs us, over
the past few months, we have seen a significant
weakening of the protection of privatization funds. The
report notes: “international involvement in and
oversight of the privatization and liquidation processes

12-22578

… is being acutely curtailed”. Only a limited appellate
process will have majority international supervision,
and even that is understood to be temporary. The
Secretary-General’s conclusion is unequivocal: “This
constitutes a departure from the privatization …
framework established by UNMIK”.
Approximately a quarter of a billion euros are
being held in banks of various United Nations Member
States. It is likely that the so-called Kosovo
Privatization Agency will try to gain access to these
funds. The financial institutions that hold those
deposits must not release them until an agreement is
reached among the stakeholders. This is a very serious
liability issue, and we shall not refrain from using all
juridical mechanisms at our disposal to protect our
property rights.
We believe this is a matter that requires the
attention of the Security Council. The actions by the
Kosovo Privatization Agency amount to usurpation of
the authority and jurisdiction of the United Nations.
This could set a precedent with serious consequences
for all United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Annex I of today’s report makes reference to
what is commonly known as the Medicus case. It
involves an organized criminal conspiracy to source
human organs for illicit transplant in a Pristina clinic.
While EULEX has been able to bring to trial a number
of ethnic Albanians on various charges, two of the
prime suspects — both foreigners — fled Kosovo and
cannot be extradited. Some of those who are suspected
of involvement in this affair, starting with its
ringleader, are also mentioned in a deeply disturbing
report released by the Council of Europe more than a
year ago, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo”. It
contains allegations of harvesting and smuggling of
human organs before, during and after the 1999
conflict. If proven true, it would constitute an entirely
new category of war crime.
This past October, Mr. Clint Williamson became
Lead Prosecutor for the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force. During his first visit to Belgrade, we
assured him and his team that we will assist them in
any way that we can, for we believe they can make an
important contribution to uncovering what occurred
inside Kosovo itself. But this remains insufficient, for
much of what is alleged took place beyond that
territory.

5

S/PV.6713

Since EULEX cannot operate at full capacity
anywhere outside Kosovo, at the moment it has neither
an adequate mandate nor sufficient temporal and
territorial jurisdiction to carry out an investigation that
would be comprehensive in scope. Only an
investigation conducted under the auspices of the
Security Council can ensure that. Otherwise, any
number of alleged participants in this war crime could
remain beyond the reach of justice.
When it comes to such matters in the Balkan
context, a mandate to investigate has always been
bestowed by the Security Council. It should happen
again, not only for the sake of consistency, but to
ensure the investigation becomes transparent and
accountable to the whole world. We appreciate
previous efforts to reach a consensus in the Council on
how these allegations can be decisively addressed. We
must not yield on this, on both moral and human rights
grounds. Serbia will therefore seek another round of
Security Council consultations on the issue.
As indicated in the report, progress has been
made in the technical dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. To quote from it, “positive results were
achieved during the intensive sessions held in
November and early December, and … there is now
visible progress in the implementation of previously
reached agreements” (ibid., para. 53). Serbia remains
committed to this process. It is the only legitimate
mechanism with which to overcome differences on
practical considerations.
The problem of Pristina’s participation in
regional meetings will be addressed in the next round
of dialogue. We have never sought to prevent any voice
in our part of the world from being heard, including
that of Pristina. However, this must stay in unequivocal
and explicit accord with resolution 1244 (1999). We
ask the Security Council to support the centrality of its
resolutions in the context of the dialogue.
Close to four years ago today, the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo unilaterally
declared independence from Serbia. Our measured
reaction to the blatant violation of our Constitution
ensured that the peace was kept. That was the first time
in the history of the Balkans that a development of
such gravity did not result in armed hostilities.
However, a comprehensive settlement to the
underlying dispute between the parties has not yet been
found. President Tadić has repeatedly said that it must

6

provide for ironclad, internationally guaranteed
assurances that safeguard our interests inside the
province by securing a realistic solution for North
Kosovo, protecting our enclaves in South Kosovo,
preserving Serbian identity and religious heritage
throughout the province and settling private and
commercial property claims.
In coming to the end of my remarks, I wish to
emphasize that the pursuit of outcomes outside the
framework of negotiations is both futile and
counterproductive. This include seeking new
recognitions for the Unilateral Declaration of
Independence, divisive attempts to force one’s way
into international organizations and any number of
other plans to achieve narrowly conceived objectives.
The only way to produce a viable, sustainable and
lasting solution to the problem of Kosovo is for the
parties to negotiate with each other in good faith, on all
outstanding issues. We are ready.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeremić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great honour and a pleasure
for me to address the Security Council today regarding
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/72).
First, I would like to congratulate Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo as new
members of the Security Council and wish them
success in that very important responsibility. Secondly,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his continuous support for building a
democratic, multi-ethnic and stable Kosovo. With the
commitment of our institutions and the support of the
international community, the Republic of Kosovo today
is a modern and viable State whose main policy goal is
integration into the Euro-Atlantic institutions.
While we are discussing my country in this
Chamber today, Kosovo prepares to celebrate next
week its fourth anniversary as an independent state.
Independent Kosovo was born, based on the will of its
people, on 17 February 2008, and our tragic history has
left a difficult legacy. Kosovo was part of the Yugoslav
disintegration of the 1990s that took the lives of tens of
thousands of innocent people — many of them women
and children — who did not accept the criminal regime

12-22578

S/PV.6713

of Slobodan Milošević. As it related to Kosovo, the aim
of Milošević’s policy was to ethnically cleanse Kosovo.
In 1999 alone, within a few months, over 1 million
people were expelled from Kosovo. In fact, those tragic
events are very well known to everyone here, as many
United Nations reports have reported on them since
1998.
However, the situation has changed in recent
years. In that time, Kosovo has made great progress in
state-building, due to the commitment of its people and
the support of the international community. We are
very grateful for the support of the Council and the
important role that it has played in rebuilding a society
and building a country from scratch and helping it to
overcome a difficult past. Today, the vision of our
government is to replace the politics of conflict with
those of reconciliation and European integration, and I
believe that lessons learned from past tragedies should
help to more effectively shape policies in the present.
Allow me to report on the progress we have
achieved during this reporting period and to go over
the challenges we face.
After four years of independence, Kosovo has
built a cohesive state and has strengthened its
multi-ethnic and democratic institutions. The internal
and international development of Kosovo has involved
various central and local-level institutions playing
vibrant roles. The parliament has been dynamic in
implementing its legislative agenda, our non-partisan
President has been active in the national and
international representation of Kosovo and the
government has been operational and effective in
reforming the country and tackling the needs of our
society.
Due to the very hard work and commitment of
our institutions, Kosovo is a prosperous, multi-ethnic
democracy and has maintained peace and stability in
the face of serious challenges and efforts to generate
instability. During this time, Kosovo’s leaders and their
political parties have shown maturity and democratic
responsibility in their engagement on issues of the
common interest.
The Assembly of Kosovo has passed a number of
important laws, and many others are under review. The
Assembly has played a very important role in
monitoring the implementation of laws and has
fulfilled its important task of overseeing the work of
the government. Through heated debates and

12-22578

discussion, the Assembly has provided real democratic
representation for Kosovo’s citizens. The Assembly of
Kosovo adopted 20 major laws, including laws on
control of the border, international agreements,
copyright, the state budget and others.
In order to overcome weaknesses in public
administration, the government is implementing
fundamental reforms. Those reforms were strongly
commended by the European Commission progress
report. We are aware that this is a very complex and
lengthy process, but the government is very much
committed to building an independent and efficient
public administration in line with the best European
practices.
The government of Kosovo is undertaking very
serious efforts to reform the justice system and
strengthen the rule of law. Important steps have been
made in building new institutions, adopting necessary
legislation and regulations and increasing the
professional capacities and numbers of judges in
Kosovo.
The fight against corruption and organized crime
is one of the top priorities of the government, and
many measures and actions have been undertaken to
strengthen the rule of law. We have adopted a Strategy
and Action Plan against Corruption, which includes the
creation of a special prosecution and anti-corruption
task force. There is close cooperation between the
Kosovo government and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX), which has done very good
work in combating and investigating different forms of
crime.
Let me reiterate that the government of Kosovo
welcomed from the very beginning the establishment
of the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force to
investigate all allegations contained in the report by
Mr. Dick Marty. All Kosovar institutions have offered
full cooperation to the EULEX Lead Prosecutor,
Mr. Clint Williamson, for this investigation process,
which started last year and has included visits this year
to Pristina and other regional capitals. Kosovo’s
institutions are very determined to support the full
clarification of the allegations in an open, independent,
professional and transparent way.
Beside reforms in public administration and the
legal sector, the economy remains a pressing priority
for the government. Therefore the government is
engaged in ensuring economic growth, tackling

7

S/PV.6713

unemployment, providing social justice for all,
improving the business investment environment and
reforming the energy and education sectors. Reforms in
the financial sector are designed to ensure fiscal
stability and improved budget management. According
to the International Monetary Fund, macroeconomic
and financial policies are on track. Kosovo’s economy
grew by an estimated 5 per cent during 2011.
Kosovo is not only the youngest state in Europe,
but it also has the youngest population, at a time when
many countries are facing an aging problem. The
young and well-educated represent a generation that
constitutes great social capital for Kosovo. In addition,
we have a very active and dynamic civil society, which
has continued to crucially shape politics and different
policies. Numerous institutions, organizations and
associations have been formed and play an active part
in public life and in supporting the overall process of
state-building and democratization. They contribute to
our important checks-and-balances system by
presenting their interests and views, which the
government values highly. Civil society activists help
prepare for a society that discusses, debates and
challenges every policy and action of the government
and the international community. They are very
important agents of modernization in our young state.
I have been speaking about the internal
consolidation of Kosovo’s institutions. Let me now
reiterate that for Kosovo, the international
consolidation of its statehood is crucial with respect to
being part of the international system.
We are undertaking major efforts to gain our
place in regional and global institutions as a
constructive, contributing member of the international
community. Kosovo’s participation in regional and
global institutions is vital for the stability, security and
development of Kosovo, the Western Balkans and even
Europe. I would therefore like to invite all Member
States to support our participation in regional and
global forums. Kosovo’s inclusion would respect the
rights and needs of all the citizens of Kosovo and of
our state.
Full recognition of Kosovo’s independence
remains a very important goal for my government. The
number of recognitions and their geographic scope has
made the independence of Kosovo a geopolitical
reality in the Balkans and in Europe, and the number of
independent and sovereign States recognizing Kosovo

8

is constantly growing. Currently, 85 Members of the
United Nations have formally recognized our country. I
would like to thank the Republic of Ghana for its
recent decision to recognize the Republic of Kosovo.
We strongly believe that even more countries will
recognize Kosovo over time; some of them are in fact
in the process of making that decision.
I have informed the Council as to how Kosovo
has become a functional, prosperous, stable and multiethnic state, with a diverse society and a steadily
growing economy. Anyone who has visited Kosovo in
the last few years has seen that it has transformed itself
into a true multi-ethnic democracy. The clear goal of
Kosovo’s government and the international community
was to create a state for all Kosovo citizens, in order to
overcome separations along ethnic lines and to advance
the interests of all communities in Kosovo through
participation
in
democratic
and
multi-ethnic
institutions.
I would like to report that this year Kosovo is
entering a new phase of statehood. This new chapter of
our state is an important short- and long-term
development for Kosovo, for the whole region and for
the European Union.
Four years ago, on 28 February 2008, the
International Steering Group (ISG) on Kosovo was
formed. Its role has been to help guide Kosovo’s
democratic development and to promote good
governance, multi-ethnicity and the rule of law. The
ISG, a body comprised of 25 States, appointed an
experienced international diplomat, Mr. Pieter Feith, as
the International Civilian Representative for Kosovo to
lead the International Civilian Office (ICO). The
mandate of the ICO was to monitor and facilitate the
implementation of United Nations Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari’s comprehensive settlement proposal.
In the last four years, due to close cooperation
between the government of Kosovo and the ICO,
Kosovo made fundamental progress in the
implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan through the
participation and promotion of communities — Serb,
Bosniak, Gorani, Turk, Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian —
at all levels of governance. Those national, ethnic,
linguistic, cultural and religious groups — who are
defined in our Constitution not as minorities but as
communities — today enjoy the most advanced rights
and privileges of any such communities in Europe. We
have invested more than €200 million in the

12-22578

S/PV.6713

implementation of the provisions of the Ahtisaari Plan
related to communities.
As a result of the successful implementation of
that Plan, the majority of Kosovo Serbs are
participating in Kosovo institutions at both the central
and local levels of government. The government of
Kosovo, through a decentralization process, has created
new municipalities composed mostly of the Serb
community, such as Gračanica, Kllokot-Verboc,
Ranillug, Novobërdë, Shtërpcë and Partesh. The
establishment of those municipalities has improved the
quality of the political and economic life of Kosovo
Serbs. They were created in accordance with the
European Charter of Local Self-Government and have
full managerial and executive competencies, based on a
process of devolution. As one would see if visiting any
one of those municipalities, the result has been the
rebirth of vibrant, dynamic communities.
In order to protect and promote religious and
cultural heritage and cultural diversity, the government
of Kosovo has granted special protection to 45 sites
through the establishment of special protective zones.
Those include monasteries and churches of the Serbian
Orthodox Church along with also medieval towns,
fortress, bridges, traditional houses and monuments.
The implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan has provided
communities with access to education, supported the
return of refugees, promoted reconciliation between
different communities and accelerated economic and
social development.
The beginning of a new phase in Kosovo’s
development as a state was marked during the latest
meeting of the ISG, held in Vienna on 24 January 2012.
The representatives of the 25 member States
confirmed:
“Kosovo is now in the final stages of
implementing the Comprehensive Settlement
Proposal and will therefore start preparations for
an organized end to supervised independence and
the closure of the International Civilian Office,
which should be possible by the end of 2012.”
The ISG has endorsed a strategy that will facilitate that
process.
Through a parliamentary resolution approved by
a majority of more than two thirds, the government of
Kosovo, opposition political parties and other Kosovo
institutions have committed themselves to taking the

12-22578

necessary political steps, backed by financial
commitments, to implement specific measures on
community rights, cultural heritage and dealing with
the past.
This year, a package of amendments to Kosovo’s
Constitution and relevant primary legislation will be
adopted. That will embody the key provisions of the
Ahtisaari plan in our Constitution and laws, and
thereby facilitate the formal end of the ICO’s mandate
and, with it, supervised independence.
We recognize that there is more work to be done
but we are ready and willing to meet our international
obligations. I would like to inform all representatives
that, so far, 95 per cent of the Ahtisaari plan has been
implemented, although that has not included the
creation of the new municipality of northern Mitrovica.
That has been prevented by the illegal security,
paramilitary and police Serbian State structures that
still today are led, controlled and financed by Belgrade
in flagrant violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
That has been recognized by the ISG as well.
“The ISG urges Serbia to abide by its
international commitments and refrain from
interfering in Kosovo, including by withdrawing
its police, security and other State presences, and
supporting efforts by international actors and the
institutions of Kosovo to promote the rule of
law.”
Let me brief the Council about the relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, the technical dialogue and
our common European future. I think that we cannot
speak of Europe as a whole, free, democratic and
peaceful without having resolved the remaining issues
in the Balkans. For the Government of Kosovo, the
integration of the whole region into Euro-Atlantic
institutions is the best means of ensuring long-term
peace and a brighter future for all.
Sharing that vision and fulfilling the obligations
of General Assembly resolution 64/298 of September
2010, Kosovo and Serbia have taken part in a technical
dialogue since March 2011. The aim of that dialogue is
to solve practical issues from which citizens of both
countries would benefit. We strongly believe in a
dialogue as a means not only to solve technical issues,
but also to build trust between the two nations and to
overcome the difficult past.

9

S/PV.6713

However, let me summarize what has happened
recently. On 9 December 2011, the European Council
held a summit in Brussels and deferred Serbia’s
European Union candidate status. The reason was
because Serbia failed to make sufficient progress in the
European Union-facilitated dialogue with Kosovo and
due to the blocked and tense situation created in the
northern municipalities of Kosovo by Serbian
Government structures. In its conclusions, the Council
tasked the Council of Ministers with:
“examining and confirming whether Serbia has
continued to show credible commitment and has
achieved further progress in moving forward with
the implementation in good faith of agreements
reached in the dialogue, including on integrated
border management, has reached an agreement on
inclusive regional cooperation and has actively
cooperated to enable EULEX and KFOR [the
Kosovo Force] to execute their mandates”.
If I translate the conclusions into simpler terms,
the Council asked Serbia to engage seriously and fully
in the technical dialogue and to implement all
provisions of the agreements that it reached with
Kosovo in Brussels, as well as to respect its obligations
under resolution 1244 (1999) to contribute to a safe
and secure environment in Kosovo and to ensure
freedom of movement for all. Serbia should not just
pay lip service to its commitments and fail to
implement its obligations on the ground. Agreements
are not worth anything if they are not implemented in
practice. If that was Serbia’s intention when it agreed
to enter into a dialogue with Kosovo, the European
Union clearly did not buy into it. The Council agreed
to review Serbia’s progress towards Kosovo by the end
of February.
Let me inform the Council briefly about the
current situation in the northern part of Kosovo and the
implementation or non-implementation of agreements
reached until now.
First, regarding the north of Kosovo, Serbia has
failed to meet its obligations as called for in the
European Union Council’s December conclusions. The
situation on the ground, in particular in the north of
Kosovo, remains tense as a result of the roadblocks put
up by Serb extremists and Serbian State structures on
Belgrade’s payroll. Since July of last year, the freedom
of movement of people and goods in the northern part of
Kosovo has been denied to the citizens of Kosovo. In

10

violation of resolution 1244 (1999), Serbia still
maintains security and judicial structures, including
hundreds of police officers and members of the
gendarmerie, in the north of Kosovo. Moreover, two
very important international actors — KFOR and
EULEX, missions authorized by the Security Council —
are unable to carry out their mandates due to the
barricades.
I believe that the rule of law is not negotiable and
should be applied to everyone. The north of Kosovo
cannot remain a black hole in Europe. The Serbian
policy of pursuing both the European Union and
Kosovo clearly means pursuing both the partition of
the northern part of Kosovo and membership of the
European Union.
Secondly, Serbia has also failed to fulfil its
obligations under the agreements reached last year in
Brussels in the technical dialogue. Besides the partial
implementation of agreements on freedom of
movement and free trade, all other agreements,
including the return of the civil registry and cadastre
records, mutual recognition of school and university
diplomas and integrated border management, have not
been
implemented
at
all.
On
issues
of
telecommunications, energy and regional cooperation,
Serbia has failed to agree to proposals coming from the
European Union itself.
The examples that I mentioned here today show
that, in the past year, Serbia understood the dialogue as
a process of taking part in meetings, not achieving
concrete results. Last year, the Serbian side accepted
some agreements and solutions in order to gain enough
credit to achieve candidate status in the European
Union. But there is no real implementation of
agreements on the ground. Kosovo will take part in the
dialogue in good faith. We will implement all
agreements reached and accept all European solutions.
Dialogue is very important to both countries as
independent States and partners on their European
path. My Government supports the integration of the
whole region into the European Union.
However, I would like to be very clear that peace
and stability between Kosovo and Serbia and the
prosperity of the whole region will depend on the
decision soon to be made in Brussels by the European
Council. If Serbia is rewarded with candidate status
without having dismantled the police and security
structures in northern Kosovo, removed barricades or

12-22578

S/PV.6713

fully implemented agreements reached in the technical
dialogue, the consequences will be both short- and
long-term. The current status quo in the three northern
municipalities of Kosovo will be transformed into a
frozen conflict; agreements reached through the
technical dialogue will not be implemented; and the
process of the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia will have no future.

Serbs there, in the same way as has happened in the rest
of Kosovo, where today Kosovo Serbs and our other
communities are shaping their own futures. The ideas of
exchanging territories or ethnic and territorial partition
are very dangerous. It is for the good of all — Serbia, as
well as Kosovo and all other countries in the region —
that the borders of the Balkans have been fixed once and
for all.

At the same time, there is a risk of other negative
developments in the next weeks and months for the
potential to worsen the situation. Next week, on
15 February, the Serbian State’s illegal structures
intend to organize a referendum in the northern
municipalities of Kosovo, opposing the institutions of
Kosovo and calling for partition and their incorporation
into Serbia.

We thank the Security Council and all United
Nations Member States, our partners and important
State actors for supporting us from conflict and war to
a peaceful and democratic transition. Kosovo is a
viable and stable state, and can be counted on as a
responsible member of international community of free
nations.

This year, when elections will be held in Serbia,
Belgrade intends to organize elections inside the
territory of the Republic of Kosovo as well. This is a
massive violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and of our
State sovereignty. These possible events could
represent a very dangerous development for stability
inside Kosovo, and they could put the whole
architecture of regional security into question.
To conclude, our institutions are committed to
making 2012 a historic European year for Kosovo and
the region. We started this year with the launching of
the visa liberalization dialogue, which will enable our
people to travel across the European Union without
visas. Key institutions in Brussels and member States
have pledged to Kosovo that it will enjoy trade
relations in the form of contractual relations with the
European Union and membership in the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
We welcome the nomination of the former
Slovenian Foreign Minister, Mr. Samuel Žbogar, as the
European Union’s Special Representative to Kosovo.
He arrived in Pristina this week. The clear goal of our
government is to make the European presence and
integration process stronger within Kosovo and to
bring our country closer to the European Union.
We call upon Serbia to refrain from violence,
destabilizing actions and provocative rhetoric. It is time
for Serbia to finally withdraw its State police and
security forces from the northern municipalities of
Kosovo. The implementation of the Ahtisaari plan in
that part of Kosovo is still the best framework for the
political and democratic participation of all Kosovo

12-22578

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Mulet for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/72) on the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We note the participation in this
meeting, through the use of telecommunications
technology, of the Head of UNMIK, Mr. Zarif. We
welcome the presence of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and we share his assessment.
We have listened closely to Mr. Hoxhaj.
Mr. Hoxhaj began his statement by citing ancient
history. To paint the full picture, he should have
mentioned the mass exodus of Albanians from Kosovo
at the time of the 78-day bombardment of Serbia by
NATO. I also note that members of the Security
Council that are members of the European Union (EU)
were certainly grateful for Mr. Hoxhaj’s clarification
with regard to relations between the EU and Serbia,
and for his formulation of the instructions received
from Brussels in that regard.
Russia’s position of not recognizing Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
force and binding as an international legal basis for
settlement in Kosovo. With regard to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the activities of UNMIK, I would
like to make the following comments. The current
trends in the province are generally correctly reflected
in the report, but in diluted form. It clearly distances
itself from the real situation and security of minorities,

11

S/PV.6713

the preservation of Serbian cultural and religious
heritage, and the return of internally displaced persons.
Yet these issues are of key importance for the
security of the province. We have serious doubts about
the report’s claim that the international presence — the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) — respect the
principle of status neutrality and resolution 1244
(1999). It is precisely their failure to respect the latter
that has led to conflict with northern Kosovo Serbs and
obliged UNMIK, as noted in the report, often to act as
a fire brigade.
Force must not be used in this situation, and we
must ensure that a political settlement is found to
emerging problems. We can only be alarmed at the
actions of EULEX in December 2011 with regard to a
Russian humanitarian aid convoy in northern Kosovo.
Russia itself decides to whom and at what level it will
provide humanitarian assistance. Resolution 1244
(1999) imposes the obligation on the international
presence to provide unrestricted access for
humanitarian aid.
The situation in Kosovo remains bleak. We note
the breakdown in the policy for the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo and the growing exodus
of the Serbian population from the province. The
situation is only partly reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We intend to give this issue priority
attention during the forthcoming visit to Kosovo in late
February by the Russian High Representative on
human rights, democracy and the rule of law. The
disappointment of the Serbian population, who feel
that they are not supported or protected by the
international presence in Kosovo, is expressed in the
setting up of roadblocks and the plan of Serbian
municipalities in the province to hold a referendum on
the issue of the legitimacy of the Kosovo Albanian
authorities.
We believe that, in seeking a solution, we must
use only peaceful means within the framework of
dialogue with all interested parties. We are convinced
that, despite efforts to repudiate the role of UNMIK,
the Mission remains the principal international civilian
presence in Kosovo, pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999). We insist on the full implementation by
UNMIK of its mandate, including with regard to the
foreign representation of Kosovo in regional and
international organizations and mechanisms.

12

The international community must pay greater
attention to the Orthodox holy sites and congregations.
We share the concern of the Serbian authorities and
Orthodox Church with regard to the imminent handover of protection responsibilities for important
Serbian cultural and religious cultural sites from KFOR
to the Kosovo Police. We believe that this development
may cause further uncertainty in the security of
Kosovo.
We would like to obtain clarification with regard
to the reasons and parameters for the coming
drawdown of EULEX and the planned conditions for
transferring the police and customs functions it
inherited from UNMIK to Kosovo institutions. Why
this is being done without the approval of the Security
Council, which sanctioned the deployment of the
European mission?
Finally, we are concerned at the way EULEX is
investigating facts revealed by Dick Marty, Special
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe, on the illegal
trade in human organs in Kosovo. These very grave
facts point to the criminal involvement of some current
Kosovo leaders. The investigation must be impartial
and worthy of trust.
It is with this in mind that we advocate the
transfer of the investigation to the Security Council. At
the moment, the investigation is looking into the
involvement of some Kosovo leaders in illegal
trafficking in human organs, and is being undertaken
by those countries which in the past helped these very
people come to power in Kosovo. As we know,
a leading role was played here by the United States.
And — what an amazing coincidence — it is a United
States citizen who is heading the ongoing
investigation. There is a clear conflict of interest here.
We recall that Carla del Ponte, the former Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, noted significant problems with the
investigation being led by international entities and the
Kosovo authorities into organ trafficking in Kosovo.
We note the unsatisfactory situation with regard
to witness protection, as confirmed by the Council of
Europe. There is no progress here; key witnesses are
simply rubbed out. In this regard, we call on the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council to
support the Serbian initiative to establish a Security
Council mechanism to follow up on the findings of the
Marty report. Their support would be an important

12-22578

S/PV.6713

contribution to ensuring justice and the rule of law and
to guaranteeing that the investigation will not once
again be brushed under the carpet. We hope that those
countries that view this initiative negatively will
change their positions. The humanitarian importance of
this problem is too great.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet for his briefing. I also listened carefully
to the statements of Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić of
Serbia and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj of Kosovo.
In recent times, various parties have made efforts
to ease the tension in northern Kosovo. However, the
root causes of the tension in the region endure, the
situation in northern Kosovo remains fragile, and the
risk of further escalation persists. We hope that the
parties concerned will fully grasp the sensitivity and
complexity of the situation, act with caution, settle
their differences through dialogue and avoid any
unilateral action that might further exacerbate the
situation.
On the question of Kosovo, it is the consistent
view of China that mutually acceptable solutions
should be sought within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999) and on the basis of a dialogue among the
various parties. A series of talks was held recently in
Serbia and Kosovo, and some progress was made on
some issues. We hope the parties concerned will
increase their efforts and maintain and intensify their
dialogue. This is not only in the interests of the parties
themselves and the well-being of their people, but will
also contribute to peace and stability of the Balkan
region and all of Europe.
China expresses grave concern about allegations
of human organ trafficking in Kosovo. No act in
violation of international law and international
humanitarian norms should be condoned. The Serbian
concern about these allegations is legitimate. We are in
favour of investigation by the United Nations into
these allegations.
The United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has made tireless efforts, with positive results, to
facilitate the stability and development of Kosovo and
to coordinate the work of various international entities
in Kosovo. China appreciates the efforts of UNMIK
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, in this connection. China will
continue to support their work.

12-22578

We hope that UNMIK will play a greater role in
facilitating communication and dialogue among the
parties. We also hope that EULEX, KFOR and other
international entities will strictly implement their
mandates pursuant to the resolutions of the Security
Council, and play a constructive role in stabilizing the
situation in Kosovo.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his most recent report (S/2012/72) and Mr. Edmond
Mulet for his briefing on recent developments
concerning the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
The Secretary-General’s report tells us that,
during the period covered, the security situation in
Kosovo improved considerably compared with the
previous period. Nevertheless, as Mr. Mulet stressed,
there are continuing tensions in northern Kosovo that
may exacerbate the situation on the ground and
undermine the chances for progress in the substantive
negotiations.
We welcome the efforts being made by UNMIK
to reduce inter-communal tensions in Kosovo and to
avert the escalation of violence and confrontation
among them. We welcome the progress made in the
ongoing negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina
under the auspices of the European Union, particularly
in the joint management of border crossings, the civil
registry, freedom of movement, license plates and the
recognition of university diplomas. These efforts
represent an important stage in the negotiations
between the two parties, and it is our hope that this
trend will have a positive impact on the substantive
negotiations concerning the final settlement in Kosovo.
Morocco encourages the parties to pursue, in
good faith and with a determination to succeed, the
bilateral negotiations aimed at finding a final, political
settlement to this issue, in line with the parameters set
out in resolution 1244 (1999), and to act in conformity
with its provisions, without undertaking any unilateral
steps.
On another subject, my country is concerned at
allegations of trafficking in human organs, known as
the Medicus case. We note the determination of the
parties to cooperate in order to identify and bring to
justice those who responsible for these acts and to
avoid any recurrence thereof.

13

S/PV.6713

Morocco has always attached special importance
to peace in that region, as witnessed by the presence of
a Moroccan humanitarian contingent in the
multinational peacekeeping force in Kosovo. In the
Security Council, my country will continue alongside
other members to support engagement and dialogue
among the parties and the promotion of confidencebuilding members among the communities and parties
of Kosovo so as to identify a definitive political
solution, in line with international law, that will
establish peace and security in the region.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me at the outset
welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, Foreign Minister of Kosovo. Many thanks also
go to Assistant Secretary-General Edmond Mulet for
his comprehensive briefing and Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for joining us by video link.
We continue to view the situation in northern
Kosovo with great concern. The tense political
situation as clearly and negatively impacted the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. Once again, we particularly deplore the
reactions following the deployment of Kosovo customs
and border police officers last year, especially the
reinforcement of roadblocks at some gates and the
erection of additional roadblocks along other routes.
We firmly condemn any act of violence against the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union (EU)
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), such as the
attacks against KFOR personnel in late November
2011.
Let me recall that, throughout these recent
tensions, both KFOR and EULEX have acted and
continued to act, in accordance with their mandate, in a
status-neutral way that aims to ensure and maintain a
safe and secure environment, including freedom of
movement, and to establish the rule of law. Germany
appreciates the contribution of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
towards restoring freedom of movement for the
international presences throughout northern Kosovo.
The last weeks have seen slight improvements.
That momentum should be maintained, and parties
should build upon it. In that context, we welcome
efforts undertaken by UNMIK to improve coordination
and cooperation among KFOR, EULEX, the

14

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and Kosovar and Serbian leaders, and we encourage
further action to reduce misunderstandings and
miscommunication. We commend the call by President
Tadić for the dismantling of roadblocks. That call came
belatedly, but it should be welcomed, nevertheless.
Further steps are required to enable both KFOR and,
above all, EULEX to carry out their respective
mandates unhindered.
Dialogue has been proven to be the most effective
means to contribute to sustainable peace and stability
in the region. It is of utmost importance to provide the
region with a clear European perspective and to ensure
transparent communication among the parties. The
European Union is a strong partner and is committed to
supporting the region in finding long-lasting solutions
and building a European future.
As Foreign Minister Westerwelle emphasized
after his recent meeting with His Excellency Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, it is
positive that Kosovo and Serbia have resumed their
dialogue and that the dialogue has brought about first,
tangible results. It is crucial that both sides continue to
show credible commitment and achieve further progress
in moving forward with the implementation in good
faith of the agreements reached in the EU-facilitated
dialogue. That includes implementation of the
2 December agreement on the integrated management
of crossing points. Reaching agreement on inclusive
regional cooperation will also be a crucial contribution
to peace and stability in the region as a whole.
We welcome the progress made on mutually
accepted university diplomas, including the agreement
to introduce certification by a committee of European
academic experts. Those measures are important,
tangible steps that will have a direct, positive impact
for the people in Kosovo.
Against that background, it is even more
regrettable that no date has yet been set for a new
dialogue meeting. We urge both parties to agree on that
as soon as possible.
Now, a few remarks on rule of law and security.
Germany is pleased to note that in 2011 the overall
number of common crimes decreased, compared to the
previous year. We also congratulate the Kosovo police
on its successful operations against organized crime
and its perseverance in the fight against human and
drug trafficking. We encourage Kosovo and Serbia to

12-22578

S/PV.6713

continue to reinforce cooperation
respective ministries of justice.

between

their

Regarding the allegations raised in the so-called
Marty report, let me once again stress that Germany
takes them very seriously. A thorough investigation of
all alleged crimes is required, including abductions,
detentions, mistreatment and killings during the period
in question. We thus fully support the work of the
Special Investigative Task Force established by
EULEX, under the leadership of Ambassador Clint
Williamson. We welcome the update provided in the
current report on UNMIK (S/2012/72) and look
forward to continued reporting to the Council on the
work of that Task Force.
Let me reiterate that we have no doubt that the
Task Force has the capacities, competence and the
jurisdiction to carry out those investigations. Much has
been achieved. Nineteen of the authorized 25 staff
members have commenced their work, including
prosecutors, investigators, analysts and support staff.
The Special Investigative Task Force is analyzing the
information collected, including that provided by
UNMIK as part of its transition process. Ambassador
Williamson has had numerous constructive meetings
with Heads of States and Government, as well as
relevant authorities in Kosovo, Serbia and Albania.
We are thus particularly pleased to see that not
only Pristina, but also Belgrade and Tirana have
reconfirmed, at the highest political level, their full
cooperation with the Task Force and its investigators.
The Serbian Prosecutor for War Crimes, Mr. Vladimir
Vukčević, met with Ambassador Williamson and,
according to local media on 19 January, described his
approach as “very serious and highly professional”.
Most recently, the Albanian Government and
authorities reiterated their commitment to full
cooperation with the Special Investigative Task Force,
following the visit of Ambassador Williamson to
Tirana. This was again reiterated in the letter sent to
the Council yesterday by the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Albania.
Against that background, we are confident that all
Governments will continue to respond favourably to a
possible call for assistance. That will ensure that the
Task Force can conduct investigations in Kosovo and
beyond.
Let me conclude by reiterating our appreciation
for the contributions made by UNMIK and by

12-22578

commending the dedication and service of its staff.
Germany will continue to pay great attention to the
developments in Kosovo. We will also continue to
promote Serbia’s and Kosovo’s joint and shared
European future.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2012/72). We welcome the participation in
today’s meeting of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.
Azerbaijan respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and does not recognize Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence. Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) is the binding
international legal basis for resolving the Kosovo issue
and providing security in the area. The resolution
outlines explicit guidelines and steps to be taken for a
comprehensive settlement in a political process and
through negotiations.
Neither the divergences on the interpretation of
resolution 1244 (1999) nor the lack of progress in
political negotiations can be presented as justifying
unilateral action. It should be taken into account that in
its advisory opinion of 22 July 2010, the International
Court of Justice did not address the question of the
legal consequences of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration
of independence. Accordingly, the Court did not clarify
whether Kosovo had the right to unilaterally secede
from Serbia or, generally speaking, whether such
secession conformed with international law, nor
whether or not Kosovo’s declaration of independence
had led to the creation of a state. The Court also left
unanswered the question of the status of acts of
recognition of Kosovo made by other States.
Attempts to impose unilateral solutions on crisis
situations and their far-reaching repercussions,
including, in particular, when such actions are
controlled from outside or are coupled with external
aid or even foreign military intervention, continue to
pose a serious threat to international and regional
peace, security and stability.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report,
optimistic assumptions that durable solutions to the
Kosovo issue might simply evolve from the status quo,

15

S/PV.6713

without a strong vision for the way forward and a united
engagement of the international community, are belied
by dynamics on the ground (see S/2012/72, para. 52).
Indeed, dangerous escalation of the situation and
instability and insecurity in the area demonstrate how
illusive were the hopes of those who preferred unilateral
actions to the perspective of achieving a solution based
on mutual understanding and consensus.
Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the tension
and violent clashes observed in northern Kosovo
during the reporting period. We note the efforts aimed
at de-escalating tension and call upon all stakeholders
on the ground to engage in dialogue and work together
to restore stability.
Under challenging circumstances, it is important
that the sides continue to be constructively engaged in
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. Some positive
results achieved so far in the framework of that
dialogue and visible progress in the implementation of
previously reached agreements are commendable and
should be consolidated. We also hope that discussion
on the European perspective, particularly on Serbia’s
European Union candidature status, will not be further
delayed.
We are pleased to observe some positive
characteristics in Kosovo’s economic development,
including gross domestic product growth of 5 per cent
in 2011 and a satisfactory fiscal performance. At the
same time, as the Secretary-General notes in his report,
some legislative measures on privatization-related
matters constitute a departure from the relevant
framework established by UNMIK.
The situation regarding the return of internally
displaced persons, in particular the decline in the rate
of such returns, remains a matter of concern and
requires redoubled efforts. Continued cooperation on
the issue of persons reported missing and on the
protection of religious and cultural heritage is also
essential for reconciliation between communities.
Azerbaijan is concerned about reports related to
human organ trafficking and believes that inquiries to
investigate such a serious offence will definitely serve
the principles of justice and the rule of law. We look
forward to an objective investigation of the facts by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. At
the same time, in order to ensure fairness and
transparency, we support the view that the process

16

must be empowered by and accountable to the Security
Council.
In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its efforts and important role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet for his briefing and for the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for the period from October 2011 to January 2012
(S/2012/72). I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.
We commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif and UNMIK for their ongoing
efforts to improve the situation in northern Kosovo and
for the services the Mission is rendering in areas such
as document certification, mutual legal assistance,
determining the fate of missing persons, the protection
of architectural and religious sites, promoting
UNESCO’s activities, and facilitating Kosovo’s
interaction with INTERPOL, other international bodies
and non-recognizing States. Those services serve to
better the lives of all Kosovars and should be continued
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant decisions.
As the report of the Secretary-General notes, the
situation in northern Kosovo continues to be tense and
potentially unstable. In order to deal with that volatile
situation, we urge all United Nations bodies and
international agencies to use persuasion and
negotiation, rather than force. Further, all sides must
try to avoid taking unilateral steps to change the status
quo. All sides should show creativity in finding a
compromise on the contentious issues. In that
connection, we appreciate the helpful position taken by
the Government of Serbia on the issue of roadblocks
and on the proposed holding of a referendum in
northern Kosovo.
We applaud the concerned parties as well as the
European Union for successfully holding two rounds of
dialogue in Brussels in November and December 2011,
despite the prevailing tensions. We have noted that
these talks have resulted in forward movement on the
agreements reached previously and in a new agreement
on integrated management of crossing points. We hope

12-22578

S/PV.6713

that the implementation of those agreements will
further facilitate the daily lives of the Kosovars.
We have taken note with satisfaction that the
Lead Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task
Force of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) to investigate allegations of organ
trafficking has assumed office and has started his work
in earnest. We reiterate our stand that a thorough and
impartial investigation should be carried out into all
aspects of the matter.
In conclusion, I would like to express our support
for Special Representative Zarif and UNMIK. Other
agencies in Kosovo — the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force, EULEX and
others — should continue to cooperate and coordinate
with UNMIK in accordance with their respective
mandates. We reiterate the call on the parties to resolve
all issues concerning Kosovo through consultation and
dialogue without resort to unilateral action. Only thus
can the aspirations of the Kosovars be met and lasting
peace and stability established in the region, creating an
enabling environment for socio-economic development.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for
his briefing. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his participation by video
teleconference. The use of video teleconferencing is
one of several recent useful innovations that, in our
view, improve the efficiency of the Security Council
and of United Nations operations in the field, and I
welcome the fact that Special Representative Zarif is
amongst the many Special Representatives now using
it.
I am also pleased to welcome to the Council His
Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
The United Kingdom endorses a central theme of
the report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2012/72), which is that the Government of Kosovo
continues to make progress towards normalization both
within Kosovo and within the region. I am sure that all
Council members will agree that that is firmly in the
interests of long-term peace and stability in the
Balkans.

12-22578

We wholeheartedly agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s observation that the European Unionfacilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
shows that it is possible for the parties to reach
practical agreements in order to improve the daily lives
of the people of Kosovo, and where those agreements
have been reached, I congratulate the negotiators on
both sides for their efforts. I welcome the assurances
we have heard today from both Foreign Ministers of
their continued commitment to the dialogue. The
United Kingdom urges both sides to remain continually
and constructively engaged in the process, and indeed
to agree quickly on dates for further meetings.
The positive steps taken since the Council last
discussed Kosovo (see S/PV.6670) demonstrate how
Europe, with valuable support from the wider
international community, is able to tackle and achieve
progress on complex and sensitive issues that arise
within its borders. It is for that reason that we welcome
the recent appointment of Mr. Samuel Žbogar as the
Special Representative of the European Union (EU) to
Kosovo. We look forward to working with EU Special
Representative Žbogar and his team as they help to
guide Kosovo along the path to towards eventual EU
accession.
Kosovo continues to make particular progress in
judicial reform and migration. The launch in January of
a formal dialogue with the European Commission on
visa liberalization was a result of much hard work on
the issue by the Government of Kosovo. Nevertheless,
the United Kingdom recognizes that, in other areas,
significant challenges remain. We are concerned about
the decline in the level of voluntary returns of
displaced people and communities. The Government of
Kosovo should continue to make every effort to
facilitate the return of its nationals in the hope that
long-term resettlement and reintegration can take
place. The United Kingdom is making its own
contribution to that process, notably in the historic
centre of Prizren.
Further efforts are also needed towards the
strengthening of the rule of law and minority rights.
There is no doubt that the government of Kosovo is
committed to securing concrete progress on those
issues, not least in the context of its commitment to
prepare for eventual EU accession. We welcome the
government’s determination to engage more directly
with Kosovo Serb citizens in the north.

17

S/PV.6713

For that reason, it is important for both Kosovo
and Serbia to remain engaged in the EU-facilitated
dialogue. As we have underlined on many occasions
before, the dialogue remains crucial for building
practical cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade,
for improving the lives of their citizens, and for
ensuring that both Kosovo and Serbia progress in a
more stable fashion towards eventual EU membership.
It remains the responsibility of all who exercise
influence in northern Kosovo, including the
Government of Serbia, to work to actively deter
violence and reduce tensions. That includes withholding
support for any moves or initiatives that risk inflaming
the situation, and it includes giving consistent and
unequivocal backing to both the Kosovo Force and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) in the
exercise of their legitimate mandates — mandates that
they have at all times been fully respected — to
guarantee security and freedom of movement
throughout Kosovo.
The situation still merits close attention, as
Assistant Secretary-General Mulet has emphasized.
The tentative trend established in the past few months
towards a more stable situation in northern Kosovo is
clearly one that needs to be sustained and built on.
We have heard today references to the allegations
of organ trafficking in Senator Dick Marty’s report to
the Council of Europe. The United Kingdom takes
those allegations seriously and continues to offer its
full support to Ambassador Williamson and his Task
Force, who are undertaking a thorough and
comprehensive investigation into those sensitive
issues.
We welcome the public commitments undertaken
by the Governments of Serbia, Albania and Kosovo to
cooperate with Ambassador Williamson’s investigations.
I note the welcome assurances given today by both
Ministers for Foreign Affairs that their authorities will
provide full assistance to the investigation. We are
equally encouraged by the letter from His Excellency
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Albania, Mr. Edmond Haxhinasto, which was
circulated to Council members on 6 February and
pledged to take all legislative steps necessary to
institutionalize the Albanian Government’s cooperation
with EULEX. Those developments reinforce our
confidence in the work of the EULEX Task Force and in
its capacity, authority and jurisdiction to carry out a

18

detailed and exhaustive investigation. I deeply regret the
aspersions cast against the impartiality of that
investigation by one Council member in an earlier
intervention.
Overall, 2011 was a good year for Kosovo, in
which it further consolidated its independence, with, I
understand, 85 countries now confirmed as
recognizers. Furthermore, the European Union’s
General Affairs Council conclusions of 27 January
represented a significant step forward in Kosovo’s
relationship with the EU. Nevertheless, as the report of
the Secretary-General makes clear, it is crucial that
Kosovo maintain its focus on reform.
The United Kingdom shares the hope expressed
by Assistant Secretary-General Mulet that 2012 can be
a year in which opportunities are seized. In our view,
that will mean a particular, sustained and full
commitment by both sides to the EU-facilitated
dialogue.
The United Kingdom continues to believe that
Kosovo’s future belongs in the European Union, along
with all other countries in the western Balkans. We will
work assiduously to help the government of Kosovo
achieve that goal, and we remain committed to the
work of the United Nations and the EU in Kosovo in
support of that aspiration.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond
Mulet, for his briefing, and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for participating in
this debate by videoconference, which is a welcome
practice at this time of budgetary constraints. I also
welcome the presence here in the Chamber of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo.
We begin this year in the hope that a dynamic of
commitment will follow in the wake of the recent
period of increased tensions. We have reason to be
optimistic. The dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, launched about a year ago and facilitated by
the European Union, has yielded positive results. The
authorities of Serbia and Kosovo have established a
regular channel for communication; and they have
concluded several agreements, aimed at improving the
daily lives of the population, whose effects are
beginning to be felt. Nonetheless, much remains to be
done.

12-22578

S/PV.6713

These first efforts towards the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo are steps in the
right direction. We encourage Belgrade and Pristina to
constructively and pragmatically continue the dialogue
by reaching agreement on pending issues. We are
convinced in particular that agreement is possible on
the participation of Kosovo in regional forums.
Political courage will definitely be required on
the part of both sides. The parties must not succumb to
the temptation to turn inward that can arise in a
difficult economic and social context. They must
continue to work towards the compromises required for
the two countries to achieve regional reconciliation and
European rapprochement. The stability of the Balkans
as a whole is at stake.
The Secretary-General rightly highlights in his
report (S/2012/72) the positive rhetoric used by leaders
in Pristina and Belgrade, which we welcome. In that
context, it is important for Prime Minister Thaçi to
convince the Kosovo Serbs that Serbians and Albanians
have a shared future and common interests in northern
Kosovo. We call on the Kosovo government to act in
order to ensure the peaceful integration of northern
Kosovo by inviting its authorities to come to the table
to discuss the issue. The autonomy of northern Kosovo
within the legal framework of Kosovo is in the
interests of Kosovo, its stability and its regional and
European integration, because the primary goal of the
two countries is to rejoin their European family. Those
who continue to use ethnic nationalism as a political
platform are in the wrong century.
We have also noted the recent statements made
by President Tadić. We welcome with interest his fourpoint proposal calling for the implementation of
decentralization, guarantees for the Kosovo Serbs,
status for the Serbian Orthodox Church and its holy
sites, and the settlement of property issues. Those
proposals will open the way to a lasting reconciliation
between Kosovo Serbs and Albanians without bringing
into question the independence and territorial integrity
of Kosovo. The Ahtisaari Plan offers a solid basis on
which the parties can build to establish broad
autonomy for Serbs in the north, consolidate the rights
of minorities and protect their religious heritage.
Let me turn now to the situation on the ground in
northern Kosovo. We hope that the agreements reached
in Brussels will make it possible, if not to reduce
tensions, at least to ease the daily lives of its

12-22578

inhabitants, who are the primary victims of those on
both sides who have an interest in triggering incidents
and allowing for the emergence of a lawless zone
conducive to all types of trafficking.
Our substantive position remains unchanged. The
police officers and soldiers deployed in the framework
of NATO and the European Union cannot be seen as
parties to the conflict. Any attack on them is
unacceptable, as is any obstacle to their freedom of
movement. The international community is present in
Kosovo to maintain security and stability on the
ground, including by ensuring respect for freedom of
movement and enhancing the rule of law, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council.
We welcomed the call made by the President of
Serbia to lift the barricades in northern Kosovo. Once
again, we call on Belgrade to bring to bear all of its
influence to re-establish freedom of movement there
and to fully implement all of the agreements already
reached, in particular the agreement on the integrated
management of crossing points. We also call on the
Serbian authorities to cooperate fully with the
European Union Rule of Law Mission. Our requests
and expectations are, of course, the same with respect
to Pristina.
I should like to say one last word on the current
investigation into the allegations of organ trafficking
contained in the Marty report. In the light of the
seriousness of those allegations, France would like the
truth to be known, and, if the allegations are found to
be true, for those responsible to be brought to justice.
That is why we supported the creation of the
19-member Special Investigative Task Force of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the appointment of a very experienced
individual, Clint Williamson, as its Lead Prosecutor.
His actions throughout his career are well known in
this Chamber. His impartiality is unquestionable. We
expect the Task Force to conduct its investigation in
Kosovo and beyond its borders, which it can do in
cases involving crimes committed by citizens of
Kosovo. I note that the States of the region have
expressed their confidence in Mr. Williamson and
assured him of their full cooperation on the political
and legal levels.
We are particularly encouraged by the
commitments made in that regard by the Prime
Minister of Albania, as confirmed in the letter from the

19

S/PV.6713

Albanian authorities addressed to the President of the
Security Council on 6 February. I am also pleased to
note that the Lead Prosecutor will rely in part on the
work already carried out by some institutions, in
particular the Council of Europe. Finally, I should like
to emphasize that, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General,
Mr.
Williamson
will
also
investigate allegations of mistreatment, detentions,
abductions and killings during the reporting period.
In our view, EULEX has the resources, the will
and the ability to complete this complex investigation
in an impartial and independent manner, provided that
it can work without political interference and in respect
for the basic rules of confidentiality applicable to such
matters. Naturally, EULEX must be able to guarantee
witness protection. In that regard, we also expect it to
provide the Security Council with periodic updates
containing the most accurate possible information on
the steps taken to pursue the investigation. Those
updates can be included in the quarterly reports of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet for his comprehensive and very
useful briefing and for having introduced the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/72). I welcome the
presence of Mr. Farid Zarif via video teleconference. I
would also like to welcome Foreign Ministers Vuk
Jeremić and Enver Hoxhaj and thank them for their
statements.
I will focus my statement on three specific
aspects. The first is the referendum on the acceptance
of the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo, which is
being planned in northern Kosovo. That project has
already been condemned by the international
community in general and very pointedly by the
Republic of Serbia.
The rhetoric that serves as the basis for some
actors in northern Kosovo who entertain the idea of a
referendum is unhelpful to the process of improving
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, and is
potentially destabilizing for Kosovo. It demonstrates
the extent to which some actors in northern Kosovo are
pursuing independent agendas. In that regard, President
Boris Tadić’s rejection of the partition of Kosovo must
be highlighted and is to be much welcomed. In fact,
that unacceptable initiative is a challenge to the
territorial integrity of Kosovo. Furthermore, it strays

20

from the accepted path towards peace and stability in
the region under resolution 1244 (1999). It is meant to
put pressure on the Government of the Republic of
Serbia and to disturb Serbia’s clear, deserved and,
indeed, necessary path towards European integration.
The second aspect is the situation created by the
barricades in northern Kosovo. Last November in
particular, we witnessed violent clashes between
Kosovo Serbs and the Kosovo Force (KFOR). I need
not mention how much the barricades and related
violence have hampered the normalization of the
situation in northern Kosovo. The barricades are also a
clear obstacle to the development of unimpeded
economic relations between Serbia and Kosovo, which
represent an important dimension of the ongoing
negotiations in the European Union to facilitate a
dialogue.
We must vigorously deplore the continued
existence of the barricades. They stop the population of
northern Kosovo from leading a normal life. They
prevent the international forces in Kosovo from fully
implementing the mandates they were given by the
Council and from fulfilling their duties to the
population. Finally, they are a source of great tension
and therefore cast a permanent shadow over the
negotiations and dialogue between the parties. Those
negotiations are indeed decisive. The barricades are
imprisoning Kosovo Serbs in a situation for which a
solution acceptable to all is made more difficult by
their action. I am happy to echo President Boris Tadić’s
appeal for the dismantling of the barricades.
Finally, allow me to briefly address the third
aspect, the report on the activities of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (see S/2012/72,
annex I). I wish to underline the ambitious scope of the
Mission’s
activities,
which
include
ensuring
accountability for war crimes, rooting out corruption,
fighting organized crime and trafficking in human
organs, and investigating the allegations made in the
Dick Marty report.
Portugal
commends
the
efforts
already
undertaken by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and welcomes the recent
activity of the Lead Prosecutor of the Special
Investigative
Task
Force,
Ambassador
Clint
Williamson. The contacts he has established with the
Presidents and Governments of Serbia, Albania and
Kosovo, as well as the strong support he has gathered

12-22578

S/PV.6713

for his mission, allow us to expect transparent and
efficient cooperation from all involved. It also raises
our expectations about the Mission’s initial findings,
which we would like to hear about very soon, for the
endeavour to uncover the whole truth behind the
allegations of hideous crimes must remain our ultimate
goal.
In that context, I would like to note with great
appreciation the recent letter from the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Albania, in
which full cooperation with EULEX investigative
action was promised. In line with the position we have
always held on serious crimes, be it in the region or
elsewhere, we believe that impunity in itself is not only
intolerable, but also an obstacle to peace. Those
allegations must be fully investigated and, if
confirmed, their perpetrators brought to justice.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report, both
sides at the highest levels have adopted a more
conciliatory stance in some important respects and
have renewed efforts to achieve results. We encourage
them to move forward on that path. Progress has been
made in the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. In December
2011, another agreement was reached on the integrated
management of crossing points, which we hope, once
implemented, will help to normalize the situation in
northern Kosovo. Furthermore, we have seen
encouraging steps towards implementing previous
agreements.
We reiterate our call on both parties to continue
their commitment to that process and to finding
compromise solutions. We should not allow minor
irresponsible stakeholders to play a spoiling role
disproportionate to their contribution to peace and
stability and their representation among the population.
The Security Council must therefore continue to play
its crucial role in ensuring stability in Kosovo and the
region, as Mr. Mulet underlined.
Portugal believes that the European perspective
of Serbia and Kosovo constitutes an important
encouragement
for
both
parties
to
remain
constructively engaged in their negotiations. While we
are aware of the challenges ahead, we stress that time
is of paramount importance in that regard. We appeal
to both parties to renew their efforts, both internally
and bilaterally, so as to make headway on all
fundamental issues.

12-22578

In concluding, let me once again express
Portugal’s appreciation and full support for the
important work being carried out in Kosovo by the
various international presences there, mainly the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and the Special Representative Farid Zarif.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Edmond Mulet for his briefing on
Kosovo for the period from October 2011 to January
2012. We would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements. We also note
the participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif.
There were some positive developments in
Kosovo during the reporting period. We are pleased to
note that the seventh and eighth rounds of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue took place in
Brussels, during which an agreement was reached on
the application of the European Union (EU) concept of
the integrated management of crossing points. The
technical protocol for the implementation of that
agreement should also be signed soon. We hope that
the implementation of the agreement at all border
crossing points will help to remove the irritants that
have been a major source of recent tensions in Kosovo.
We also positively note the progress made in
implementation of the earlier agreements on cadastre
records, freedom of movement and acceptance of
university diplomas.
We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to de-escalate
tensions in northern Kosovo. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
continues to play an important role in ensuring stability
in Kosovo. All constituents of the international
presence in Kosovo must maintain neutrality while
executing their respective mandates.
We welcome the positive statements from
Belgrade concerning a compromise solution for
Kosovo. We also appreciate the efforts of the
leadership in Pristina to adopt a more conciliatory
approach towards the population in the north.
Conciliatory signals from both sides bode well for the
creation of conditions conducive to winning public
support for a resolution of the outstanding issues.
We note with concern, however, that the overall
security situation in northern Kosovo continues to be

21

S/PV.6713

fragile. Such steps as the planned referendum carry the
risk of increasing polarization and hardening attitudes
and positions. Being detrimental to dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of the problems of Kosovo, such
measures should be avoided. We support the impartial
investigation into alleged inhuman treatment of people
and illicit trafficking in human organs.
The achievement of lasting peace needs vision
and the demonstration of flexibility on the part of the
leadership of both sides. Leaders also have the
responsibility to prepare their publics to make the
necessary accommodations. We urge all parties to
pursue the path of dialogue and engagement for the
sake of lasting peace in Kosovo.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Edmond
Mulet for his briefing today on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif by
video teleconference in this meeting today.
We welcome Foreign Minister Jeremić back to
the Council and thank him for his statement. We also
welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank him for his statement.
From the outset, my delegation reiterates its
position that resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force
and forms the basis for the resolution of the situation in
Kosovo. It is therefore incumbent on the international
presences in Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), to maintain a status-neutral
position in the execution of their mandates, in line with
presidential statement S/PRST/2008/44, adopted by the
Council in November 2008.
South Africa supports the dialogue process
facilitated by the European Union between the two
sides, Pristina and Belgrade, as mandated by the
General Assembly. We are pleased by the resumption
of this dialogue and that the seventh and eighth rounds
of negotiations took place in Brussels late last year.
This regular direct contact between the parties is an
important confidence-building measure that, we hope,
will improve trust and allow the parties to address their
outstanding and contentious issues. The recent
discussions in Brussels have proven that, through
dialogue, the parties are able to agree on a number of
important issues, such as the management of crossing
points.

22

South Africa remains concerned, however, that
since the previous reporting period, the situation has
continued to be tense and potentially unstable,
particularly in northern Kosovo. We condemn all forms
of violence by all sides, including attacks on KFOR
and EULEX. This violence threatens the peace and
stability of the region. All parties should exercise
restraint and refrain from the unnecessary use of force.
Violence and the use of excessive force will only
undermine the gains made by the parties in their
dialogue processes, ultimately making reconciliation
more difficult to achieve.
My delegation is also concerned about the
deterioration of inter-ethnic relations throughout
Kosovo. Inter-ethnic trust remains vital. Public
reconciliatory pronouncements from leaders on both
sides are welcome, positive contributions towards
reconciliation.
We have noted with appreciation the commitment
shown by the Kosovo Police in the fight against
criminal activities, such as organized crime, human
trafficking and drug trafficking. As a result, by and
large there has been a reduction in common crime from
the previous year.
We would like to echo the concern expressed by
the Secretary-General that “progress appears to be
slowing on two major issues essential for
reconciliation: voluntary returns of the displaced and
determining the fate of missing persons” (S/2012/72,
para. 55). In this regard, my delegation urges all
parties to demonstrate cooperation and flexibility in
finding solutions to these outstanding issues.
Negotiations remain the only approach to producing
reciprocally beneficial and sustainable solutions.
Regarding the allegations of organ trafficking, we
reiterate our position that a credible, thorough,
impartial and independent inquiry into these
allegations should be conducted.
South Africa once more urges both sides to
refrain from any action that could undermine the
achievements attained in the dialogue process. We
therefore call on the parties to exercise flexibility in
order to enhance their engagement, resolve outstanding
matters and ensure that reconciliation prevails.
Finally, I would like to express South Africa’s
appreciation and support for the role of UNMIK, under

12-22578

S/PV.6713

the able leadership of Mr. Farid
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

Zarif,

in

Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his detailed
briefing on recent events and progress made in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and thank them
for their presence. I know that winter conditions in
Europe make travel to New York difficult, so their
resolve to participate in this meeting merits twofold
thanks.
We also welcome the presence via video
teleconference of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, whose intensive
work with local leaders and those in Belgrade and
Pristina is clearly outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General before us (S/2012/72).
We regret the various incidents and violence that
have occurred in recent months, and therefore stress
the critical nature of UNMIK’s work in easing tensions
and preventing the recurrence of such events. We also
regret acts of vandalism against churches and
cemeteries, threats against the press, and other acts of
violence, all of which hinder peaceful coexistence.
With respect to the allegations of trafficking in
human organs made in a report to the Council of
Europe in December 2010 by Mr. Dick Marty, we note
the positive start to the work of Mr. Clint Williamson,
as Lead Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task
Force of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo. We hope that his work will give renewed
momentum to the rapid completion of the
investigations in order to ensure that those who are
guilty of these acts are brought to justice.
Colombia views with optimism the progress made
on issues of direct benefit to citizens, such as the civil
registry, the cadastre records, improved freedom of
movement, automobile registration and in particular
the possibility of joint management of border
crossings, which represents a dispute of great
sensitivity between the parties.
We are also optimistic about the resumption of
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. Colombia

12-22578

stresses the importance of building on common ground
where progress can be made and the path to
reconciliation can run smoothly. We are concerned
about the slowing rate of voluntary returns of the
displaced and the stagnation in investigations of
missing persons. We therefore believe that increased
efforts are necessary in mobilizing not only political
will but also technical resources and cooperation.
Those issues play a critical role in the reconciliation
process and should enjoy the full commitment of all
parties concerned and the support of the international
community.
In setting its priorities, UNMIK should continue
to promote security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and the region by collaborating with
the parties concerned, Kosovo communities and
regional and international agencies. The work of
UNMIK will be critical to persuading the parties to
show moderation and promote dialogue in order to
reach sustainable solutions to long-standing disputes.
Finally, we urge the parties to adopt measures
allowing for a reduction in tension and avoiding the
outbreak of new crises, and to work with the necessary
political resolve on the basis of agreements already
reached, because that is the true way to move towards
peace.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/72) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and my
compatriot Edmond Mulet for having introduced it to
us. I would also like to welcome the virtual presence of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif.
The report before us today leaves no doubt about
the important function that UNMIK is fulfilling in
Kosovo. We express our support for the Mission and
encourage it to continue carrying out its mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999) in all activities conducted in
Kosovo involving the entire international presence in
Kosovo, including the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force,
which must act with strict neutrality and impartiality.
We are concerned by the security situation in
northern Kosovo, which not only creates additional
challenges for the United Nations but also has a
negative impact on dialogue between the parties. We
encourage Pristina and Belgrade to take responsibility

23

S/PV.6713

for reducing tensions and to continue to use positive
rhetoric in their communications.

back to the Council, and I thank them for sharing their
perspectives with us.

We welcome the fact that, despite the difficulties
described, the parties are focused on resolving their
differences through dialogue, as shown by the recent
round of talks facilitated by the European Union. We
likewise recognize the contribution that this dialogue is
making towards resolving practical issues, especially
those directly affecting the daily life of the population.
We note from the Secretary-General’s report that some
agreements have been reached which we hope can soon
be put into practice towards the normalization of the
situation in the north, such as through the integrated
management of crossing points.

I would like to make four points. First, although
the situation in northern Kosovo remains tense, the
United States is encouraged by the progress Kosovo
and Serbia have made in the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union (EU). Both countries aspire to EU
membership, and it is appropriate that this EU
initiative be the forum for the parties to resolve their
differences. Through practical arrangements, Kosovo
and Serbia are expanding possibilities for their citizens
to travel, work, study and trade. We continue to support
EU efforts to encourage both countries to be flexible in
reaching agreements on such issues as implementation
of integrated management of their border crossings and
Kosovo’s participation in regional forums. We look
forward to the full implementation of all previously
negotiated agreements.

The incidents involving roadblocks and recent
protests are regrettable. We are also concerned by the
news of the referendum planned for mid-February by
the municipal authorities in northern Kosovo. In fact,
events remind us that it is impossible to separate the
situation on the ground from positions on the legal
status of Kosovo. Violence and unilateral actions must
be renounced, and attempts to change the legal status
by force must be shunned. We call on the parties to
pursue dialogue on outstanding issues in order to reach
a solid and lasting solution. We agree with UNMIK
that the time has come to show the courage and
pragmatism needed to achieve substantive progress.
We note the report on the work of EULEX in the
annex to the Secretary-General’s report. It is important
to solidify efforts to move towards the rule of law in
Kosovo. From our own experience, we have learned
first-hand that strengthening the rule of law is essential
to achieving peace and justice and to fighting impunity.
We have also followed closely the accusations
made by Serbia against Kosovo authorities about
human organ trafficking. We note that Lead Prosecutor
Clint Williamson has assumed his position, and that the
report on EULEX describes the investigation as
complex and covering several jurisdictions. We hope
that all accusations will be investigated in detail and
that those responsible will be indicted. We therefore
hope that an arrangement can be reached to involve
UNMIK in the process of unravelling the accusations.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I want
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for his
briefing and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarif for participating today. I also welcome
Foreign Minister Hoxhaj and Foreign Minister Jeremić

24

Secondly, we renew our call for unconditional
and unfettered freedom of movement throughout
Kosovo. The current so-called conditional freedom of
movement afforded the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) in northern Kosovo is simply unacceptable.
While we are pleased that some barricades and
checkpoints have been relaxed, obstructions to freedom
of movement remain and are attributable to the actions
of Serb hardliners, with the support of illegal Serb
parallel institutions. The northern Kosovo Serb
population and the Serbian Government should
cooperate fully with KFOR and EULEX in the
immediate removal of all roadblocks and in supporting
the rule of law through actions such as cooperating in
the arrests of key criminal suspects.
As noted in the report on EULEX (S/2012/72,
annex I), Serb hardliners man barricades that block
lawyers and EULEX judges and prosecutors from
accessing the Mitrovica District Court, paralysing the
only legitimate institution in northern Kosovo.
Similarly, illegal roadblocks along the border continue
to impede commerce and movement. We welcome
President Tadić’s public call on Serbs in northern
Kosovo to dismantle such barricades, and we hope that
his words will lead to actions on the ground to achieve
freedom of movement for all. We reject all actions that
seek to undermine Kosovo’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. That includes the parallel
structures and Serbian security forces still present in
northern Kosovo, nearly 13 years after the Council

12-22578

S/PV.6713

mandated the withdrawal of such forces enacted under
resolution 1244 (1999), to supersede Serbia’s legal
order in Kosovo.
Thirdly, we commend the efforts of the
government of Kosovo to reach out to Kosovo Serbs by
establishing a trust fund dedicated to support for the
north. Kosovo’s Constitution affords Serbs and other
minorities extensive rights and protections, including
enhanced local self-governance through the creation of
new Serb-majority municipalities, special emphasis on
returns of minorities displaced during the 1999
conflict, special ties to Serbia in education, health and
social services, and protection of religious and cultural
heritage.
However, the efforts of the government of
Kosovo are made vastly more difficult by the presence
in northern Kosovo of illegal Serb parallel institutions,
including local government structures, police and
courts financed by Belgrade, which exercise a
campaign of intimidation against anyone willing to
engage constructively with Pristina institutions. Serbia
must cease its support for those parallel structures.
Finally, the United States takes very seriously any
allegations of serious crimes committed in connection
with the 1999 conflict. Such allegations must be
thoroughly investigated. EULEX is the appropriate
body to conduct an investigation into allegations of
serious criminal activity, including organ trafficking.
EULEX assumed rule-of-law responsibilities in
Kosovo in 2008. That was a key point in the SecretaryGeneral’s November 2008 report on UNMIK
(S/2008/692), which the Council welcomed in its
presidential statement of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44). EULEX has the full support of all
stakeholders in the region. We note that President
Jahjaga of Kosovo and other Kosovo authorities have
pledged full support and cooperation with the
investigation, as have Prime Minister Berisha of
Albania and President Tadić of Serbia. Given that all
three countries aspire to be members of the European
Union, we expect that they will fully cooperate with
the EU investigation.
Also, the assertion that all investigations into war
crimes in the former Yugoslavia have taken place under
Security Council auspices is not correct. Cases outside
the United Nations mandate have been developed by
national prosecutors and are being handled by domestic
courts in the region. Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,

12-22578

and Croatia all have active war crimes prosecutors
offices and war crimes chambers in their court systems
that deal with not only cases referred to them by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, but other cases as well. The Cuska case,
which concerns the massacre of Kosovo Albanian
citizens by Serbian forces, is currently before courts in
Serbia.
The United States has full confidence in the
leadership of the Special Investigative Task Force led
by Ambassador Clint Williamson. We categorically
reject attempts to cast aspersions on the impartiality of
Ambassador Wiliamson and the Task Force, such as
those we heard in the Chamber today. Such assertions
are irresponsible and baseless. Attempts to politicize
the investigation, to duplicate its efforts or to conflate
it with other investigations — including the ongoing
Medicus case, which involves criminal activity during
the 2006-2008 period — do a disservice to the alleged
victims and their families. They also risk calling into
question the impartiality of any decisions reached.
The international community is committed to
long-term peace and stability for Kosovo and for the
entire Balkan region. Many multilateral institutions,
including the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and the
EU, have worked to promote peace, stability and
reconciliation in the region. Now is the time for Serbia
and Kosovo to put the past behind them and work
towards their future in European and Euro-Atlantic
institutions.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as
representative of Togo.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Edmond
Mulet for the presentation he has just made of the
Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2012/72). I also welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
UNMIK’s mandate, we should recall, is to
re-establish the institutions of a country devastated by
war and to establish democratic governance. Within the
framework of a process of reconstruction, the essential
goals to be achieved were the security of individuals
and goods, as well as a legal system in which all
populations could have confidence. According to the

25

S/PV.6713

report, despite tangible progress, those goals have been
but imperfectly reached, and the support of
international actors remains necessary for Kosovo’s
stability. Indeed, even if the threat of war seems to
have faded and if peace processes have been set in
motion between the Kosovar and Serbian people, much
remains to be done with respect to security in terms of
community cohesion in Kosovo.
Acts of violence, in particular against border posts
in northern Kosovo during the night of 27-28 July 2011,
are a perfect demonstration of the climate of insecurity
and of this difficult cohabitation. Those events
contributed to the deterioration of the security situation
in northern Kosovo, to the polarization of positions and
to the worsening of separatist tendencies among the
local populations. That instability is tangible proof that
underlying problems that have yet to be resolved
remain a threat to the peace and stability of the region.
They also justify the importance of the presence of
UNMIK and other partner organizations in Kosovo.
Togo regrets that those incidents have put a hold
on peace negotiations between Kosovo and Serbia,
which had begun well in the spring of 2011. In this
tense situation, we welcome UNMIK’s continued
activities. Under difficult conditions it acts as an
impartial mediator, helping to bring the different
Kosovo communities closer together. UNMIK strives
to encourage both Serb and Kosovar authorities to
work with a view to leading all parties in the conflict to
engage in an open, sincere dialogue in order to find a
durable, peaceful solution to their differences.
In that regard, we welcome the thaw seen in recent
weeks in relations between Pristina and Belgrade.
Indeed, the report indicates that on 2 December 2011,
with European Union mediation, the two parties adopted
the agreed integrated border management conclusions.
That paves the way for normalizing the situation at
border crossings and for re-establishing freedom of
peaceful movement. That agreement allows Serb and
Kosovar police and customs officers to jointly manage
those crossing points under the supervision of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). This is
likely to reinforce trust between the two parties. My
delegation believes that that shows significant progress
towards normalizing relations between the two parties.
We would also like to welcome the two parties’
agreement on the recognition of university diplomas.

26

Of course, there are still differences over the
definition of Kosovo’s common borders, which is,
moreover, the main stumbling block. My country
therefore urges the two parties to pursue their
constructive efforts with a view to a full and complete
normalization of their relations. It is through a shared
resolve to reach a compromise that Serb and Kosovar
authorities will be able to find a lasting solution to the
conflict.
Finally, we welcome the presence in Kosovo of
other international organizations, in particular the
International Security Force in Kosovo, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, and we salute
them for working together towards their common goal,
which is the return of peace and stability to Kosovo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Jeremić has requested the floor to make a
further statement. I now call on him.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I would just like to direct
the attention of the Council to one or two points that
came up in the debate. I think that one thing that we
really must address is that there may be different
political points of view on how we see the issue of
Kosovo from the legal perspective, the perspective of
the rule of law and so on and so forth, but we need to
acknowledge that the situation in Kosovo is very far
from the rosy picture that some participants in today’s
debate have actually tried to present to the Council.
I will quote new reports from institutions such as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
for example. During the reporting period, the UNDP
released its 2012 democratization index. It registered a
lower score for the province than that of last year. So
we are not really talking about improvements. It
concluded that “democratic processes in Kosovo do not
fulfil the standards”. That is consistent with the results
of the 2012 Map of Freedom put out by Freedom
House, which again failed to classify Kosovo as an
electoral democracy.
The January 2012 report of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe on the judiciary in
Kosovo, which was actually hailed by at least one
participant in today’s discussion, concludes that the
political influence in trials and verdicts remained
unacceptably strong, threats against judges and their

12-22578

S/PV.6713

families were ever present and witness protection was
dangerously weak.
The Human Rights Watch World Report 2012
states that the Kosovo human rights situation has
improved little in 2012, citing the poor justice system
and systematic discrimination against non-Albanian
communities as two main problems. Transparency
International’s 2012 Corruption Perceptions Index
classifies Kosovo as a highly corrupt society. It obtains
the worst score of any territory on the old continent.
Meanwhile, that non-governmental organization’s local
Pristina branch issued a 250-page Assessment of
Institutional Integrity, concluding that “corruption is
tremendously spread throughout Kosovo” and that “its
level is only increasing”.
A slightly older report of the European
Commission of October 2011 indicated that public
administration, the judiciary and efforts to tackle
corruption and organized crime remain ineffectual, and
so on and so forth.
So, I think that we need to look at things the way
they are and to try and address them in the best
possible faith. Serbia is ready — and we have
demonstrated time and again that we are ready — to
talk and to engage to discourage any provocative
action, and we will adhere to that attitude. But let us
not try to delude ourselves as to what the situation is
really like over there.
I would like to use this opportunity to invite the
Security Council to visit Serbia, including Kosovo, to
see for itself what the situation is like. Representatives
would see barbed wire and ghetto-like situations in
certain parts of the province and that, today, Serbs are
the most endangered society in the whole of Europe, at
least in some parts of the province. So I urge the
Council to consider Serbia’s invitation to come and
visit.
I appreciate the fact that one member of the
Council, despite not exactly sharing Serbia’s point of
view, called for the two parties to put the past behind
them and to work together to achieve a European
future. We appreciate that stance. What was, of course,
far more disappointing was today’s appeal by the
representative of Pristina for the European Union not
to give Serbia candidate status at the next meeting.
That does not go very well with the attitude of trying to
work together to achieve a common European future,
to which we in Belgrade remain committed.

12-22578

Last but not least, there are not 85 countries of
the United Nations system have recognized Kosovo.
There are actually 81. I just wanted to make that clear
for the record.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Hoxhaj, who asked to make a further
statement.
Mr. Hoxhaj: I think that my statement was long
enough to inform the Council of the objective situation
within Kosovo and in the region. However, let me
repeat here that Kosovo is a viable State and in the past
four years, with the support of all Council members —
and I would like to thank them for that support — and
of key State partners, we were able to build a country, a
society and a State from scratch that is today a very
multi-ethnic democracy.
Whatever was said some minutes ago, it does not
reflect the reality there but is just a description of a
world that does not exist, since those who describe
Kosovo never visit it. They do not know what Kosovo
looks like. I am not here to bother the Council with
reports and quotes, but if we refer to a report, we
should simply refer to the European Commission
progress report of last year, which confirmed that
Kosovo had made significant progress in political
criteria and other fields of life.
Today, Kosovo is an independent country. There
are 85 countries that formally recognize the Republic
of Kosovo. Nobody can stop the flow of history. Here,
I repeat our attitude that we are very much in favour of
politics of reconciliation, not of conflict, and of
supporting the European integration of the whole
region.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Russian Federation has requested
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to briefly address two issues.
First, I was intrigued by Minister Jeremić’s very
interesting proposal that the Security Council visit
Kosovo. As I understand, Mr. Hoxhaj also believes that
such a visit to the province is important to obtaining an
objective and correct understanding of developments
there. The Security Council programme of work for
this year is still not fully determined, so I propose that
the Security Council discuss such a possibility to see if
it can be part of our work programme for 2012.

27

S/PV.6713

Now, I should like to return to the matter of
investigating the human organs issue and the Special
Investigative Task Force led by Mr. Williamson. I take
it as a positive sign that the Security Council has
spoken about the work of that group for the first time
today. Of course, it is important that cooperation and
contact be established between the Task Force and
interested parties because it is the only existing
investigation mechanism. Of course, we should support
it and cooperate with it.
Now, with regard to impartiality, we all know that
in politics perceptions are as important as facts, and
sometimes more important. We all know that, for
example, in the United States of America, where we
work, and in many other countries there is a jury
system for trials. The jury selection sometimes takes
longer than the trial itself. Some candidates are
removed not because they are bad people or because
they are not professionally trained, but simply because
their perceptions may not be impartial, which could
have an impact on the case.
I am convinced that the Task Force set up under
Mr. Williamson is a closed group of which little is
known, and its members have not gone through the
kind of vetting process that would normally take place
when a jury is established, simply because certain

28

countries, including the United States, have their
political agendas. I stress that we recognize
Mr. Williamson as a highly professional specialist, and
he has been put into a very difficult situation. To help
him, we must set up the kind of mechanism described
in the Serbian initiative. It would be under United
Nations and Security Council auspices because, unless
such a mechanism is set up, no outcome of the
investigation undertaken by the Task Force that is not
based on confirmed facts and the conclusions of the
Marty report will be accepted as convincing.
They may make every effort and do everything
necessary to fulfil their professional duty, but if they
claim to be unable to confirm this or that assertion, or
the involvement of particular individuals in the crime,
then the international community will not accept them
as convincing. We must understand that we are putting
Mr. Williamson in a bind. In order to avoid such a
dilemma, we again offer our support for the Serbian
initiative to establish a special mechanism to involve
the United Nations in this investigation.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

12-22578
