28

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

vital importance in heightening awareness of and support
for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to self­
determination and to the establishment of an independent
sovereign Palestinian State,
1. Notes with appreciation the action taken by the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat in
compliance with General Assembly resolution 38/58 E;
2. Requests that the Department of Public Informa­
tion, in full co-operation and co-ordination with the Com­
mittee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Pal­
estinian People, should:
(a) Continue the implementation of all parts of Gen­
eral Assembly resolution 38/58 E;
(b) Disseminate all information on the activities of the
United Nations system relating to Palestine;
(c) Expand and update publications and audio-visual
material on the facts and developments pertaining to the
question of Palestine;
(d) Publish newsletters and articles in its relevant pub­
lications on Israeli violations of the human rights of the
Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories;
(e) Organize fact-finding missions to the area for jour­
nalists;
(j) Organize regional and national encounters for jour­
nalists.
95th plenary meeting
11 December 1984
D
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/58 C of 13 December I 984.
in which it, inter alia, endorsed the convening of an Inter­
national Peace Conference on the Middle East,
Reaffirming paragraph 5 of its resolution 38/58 C, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to undertake pre­
paratory measures to convene the Conference,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
of 13 March 198455 and 13 September 1984, 56 in which he
stated that, inter alia, "it is clear from the replies of the
Governments of Israel and the United States of America
that they are not prepared to participate in the proposed
Conference", 5 7
Reiterating its conviction that the convening of the Con­
ference would constitute a major contribution by the
United Nations towards the achievement of a comprehen­
sive, just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
I. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General:
2. Reaffirms its endorsement of the call for convening
the International Peace Conference on the Middle East in
conformity with the provisions of General Assembly reso­
lution 38/58 C;
3. Expresses its regret at the negative response of the
two Governments and calls upon them to reconsider their
position towards the Conference;
4. Urges all Governments to make additional con­
structive efforts and to strengthen their political will in
55 N39/130-S/16409. For the printed text, see Official Records of 1h,·
Security Council, Thmy-ninth Year. Supplement for January, Februarv and
March I 984, document SI16409.
56 A/391130/Add. I -S/16409/Add. I. For the printed text, see Offinal
Records of the Security Council, Thmv-ninth Year, Supplement .for Julr,
Auf/';t and Septemher 1984. document S/16409/Add.l.
Ibid., para. 4.
SS The report was issued under the symbol A/40/168-S/ 17014. For the
printed text. see Ofjicial Records o{the Security Council, Forue1h Year. Su/>
plemenl for Januarr. Februarr and �farch 19/i.<. document S117014.

order to convene the Conference without delay and for the
achievement of its peaceful objectives;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Security Council, to continue his efforts with a view to
convening the Conference and to report thereon to the
General Assembly not later than 15 March 1985;58
6. Decides to consider at its fortieth session the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
present resolution.
95th plenary meeting
Il December 1984

39/50. Question of Namibia
A
SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 59 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peo­
ples,60
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and subse­
quent resolutions of the General Assembly and the Secur­
ity Council relating to Namibia, as well as the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June
1971,61 delivered in response to the request addressed to it
by the Security Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29
July I 970,
Recalling also its resolutions 3111 (XXVIll) of 12
December 1973 and 31/146 and 31/152 of 20 December
1976, by which it, inter alia, recognized the South West
Africa People's Organization as the sole and authentic rep­
resentative of the Namibian people and granted observer
status to it,
Recalling further its resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September
1981 and 36/121 B of 10 December 1981, by which it
called upon States to cease forthwith, individually and col­
lectively, all dealings with South Africa in order totally to
isolate it politically, economically, militarily and cultur­
ally,
Taking note of Security Council resolutions 532 (1983)
of 3 I May 1983 and 539 (1983) of 28 October 1983,
Noting also the Final Communique of the Common­
wealth Heads of Government Meeting, held at New Delhi
from 23 to 29 November 1983,62 the resolution on
Namibia adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its fortieth ordinary ses­
sion, held at Addis Ababa from 27 February to 5 March
1984,63 the Final Communique of the Summit Meeting of
the Front-line States, held at Arusha, United Republic of
59 Offic,a/ Records of 1he General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 24 (A/39124).
60 Ibid .. Supplement No. 13 (N39/23).
61 Legal Consequences for States o.f the Cominued Presence of South Africa
1n Namibia /South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution
276 ( 19701. Adv,sPrr Op1n,on, I.CJ. Reports, 1971, p. 16.
62 See A;38i707-S/ 16206, annex.
61 A/391207, annex. resolution C'M!Res.934 (XL).

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

29

Tanzania, on 29 April 1984, 64 the Bangkok Declaration
and Programme of Action on Namibia,65 adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia on 25 May 1984 at
its extraordinary plenary meetings held at Bangkok, the
resolution on Namibia adopted by the Organization of
African Unity Co-ordinating Committee for the Libera­
tion of Africa at its forty-second session, held at Dar es
Salaam from 30 August to I September 1984, and the
Final Communique of the Meeting of Ministers and Heads
of Delegation of the Non-Aligned Countries to the thirty­
ninth session of the General Assembly, held in New York
from I to 5 October 1984, 66
Welcoming the resolution on relations between the
European Economic Community and Namibia adopted by
the European Parliament on 22 May 1984,67
Strongly reiterating that the continuing illegal and colo­
nial occupation of Namibia by South Africa, in defiance of
repeated General Assembly and Security Council resolu­
tions, constitutes an act of aggression against the
Namibian people and a challenge to the authority of the
United Nations, which has direct responsibility for
Namibia until independence,
Stressing the solemn responsibility of the international
community to take all possible measures in support of the
Namibian people in their liberation struggle under the
leadership of their sole and authentic representative, the
South West Africa People's Organization,
Reaffirming its full support for the armed struggle of the
Namibian people, under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization, to achieve self-determina­
tion, freedom and national independence in a united
Namibia, and recognizing that 1984 marks the one hun­
dredth year of heroic struggle of the Namibian people
against colonial occupation,
Indignant at South Africa's refusal to comply with
repeated resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976, 435 (1978) of
29 September 1978, 439 (1978) of 13 November 1978,
532 (1983) of 31 May 1983 and 539 (1983) of 28 October
1983, and at its manoeuvres aimed at perpetuating its bru­
tal colonial domination and exploitation of the Namibian
people,
Deploring South Africa's intransigent stand and insis­
tence on new pre-conditions and its demands for conces­
sions from the South West Africa People's Organization
which led to the failure of the Namibian independence
talks held in 1984 at Lusaka and Mindelo,
Commending the front-line States and the South West
Africa People's Organization for the statesmanlike and
constructive attitude which they have displayed in the
efforts aimed at implementing Security Council resolution
435 (1978),
Strongly condemning the racist regime of South Africa
for developing a nuclear capability for military and aggres­
sive purposes,
Deeply concerned at the increasing militarization of
Namibia, the forced conscription of Namibians, the crea­
tion of tribal armies and the use of mercenaries for the
repression of the Namibian people and for carrying out
aggression against neighbouring States,
Noting with grave concern that, as a result of the Security
Council's failure on 31 August 1981,68 on account of the
veto of the United States of America, to exercise effec­
tively its responsibilities, unprovoked armed aggression

against Angola continues and parts of southern Angola are
still under occupation by South African troops,
Expressing its strong condemnation of South Africa's
continuing acts of aggression against independent African
States, particularly Angola, which have caused extensive
loss of human life and destruction of economic infrastruc­
tures,
Reaffirming that the resources of Namibia are the invio­
lable heritage of the Namibian people and that the
exploitation of those resources by foreign economic inter­
ests under the protection of the illegal South African colo­
nial regime, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, of the relevant resolutions of the General Assem­
bly and the Security Council and of Decree No. I for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,69
enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27
September I974, and in disregard of the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, is
illegal and encourages the occupation regime to be even
more intransigent and defiant,
Deeply deploring the continued collaboration with South
Africa of certain Western States, in particular the United
States of America, as well as that of Israel, in the political,
military, economic and nuclear fields, in disregard of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Deeply concerned at the continued assistance rendered
to the racist Pretoria regime by certain international orga­
nizations and institutions, in particular the International
Monetary Fund, in disregard of the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly,
Indignant at the continuing arbitrary imprisonment and
detention of leaders, members and supporters of the South
West Africa People's Organization, the killing of
Namibian patriots and other acts of brutality, including
the wanton beating, torture and murder of innocent
Namibians, and other inhuman measures by the illegal
occupation regime designed to intimidate the Namibian
people and to destroy their determination to fulfil their
legitimate aspirations for self-determination, freedom and
national independence in a united Namibia,
Noting with grave concern that the Security Council has
been prevented from taking effective action against South
Africa in the discharge of its responsibilities under Chapter
VII of the Charter on account of the vetoes cast by one or
more of the Western permanent members of the Security
Council,
Commending the efforts of the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities
entrusted to it under the relevant resolutions of the Gen­
eral Assembly as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia until independence,
I. Approves the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia; 59
2. Takes special note of the Bangkok Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia;65
3. Takes note of the debate on the question of Namibia
held in the Security Council from 20 to 28 October 1983,
culminating in the adoption of resolution 539 (1983), by
which the Council rejected South Africa's insistence on
linking the independence of Namibia to irrelevant and
extraneous issues as incompatible with Council resolution
435 (1978) and declared that the independence of Namibia

64 A/AC.115/L.61 I.
65 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 24 (A/39/24), pan two, chap. Ill, sect. B.
66 A/39/560-S/16773, annex.
67 Official Journal of the European Communaies, No. C I 72145.

68 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth Year, 2300th
meeting.
69 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session, Supple­
ment No. 24 (A/35/24), vol. I, annex IL

30

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

could not be held hostage to the resolution of issues that
were alien to resolution 435 (1978);
4. Further takes note of Security Council resolution
539 (1983) by which the Council decided, in the event of
continued obstruction by South Africa, to consider the
adoption of appropriate measures under the Charter of the
United Nations;
5. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and as recognized in Gen­
eral Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI) and
in subsequent resolutions of the Assembly relating to
Namibia, as well as the legitimacy of their struggle by all
the means at their disposal, including armed struggle,
against the illegal occupation of their territory by South
Africa;
6. Reiterates that, in accordance with its resolution
2145 (XXI), Namibia is the direct responsibility of the
United Nations until genuine self-determination and
national independence are achieved in the Territory and,
for this purpose, reaffirms the mandate given to the United
Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering
Authority for Namibia until independence under resolu­
tion 2248 (S-V) and subsequent resolutions of the General
Assembly;
7. Reaffirms that the South West Africa People's
Organization, the national liberation movement of
Namibia, is the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people;
8. Further reaffirms that the genuine independence of
Namibia can be achieved only with the direct and full par­
ticipation of the South West Africa People's Organization
in all efforts to implement resolutions of the United
Nations relating to Namibia;
9. Strongly condemns the South African regime for its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia in defiance of the
resolutions of the United Nations relating to Namibia;
10. Declares that South Africa's illegal occupation of
Namibia constitutes an act of aggression against the
Namibian people in terms of the Definition of Aggression
contained in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) of
14 December 1974 and supports the armed struggle of the
Namibian people, under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization, to repel South Africa's
aggression and to achieve self-determination, freedom and
national independence in a united Namibia;
11. Reaffirms that Security Council resolution 435
(1978) remains the only acceptable basis for a peaceful set­
tlement of the Namibian question and calls once again for
its immediate and unconditional implementation;
12. Urges the Security Council to act decisively in ful­
filment of the direct responsibility of the United Nations
over Namibia and to take, without further delay, appropri­
ate action to ensure that the United Nations plan, as con­
tained in Security Council resolution 435 (1978), is not
undermined or modified in any way and that it is fully
respected and implemented;
13. Reiterates its conviction that South Africa's contin­
ued illegal occupation of Namibia, its defiance of United
Nations resolutions, its brutal repression of the Namibian
people, its acts of destabilization and aggression against
independent African States and its policies of apartheid
constitute a threat to international peace and security;
14. Expresses its dismay at the failure to date of the
Security Council to discharge effectively its responsibilities
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

owing to the opposition of its Western permanent mem­
bers;
I 5. Declares that comprehensive mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
are the only effective measures to ensure South Africa's
compliance with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations;
16. Denounces all fraudulent constitutional and politi­
cal schemes through which the illegal racist regime of
South Africa may attempt to perpetuate its colonial domi­
nation of Namibia and, in particular, calls upon the inter­
national community, especially all Member States, to con­
tinue to refrain from according any recognition or
extending any co-operation to any regime which the illegal
South African administration may impose upon the
Namibian people in disregard of Security Council resolu­
tions 385 (1976), 435 (1978), 439 (1978), 532 (1983) and
539 (1983) and of other relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Council;
17. Condemns South Africa for its continued attempts
to circumvent the United Nations plan for Namibia by
promoting an internal settlement through the so-called
"Multi-Party Conference" and declares that such attempts
by the racist regime, immediately following the decision to
establish a so-called State Council with the object of draw­
ing up a "Constitution", once again make clear that Preto­
ria has no intention of complying with the letter and spirit
of the United Nations plan and seeks, instead, to consoli­
date its illegitimate hold on the Territory through the
installation of puppet political institutions subservient to
its own interests;
18. Reaffirms that all such manoeuvres are fraudulent
and null and void and that they must be rejected categori­
cally by all States as called for in the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council;
19. Reiterates that there are only two parties to the
conflict in Namibia, namely, the people of Namibia, led by
their sole and authentic representative, the South West
Africa People's Organization, on the one hand, and the
illegal occupation regime of South Africa, on the other;
20. Further reiterates that all efforts must be deployed
to counter any sinister manoeuvres aimed at circum­
venting the United Nations and undermining its primary
responsibility for the decolonization of Namibia;
21. Firmly rejects and condemns the persistent
attempts by the United States of America and South
Africa to establish a "linkage" or "parallelism" between
the independence of Namibia and any extraneous and
irrelevant issues, in particular the withdrawal of Cuban
forces from Angola, and emphasizes unequivocally that all
such attempts are designed to delay the decolonization
process in Namibia and that they constitute interference in
the internal affairs of Angola;
22. Expresses its appreciation to the front-line States
and the South West Africa People's Organization for their
statesmanlike and constructive attitude in the efforts
aimed at implementing Security Council resolution 435
(1978);
23. Reaffirms its conviction that the solidarity and sup­
port of the front-line States for the Namibian cause contin­
ues to be a factor of paramount importance in the efforts to
bring genuine independence to the Territory;
24. Strongly urges the international community to
increase, as a matter of urgency, financial, material, mili­
tary and political support to the front-line States so as to
enable them to resolve their own economic difficulties,
which are largely a consequence of Pretoria's policies of
aggression and subversion, and to defend themselves bet-

II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

ter against South Africa's persistent attempts to destabilize
them;
25. Commends the South West Africa People's Organ­
ization for its continued intensification of the struggle on
all fronts, including the armed struggle, and for its com­
mitment to embrace all Namibian patriots in an effort to
strengthen further the national unity so as to ensure the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of a united Namibia,
and welcomes the consolidation of unity in action by the
patriotic forces in Namibia under the leadership of the
South West Africa People's Organization, during the criti­
cal phase of their struggle for national and social libera­
tion;
26. Reaffirms its solidarity with, and support for, the
South West Africa People's Organization, the sole and
authentic representative of the Namibian people, and pays
tribute to that organization for sacrifices it has made in the
field of battle and also for the spirit of statesmanship, co­
operation and far-sightedness it has displayed in the politi­
cal and diplomatic arena despite the most extreme provo­
cations on the part of the racist Pretoria regime;
27. Welcomes the release of Andimba Toivo ya Toivo,
Secretary-General of the South West Africa People's
Organization, and other leaders of that organization and
considers it a victory for the international campaign;
28. Declares that all so-called laws and proclamations
issued by the illegal occupation regime in Namibia are ille­
gal, null and void;
29. Calls upon Member States and the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to render sustained and increased support as well
as material, financial, military and other assistance to the
South West Africa People's Organization so as to enable it
to intensify its struggle for the liberation of Namibia;
30. Urges all Governments and the specialized agen­
cies and other intergovernmental organizations to provide
increased material assistance to the thousands of
Namibian refugees who have been forced by the apartheid
regime's oppressive policies to flee Namibia, especially
into the neighbouring front-line States;
31. Solemnly reaffirms that Namibia's accession to
independence must be with its territorial integrity intact,
including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands, and reiter­
ates that, in accordance with the resolutions of the United
Nations, in particular Security Council resolution 432
(1978) of 27 July 1978 and General Assembly resolutions
S-9/2 of 3 May 1978 and 35/227 A of 6 March 1981, any
attempt by South Africa to annex them is, therefore, ille­
gal, null and void;
32. Calls upon the Security Council to declare categori­
cally that Walvis Bay is an integral part of Namibia and
that the question should not be left as a matter for negotia­
tion between an independent Namibia and South Africa;
33. Strongly condemns South Africa for obstructing
the implementation of United Nations resolutions, in par­
ticular Security Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435
( 1978), 439 (1978), 532 (1983) and 539 (1983), and for its
manoeuvres, in contravention of those resolutions,
designed to consolidate its colonial and neo-colonial inter­
ests at the expense of the legitimate aspirations of the
Namibian people for genuine self-determination, freedom
and national independence in a united Namibia;
34. Condemns racist South Africa for sabotaging the
Namibian independence talks held in 1984 at Lusaka and
Mindelo by insisting on the notorious "linkage" pre-con­
dition and introducing new insidious subterfuge as alterna­
tives to Security Council resolution 435 (1978);

31

35. Condemns and rejects the puppet "Multi-Party
Conference" as the latest in a series of political stratagems
through which Pretoria attempts to impose a neo-colonial
settlement in Namibia;
36. Strongly urges the Security Council to act deci­
sively against any dilatory manoeuvres and fraudulent
schemes of the illegal occupation regime aimed at frustrat­
ing the legitimate struggle of the Namibian people, under
the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organiza­
tion, for self-determination and national liberation;
3 7. Condemns the increased assistance rendered by the
major Western countries and Israel to South Africa in the
political, economic, financial and particularly the military
and nuclear fields, expresses its conviction that this assis­
tance constitutes a hostile action against the people of
Namibia and the front-line States since it is bound to
strengthen further the aggressive military machine of the
racist regime, and therefore demands that such assistance
be immediately terminated;
38. Denounces the establishment of the so-called Liai­
son Office of the United States Government at Windhoek
in direct violation of relevant resolutions and decisions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council, in partic­
ular Council resolutions 283 (1970) of 29 July 1970 and
30 I (1971) of 20 October 1971, and in total disregard of
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 2 I June 197 1 , 61 and calls for its immediate closure and
withdrawal;
39. Calls once again upon all Governments, especially
those which have close links with South Africa, to support,
in co-operation with the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the actions of the United Nations to defend the
national rights of the Namibian people until indepen­
dence;
40. Strongly condemns South Africa for its military
buildup in Namibia, its introduction of compulsory mili­
tary service for Namibians, its recruitment and training of
Namibians for tribal armies, its use of mercenaries to sup­
press the Namibian people and to carry out its military
attacks against independent African States, its threats and
acts of subversion and aggression against those States and
the forcible displacement of Namibians from their homes;
41. Strongly condemns South Africa for its recent
imposition of military conscription of all Namibian males
between seventeen and fifty-five years of age into the occu­
pying colonial army, in yet another sinister attempt to sup­
press the national liberation struggle of the Namibian peo­
ple and to force Namibians to kill one another, and
declares that all measures taken by racist South Africa by
which the illegal occupation regime attempts to enforce
military conscription in Namibia are illegal, null and void;
42. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa for its
use of the territory of Namibia as a staging ground from
which to launch acts of subversion, destabilization and
aggression against neighbouring African States;
43. Strongly condemns South Africa, in particular for
its persistent acts of subversion and aggression against
Angola, including continued occupation of parts of Ango­
lan territory in gross violation of its sovereignty, and calls
upon South Africa to cease all acts of aggression against
Angola and withdraw immediately and unconditionally all
its troops from that country;
44. Condemns the continuing military and nuclear col­
laboration on the part of certain Western States and Israel
with the racist regime of South Africa, in violation of the
arms embargo imposed against South Africa under Secur­
ity Council resolution 4 1 8 (1977) of 4 November 1977;
45. Declares that such collaboration encourages the
Pretoria regime in its defiance of the international commu-

32

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

nity and obstructs efforts to eliminate apartheid and bring
South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia to an end and
calls for immediate cessation of such collaboration;
46. Calls upon the Security Council to adopt the neces­
sary measures to tighten the arms embargo imposed
against South Africa under Council resolution 418 (1977)
and to ensure strict compliance with the embargo by all
States;
47. Further calls upon the Security Council to imple­
ment, as a matter of urgency, the recommendations con­
tained in the report of the Security Council Committee
established in pursuance of resolution 421 (1977); 70
48. Expresses its grave concern at the acquisition of
nuclear weapons capability by the racist regime of South
Africa and declares that such acquisition constitutes a
threat to peace and security in Africa while posing a danger
to all mankind;
49. Strongly condemns the collusion between South
Africa, Israel and certain Western States, particularly the
United States of America, in the nuclear field and calls
upon France and all other States to refrain from supplying
the racist minority regime of South Africa, directly or indi­
rectly, with installations that might enable it to produce
uranium, plutonium or other nuclear materials, reactors or
military equipment;
50. Reiterates its call upon all States to take legislative
and other appropriate measures to prevent the recruit­
ment, training and transit of mercenaries for service in
Namibia;
51. Strongly condemns the illegal occupation regime of
South Africa for its massive repression of the people of
Namibia and their liberation movement, the South West
Africa People's Organization, in an attempt to intimidate
and terrorize them into submission;
52. Demands once again that South Africa immedi­
ately release all Namibian political prisoners, including all
those imprisoned or detained under the so-called internal
security laws, martial law or any other arbitrary measures,
whether such Namibians have been charged or tried or are
being held without charge in Namibia or South Africa;
53. Demands that South Africa account for all "disap­
peared" Namibians and release any who are still alive and
declares that South Africa shall be liable to compensate the
victims, their families and the future lawful Government
of an independent Namibia for the losses sustained;
54. Reaffirms that the natural resources of Namibia are
the inviolable heritage of the Namibian people and
expresses its deep concern at the rapid depletion of the
na�ural resources of the Territory, particularly its uranium
deposits, as a result of their reckless plunder by South
Africa and certain Western and other foreign economic
interests, in violation of the pertinent resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council, of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of
21 June 19716 1 and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia; 69
55. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign eco­
nomic interests operating in Namibia which are illegally
exploiting the resources of the Territory and demands that
transnational corporations engaged in such exploitation
comply with all the relevant resolutions and decisions of
the United Nations by immediately refraining from any
new investment or any other activity in Namibia, by with­
drawing from the Territory and by putting an end to their
co-operation with the illegal South African administration:
70 Official Records of the Security Counol, Thirty,fjfih Year, Supp/emem
for July, August and September 1980, document S/ 1 4 1 79.

56. Declares that all act1v1t1es of foreign economic
interests in Namibia are illegal under international law and
that all the foreign economic interests operating in
Namibia are liable to pay damages to the future lawful
Government of an independent Namibia;
57. Requests once again all Member States, particu­
larly those States whose corporations are engaged in the
exploitation of Namibian resources, to take all appropriate
measures, including legislation and enforcement action, to
ensure the full application of, and compliance by all corpo­
rations and individuals within their jurisdiction with, the
provisions of Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natu­
ral Resources of Namibia;
58. Declares that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources and continued accumulation and repatri­
ation of huge profits, the foreign economic, financial and
other interests operating in Namibia constitute a major
obstacle to its independence;
59. Calls upon the Governments of all States, particu­
larly those whose corporations are involved in the mining
and processing of Namibian uranium, to take all appropri­
ate measures in compliance with United Nations resolu­
tions and decisions and Decree No. 1 for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia, including the practice
of requiring negative certificates of origin, to prohibit
State-owned and other corporations, together with their
subsidiaries, from dealing in Namibian uranium and from
engaging in any uranium-prospecting activities in
Namibia;
60. Urges the United Nations Council for Namibia, in
its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia until independence, to consider the promulgation
of additional decrees and other legislation in order to pro­
tect and promote the interest of the people of Namibia and
to implement effectively such legislation;
61. Requests the Governments of the Federal Republic
of Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which operate the
Urenco uranium-enrichment plant, to have Namibian ura­
nium specifically excluded from the Treaty of Almelo,
which regulates the activities of Urenco;
62. Calls upon all specialized agencies, in particular
the International Monetary Fund, to terminate all collabo­
ration with and assistance to the racist regime of South
Africa, since such assistance serves to augment the mili­
tary capability of the Pretoria regime thus enabling it not
only to continue the brutal repression in Namibia and
South Africa itself, but also to commit blatant aggression
against independent neighbouring States;
63. Reiterates its request to all States, pending the
imposition of mandatory sanctions against South Africa,
to take legislative, administrative and other measures uni­
laterally and collectively, as appropriate, in order effec­
tively to isolate South Africa politically, economically,
militarily and culturally, in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 and 36/121 B, and 37/233 A
of 20 December 1982;
64. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in implementation of paragraph 15 of General Assembly
resolution ES-8/2 and of the relevant provisions of Assem­
bly resolutions 36/121 B and 37/233 A, to continue to
monitor the boycott of South Africa and to submit to the
Assembly at its fortieth session a comprehensive report on
all contacts between Member States and South Africa,
containing an analysis of the information received from
Member States and other sources on the continuing politi­
cal, economic, financial and other relations of States and

II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
their economic and other interest groups with South Africa
and of measures taken by States to terminate all dealings
with the racist regime of South Africa;
65. Requests all States to co-operate fully with the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the fulfilment of
its task concerning the implementation of General Assem­
bly resolutions ES-8/2, 36/121 B and 37/233 A and to
report to the Secretary-General by the fortieth session of
the Assembly on the measures taken by them in the imple­
mentation of those resolutions;
66. Declares that the liberation struggle in Namibia is
a conflict of an international character in terms of article I,
paragraph 4, of Additional Protocol 1 7 1 to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 194972 and, in this regard,
demands that the Conventions and Additional Protocol I
be applied by South Africa, and in particular that all cap­
tured freedom fighters be accorded prisoner-of-war status
as called for by the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War73 and Additional Protocol
thereto;
67. Declares that South Africa's defiance of the United
Nations, its illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia,
its war of repression against the Namibian people, its per­
sistent acts of aggression against independent African
States, its policies of apartheid and its development of
nuclear weapons constitute a serious threat to interna­
tional peace and security;
68. Strongly urges the Security Council, in the light of
the serious threat to international peace and security posed
by South Africa, to respond positively to the overwhelm­
ing demand of the international community by imme­
diately imposing comprehensive mandatory sanctions
against that country, as provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations;
69. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implemen­
tation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984

B
IMPLEMENTATION OF SECURITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION 435 (1978)
The General Assembly,
Indignant at South Africa's refusal to comply with
Security Council resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January
1976, 431 (1978) of 27 July 1978, 435 (1978) of 29 Sep­
tember 1978, 439 (1978) of 13 November 1978, 532
(1983) of3 l May 1983 and 539 (1983) of 28 October 1983
and at its manoeuvres aimed at gaining international rec­
ognition for illegitimate groups which it has installed in
Namibia, and which are subservient to Pretoria's interests,
in order to maintain its policies of domination and
exploitation of the people and natural resources of
Namibia,
Reaffirming the imperative need to proceed without any
further delay with the implementation of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978), which, together with Council reso­
lution 385 (1976), is the only basis for a peaceful settle­
ment of the question of Namibia,
7 1 A/321144, annex I.
72 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 7 5, Nos. 970-973.

73 Ibid., No. 972, p. 1 35.
7 4 See resolution ES-8/2.

7 5 Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-eighth Year, Supplement
for April. May and June / 983, document S/ 1 57 7 6.

33

Condemning the attempts by South Africa and the
United States of America to continue to deny the
Namibian people their inalienable right to self-determina­
tion and independence by linking the independence of
Namibia with totally irrelevant and extraneous issues,
Reaffirming that the Cuban forces are in Angola by a
sovereign act of the Government of Angola, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
and that the attempts to link their presence in that country
with Namibia's independence constitute interference in
the internal affairs of Angola,
Reaffirming that the only parties to the conflict m
Namibia are, on the one hand, the Namibian people repre­
sented by the South West Africa People's Organization,
their sole and authentic representative, and, on the other,
the racist regime of South Africa, which illegally occupies
Namibia,
Recalling its request to the Security Council, in the light
of the serious threat to international peace and security
posed by South Africa, to respond positively to the over­
whelming demand of the international community by
immediately imposing comprehensive mandatory sanc­
tions against that country as provided for in Chapter VII
of the Charter,
Recalling its call upon all States, in view of the threat to
international peace and security posed by South Africa, to
impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against that
country in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, 74
Taking note of the further reports of the Secretary­
General dated 19 May 1983,7 5 29 August 198376 and 29
December 1983 7 7 concerning the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 ( 1 978) on
the question of Namibia,
I. Strongly condemns South Africa for obstructing the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 385
(1976), 435 (1978), 439 (1978), 532 ( I983) and 539 ( 1983)
and for its manoeuvres, in contravention of those resolu­
tions, designed to consolidate its colonial and neo-colonial
interests at the expense of the legitimate aspirations of the
Namibian people for genuine self-determination, freedom
and national independence in a united Namibia;
2. Reaffirms the direct responsibility of the United
Nations for Namibia pending its achievement of genuine
self-determination and national independence;
3. Reiterates that Security Council resolution 435
(1978), in which the Council endorsed the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia, is the only basis for
a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia and
demands its immediate and unconditional implementa­
tion without qualification, modification or amendment or
the introduction of extraneous and irrelevant issues such
as "linkage", "parallelism" or "reciprocity" insisted upon
by the United States of America and South Africa;
4. Strongly condemns racist South Africa for sabotag­
ing the Namibian independence talks held in 1984 at
Lusaka and Mindelo by insisting on the notorious
"linkage" pre-condition and introducing new insidious
subterfuge as alternatives to Security Council resolution
435 (1978);
5. Condemns the continuing attempts by racist South
Africa to set up puppet political institutions and impose an
"internal settlement" in Namibia, in defiance of United
Nations resolutions and decisions, and, in this context,
16 Ib1d., Supplement for July August and September / 983, document SI
1 5943.
77 Ibid., Supplement for Octoher. Nm•ember and December / 983. docu­
ment S/1 6237.

34

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

condemns and rejects the puppet "Multi-Party Confer­
ence" as the latest in a series of political stratagems
through which Pretoria attempts to impose a neo-colonial
settlement in Namibia;
6. Emphasizes once again that the only parties to the
conflict in Namibia are, on the one hand, the Namibian
people represented by the South West Africa People's
Organization, their sole and authentic representative, and,
on the other, the racist regime of South Africa, which ille­
gally occupies Namibia;
1. Demands that South Africa urgently comply fully
and unconditionally with the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolutions 385 ( I 976) and 435
( 1 978) and subsequent resolutions of the Council relating
to Namibia;

8. Firmly rejects and condemns the persistent attempts
by the United States of America and South Africa to estab­
lish a linkage or parallelism between the independence of
Namibia and any extraneous and irrelevant issues, in par­
ticular the presence of Cuban forces in Angola, and
emphasizes unequivocally that all such attempts are
designed to delay the decolonization process in Namibia
and that they constitute interference in the internal affairs
of Angola;
9. Demands that racist South Africa and the United
States Administration desist from their reprehensible posi­
tions in order to allow Namibia to attain its long overdue
independence;
10. Calls upon all States to condemn and reject any
attempt to link the independence of Namibia with extrane­
ous and irrelevant issues;
l l . Expresses its dismay at the fact that the Security
Council has been prevented by its three Western perma­
nent members from adopting effective measures against
South Africa in the discharge of its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and con­
siders that comprehensive and mandatory sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations would
ensure South Africa's compliance with the decisions of the
United Nations;
1 2. Requests the Security Council to exercise its
authority with regard to the implementation of its resolu­
tions 385 ( 1976), 435 ( 1 978), 532 ( 1 983) and 539 ( I 983)
so as to bring about the independence of Namibia without
further delay, and to act decisively against any dilatory
manoeuvres and fraudulent schemes of the South African
administration in Namibia aimed at frustrating the legiti­
mate struggle of the Namibian people for independence;
1 3. Urges the Security Council to impose comprehen­
sive mandatory sanctions against the racist regime of
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter, in order to
ensure the total cessation of all co-operation with that
�me, particularly in the military and nuclear fields, by
Governments, corporations, institutions and individuals;
1 4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implemen­
tation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984

C
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS
COUNCIL FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly.
Having examined the report of the United Nations

Council for Namibia, 59
Reaffirming that Namibia is the direct responsibility of
the United Nations and that the Namibian people must be
enabled to attain self-determination and independence in a
united Namibia,
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 1 9 May 1 967, by
which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia
until independence,
Taking into consideration the Bangkok Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia,65 adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia on 25 May 1 984 at
its extraordinary plenary meetings held at Bangkok,
Convinced of the need for continued consultations with
the South West Africa People's Organization in the formu­
lation and implementation of the programme of work of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, as well as in any
matter of interest to the Namibian people,
Deeply conscious of the urgent and continuing need to
press for the termination of South Africa's illegal occupa­
tion of Namibia and to put an end to its repression of the
Namibian people and its exploitation of the natural
resources of the Territory,
I . Approves the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, including the recommendations contained
therein, and decides to make adequate financial provision
for their implementation;
2. Expresses its strong support for the efforts of the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of
the responsibilities entrusted to it both as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia and as a policy­
making organ of the UniJed Nations;
3. Requests all Memltt;:.· States to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge
of the mandate entrusted to it under the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent
resolutions of the Assembly;
4. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in the discharge of its responsibilities as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia until independence,
shall:
(a) Continue to mobilize international support in order
to press for the speedy withdrawal of the illegal South Afri­
can administration from Namibia in accordance with the
resolutions of the United Nations relating to Namibia;
(b) Counter the policies of South Africa against the
Namibian people and against the United Nations, as well
as against the United Nations Council for Namibia as the
legal Administering Authority for Namibia;
(c) Denounce and seek the rejection by all States of all
fraudulent constitutional or political schemes through
which South Africa may attempt to perpetuate its presence
in Namibia;
(d) Ensure non-recognition of any administration or
entity installed at Windhoek not issuing from free elec­
tions in Namibia conducted under the supervision and
control of the United Nations, in accordance with the rele­
vant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular reso­
lution 439 ( 1 978) of 1 3 November 1 978;
(e) Undertake a concerted effort to counter the
attempts to establish linkage or parallelism between the

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

independence of Namibia and extraneous issues such as
the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola;
5. Decides further that, in pursuance of the aforemen­
tioned objectives, the United Nations Council for
Namibia shall:
(a) Consult Governments in order to further the
implementation of United Nations resolutions on the
question of Namibia and to mobilize support for the cause
of Namibia;
(b) Represent Namibia in United Nations conferences
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organiza­
tions, bodies and conferences to ensure that the rights and
interests of Namibia shall be adequately protected;
6. Decides that Namibia, represented by the United
Nations Council for Namibia, shall participate as a full
member in all conferences and meetings organized by the
United Nations to which all States or, in the case of
regional conferences and meetings, all African States are
invited;
7. Requests all committees and other subsidiary bodies
of the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council to continue to invite a representative of the
United Nations Council for Namibia to participate when­
ever the rights and interests of Namibians are discussed,
and to consult closely with the Council before submitting
any draft resolution which may involve the rights and
interests of Namibians;
8. Reiterates its request to all specialized agencies and
other organizations and institutions of the United Nations
system to grant full membership to Namibia, represented
by the United Nations Council for Namibia, so that the
Council may participate as the legal Administering
Authority for Namibia in the work of those agencies, orga­
nizations and institutions;
9. Reiterates its request to all specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system that
have not yet done so to grant a waiver of the assessment of
Namibia during the period in which it is represented by
the United Nations Council for Namibia;
10. Again requests all intergovernmental organiza­
tions, bodies and conferences to ensure that the rights and
interests of Namibia are protected and to invite Namibia,
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to participate as a full member whenever such rights and
interests are involved;
11. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia, to accede to any international conventions as it
may deem appropriate;
12. Takes note of the final communiques issued by the
regional symposia and seminars organized by the United
Nations Council for Namibia in 1984; 78
13. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to promote and secure the implementation of the Bangkok
Programme of Action on Namibia;65
14. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia shall:
(a) Consult regularly with the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization by inviting them to
New York and by sending high-level missions to the head­
quarters of that organization, as it deems appropriate, in
order to review the progress of the liberation struggle in
Namibia;
78 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session. Sup­
plement No. 24 (A/39/24). part two. chap. III. sects. C D. F and G .

35

(b) Review the progress of the liberation struggle in
Namibia in its political, military and social aspects and
prepare periodic reports related thereto;
(c) Consider the compliance of Member States with the
relevant United Nations resolutions relating to Namibia,
taking into account the advisory opinion of the Interna­
tional Court of Justice of 21 June 1971; 6 1
(d) Consider the activities of foreign economic inter­
ests operating in Namibia with a view to recommending
appropriate policies to the General Assembly in order to
counter the support which those foreign economic inter­
ests give to the illegal South African administration. in
Namibia;
(e) Continue to examine the exploitation of and trade
in Namibian uranium by foreign economic interests and
report on its findings to the General Assembly at its forti­
eth session;
(/) Notify the Governments of States whose corpora­
tions, whether public or private, operate in Namibia of the
illegality of such operations;
(g) Send missions of consultation to Governments of
States whose corporations have investments in Namibia in
order to review with them all possible action to discourage
the continuation of such investments;
(h) Contact administering and managing bodies of cor­
porations, tanker companies and other shipping interests
involved in the illicit transportation and/or supply of
petroleum and petroleum products to South Africa and
Namibia;
(!) Contact specialized agencies and other international
institutions associated with the United Nations, in particu­
lar the International Monetary Fund, with a view to pro­
tecting Namibia's interests;
(J) Draw the attention of the specialized agencies to
Decree No. l for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia,69 enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974;
(k) Take all measures to ensure compliance with the
provisions of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natu­
ral Resources of Namibia, including consideration of the
institution of legal proceedings in the domestic courts of
States and other appropriate bodies;
(/) Conduct hearings, seminars and workshops in
order to obtain relevant information on all aspects of the
situation in and relating to Namibia, in particular, the
exploitation of the people and resources of Namibia by
South African and other foreign interests, and to expose
such activities;
(m) Organize regional symposia on the situation in
Namibia with a view to intensifying active support for the
Namibian cause;
(n) Prepare and publish reports on the political, eco­
nomic, military, legal and social situation in and relating
to Namibia;
(o) Secure the territorial integrity of Namibia as a uni­
tary State, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands of
Namibia;
15. Decides to make adequate financial provision in
the section of the programme budget of the United
Nations relating to the United Nations Council for
Namibia to finance the office of the South West Africa
People's Organization in New York in order to ensure
appropriate representation of the people of Namibia at the
United Nations through the South West Africa People's
Organization;

36

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

16. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of rep­
resentatives of the South West Africa People's Organiza­
tion, whenever the United Nations Council for Namibia
so decides;
17. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to continue to consult with the South West Africa People's
Organization in the formulation and implementation of its
programme of work, as well as in any matter of interest to
the Namibian people;
1 8. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to facilitate the participation of the liberation movements,
recognized by the Organization of African Unity, in meet­
ings of the Council away from Headquarters, whenever
such participation is deemed necessary;
19. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in the discharge of its responsibilities as the legal Adminis­
tering Authority for Namibia, to hold a series of plenary
meetings in Western Europe during 1985 and to recom­
mend appropriate action to the General Assembly in the
light of South Africa's refusal to implement Security Coun­
cil resolution 435 (1978) of 29 September 1978;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to defray the cost
of the plenary meetings of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and to provide the necessary staff and services
for them;
21. Decides that, in order to expedite training of the
personnel required for an independent Namibia, qualified
Namibians should be given opportunities to develop fur­
ther their skills in the work of the United Nations Secreta­
riat and the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system, and authorizes the United
Nations Council for Namibia, in consultation with the
South West Africa People's Organization, to take, on an
urgent basis, necessary action towards that end;
22. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to review the requirements of personnel and
facilities of all units which service the Council so that the
Council may fully and effectively discharge all tasks and
functions arising out of its mandate;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
with the necessary resources in order for it to strengthen,
under the guidance of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the assistance programmes and services for
Namibians, the implementation of Decree No. I for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, the prep­
aration of economic and legal studies and the existing
activities of dissemination of information undertaken by
the Office.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984
7 9 Repon of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983 (AICONF. l 201
I 3l, part three.
O See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session.
Sufflement No. 24 (A/38/24), para. 576.
Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/39/24 ), pan two.

chap. Ill, sect. C.

D
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION AND MOBILIZATION
OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC OPINION IN SUPPORT OF
NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia59 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peo­
ples, 60
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 196 7 and 38/36 A to E of
I December 1983, as well as all other resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council relating to
Namibia,
Taking into consideration the Paris Declaration on
Namibia and the report of the Committee of the Whole
and the Programme of Action on Namibia,79
Taking into consideration the Bangkok Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 65 adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia on 25 May 1984 at
its extraordinary plenary meetings held at Bangkok,
Taking into consideration also the conclusions and rec­
ommendations adopted at the Regional Symposium in
Support of the Namibian Cause in Latin America, held at
San Jose from I6 to 19 August 1983,80 the Regional Sym­
posium on South Africa's Illegal Occupation of Namibia:
The Threat to International Peace and Security, held at
Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 2 to 5 April
1984,8 1 the Seminar on the Activities of Foreign Economic
Interests in the Exploitation of Namibia's Natural and
Human Resources, held at Ljubljana, Yugoslavia, from 16
to 20 April 1984, 82 the Seminar on the Efforts by the Inter­
national Community to End South Africa's Illegal Occupa­
tion of Namibia, held at Montreal, Canada, from 23 to 27
July 1984, 83 and the Regional Symposium on Interna­
tional Efforts to Implement Decree No. I for the Protec­
tion of the Natural Resources of Namibia, held at Geneva
from 27 to 31 August 1984, 84
Deploring the continued assistance rendered by Israel
and certain Western States, especially the United States of
America, to South Africa in the political, economic, mili­
tary and cultural fields and expressing its conviction that
this assistance should be exposed by the United Nations
Council for Namibia by all means available to it,
Stressing the urgent need to mobilize international pub­
lic opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting
effectively the people of Namibia in the achievement of
self-determination, freedom and independence in a united
Namibia and, in particular, to intensify the world-wide
and continuous dissemination of information on the strug­
gle for liberation being waged by the people of Namibia
under the leadership of the South West Africa People's
Organization, their sole and authentic representative,
Recognizing the important role that non-governmental
organizations are playing in the dissemination of informa­
tion on Namibia and in the mobilization of international
public opinion in support of the Namibian cause,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the mandate given by the General Assembly
82 Ibid .. sect. D.
83 Ibid .. sect. F.
8 4 /bid .. sect. G.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to the United Nations Council for Namibia and mindful of
the pressing need for the Department of Public Informa­
tion of the Secretariat to intensify its efforts to acquaint
world public opinion with all aspects of the question of
Namibia, in accordance with policy guidelines formulated
by the Council,
l . Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in pursuance of its international campaign in support of
the struggle of the Namibian people for independence, to
continue to consider ways and means of increasing the dis­
semination of information relating to Namibia;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in all
its activities of dissemination of information on the ques­
tion of Namibia, follows the policy guidelines laid down
by the United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the Depart­
ment of Public Information, in addition to its responsibili­
ties relating to southern Africa, to assist, as a matter of pri­
ority, the United Nations Council for Namibia in the
implementation of its programme of dissemination of
information in order that the United Nations may inten­
sify its efforts to generate publicity and disseminate infor­
mation with a view to mobilizing public support for the
independence of Namibia, particularly in the Western
States;
4. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to continue to organize journalists' encounters prior to the
activities of the Council during 1985, in order to mobilize
further international public support for the just struggle of
the Namibian people under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization, their sole and authen­
tic representative;
5. Decides to intensify its international campaign in
support of the cause of Namibia and to expose and
denounce the collusion of the United States of America,
certain other Western countries and Israel with the South
African racists and, to this end, requests the United
Nations Council for Namibia to include in its programme
of dissemination of information for 1985 the following
activities:
(a) Preparation and dissemination of publications on
the political, economic, military and social consequences
of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa, as
well as on legal matters, on the question of the territorial
integrity of Namibia and on contacts between Member
States and South Africa;
(b) Production and dissemination of radio program­
mes in the English, French, German and Spanish lan­
guages designed to draw the attention of world public
opinion to the current situation in and around Namibia;
(c) Production of material for publicity through radio
and television broadcasts;
(d) Placement of advertisements in newspapers and
magazines;
(e) Production of films, film-strips and slide sets on
Namibia;
(j) Production and dissemination of posters;
(g) Full utilization of the resources related to press
releases, press conferences and press briefings in order to
maintain a constant flow of information to the public on
all aspects of the question of Namibia;
(h) Production and dissemination of a comprehensive
economic map of Namibia;
(1) Production and dissemination of booklets on the
activities of the Council;

37

(J) Preparation and wide dissemination of a booklet
containing resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council relating to Namibia, together with rele­
vant portions of Assembly resolutions on the activities of
foreign economic interests in Namibia and on military
activities in Namibia;
(k) Publicity for and distribution of an indexed refer­
ence book on transnational corporations which plunder
the natural and human resources of Namibia, and on the
profits extracted from the Territory;
(/) Preparation and dissemination of a booklet based
on a study on the implementation of Decree No. 1 for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,69 enacted
by the Council on 27 September 1974;
(m) Acquisition of books, pamphlets and other materi­
als relating to Namibia for further dissemination;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to organize an international conference at United Nations
Headquarters in 1985 with the participation of prominent
personalities, parliamentarians, scholars, support groups
and others from all parts of the world, in order to mobilize
and strengthen further international support for the just
cause and heroic struggle of the Namibian people, led by
their sole and authentic representative, the South West
Africa People's Organization;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to allocate, in con­
sultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
sales numbers to publications on Namibia selected by the
Council;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
United Nations Council for Namibia with the work pro­
gramme of the Department of Public Information for the
year 1985 covering the activities of dissemination of infor­
mation on Namibia, followed by periodic reports on the
programmes undertaken, including details of expenses
incurred;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to group under a sin­
gle heading, in the section of the proposed programme
budget of the United Nations for the biennium 1 986-1987
relating to the Department of Public Information, all the
activities of the Department relating to the dissemination
of information on Namibia, and to direct the Department
of Public Information to present to the United Nations
Council for Namibia a detailed report on the utilization of
the allocated funds;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Department of Public Information to disseminate the list
of prisoners in Namibia;
I I . Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Department of Public Information to give the widest pos­
sible publicity and to disseminate information on the com­
memoration of a century of heroic struggle of the
Namibian people against colonial occupation;
1 2. Requests Member States to broadcast programmes
on their national radio and television networks and to
publish material in their official news media, informing
their populations about the situation in and around
Namibia and the obligation of Governments and peoples
to assist in the struggle of Namibia for independence;
13. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in co-operation with the Department of Public Informa­
tion and the Department of Conference Services of the
Secretariat, to continue to inform and provide information
material to leading opinion makers, media leaders, aca­
demic institutions, trade unions, cultural organizations,
support groups and other concerned persons and non-gov­
ernmental organizations about the objectives and func­
tions of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

38

struggle of the Namibian people under the leadership of
the South West Africa People's Organization and also to
hold consultations with, and seek the co-operation of,
those personalities and institutions by inviting them on
special occasions to participate in the deliberations of the
Council, and to continue to establish for this purpose a
regular and expeditious pattern of distribution of informa­
tion material to political parties, universities, libraries,
churches, students, teachers, professional associations and
others falling into the general categories enumerated
above;
14. Requests all Member States to commemorate and
publicize Namibia Day and to issue special postage stamps
for the occasion;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
United Nations Postal Administration to issue a special
postage stamp on Namibia by the end of 1985 in com­
memoration of Namibia Day;
16. Calls upon the United Nations Council for
Namibia to enlist the support of non-governmental orga­
nizations in its efforts to mobilize international public
opinion in support of the liberation struggle of the
Namibian people and of their sole and authentic represen­
tative, the South West Africa People's Organization;
17. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to prepare, update and continually disseminate lists of
non-governmental organizations from all over the world,
in particular those in the major Western countries, in
order to ensure better co-operation and co-ordination
among non-governmental organizations working in sup­
port of the Namibian cause and against apartheid;
18. Requests those non-governmental organizations
and support groups that are actively engaged in supporting
the struggle of the Namibian people under the leadership
of the South West Africa People's Organization, their sole
and authentic representative, to continue to intensify, in
co-operation with the United Nations Council for
Namibia, international action in support of the liberation
struggle of the Namibian people, including assistance to
the Council in the monitoring of the boycott of South
Africa called for in General Assembly resolution ES-8/2 of
14 September 1981;
19. Decides to allocate the sum of $300,000 to be used
by the United Nations Council for Namibia for its pro­
gramme of co-operation with non-governmental organiza­
tions, including support to conferences in solidarity with
Namibia arranged by those organizations, dissemination
of conclusions of such conferences and support to such
other activities as will promote the cause of the liberation
struggle of the Namibian people, subject to decisions of the
Council in each individual case taken in consultation with
the South West Africa People's Organization.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984

E
UNITED NATIONS FUND FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the parts of the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia relating to the United
Nations Fund for Namibia, 85
85 Ibid., part two, chap. VIII and chap. IX, sect. B.
86 For the text of the Charter of the United Nations Institute for Namibia,
as amended, see Official Records o/lhe General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Ses­
sion, Supplement 'No. 24 (A/37/24), annex IV.

Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December
1 970. by which it established the United Nations Fund for
Namibia,
Recalling also its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of 12
December 1973, by which it appointed the United Nations
Council for Namibia trustee of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia,
Recalling its resolution 31/153 of 20 December 1976,
by which it decided to launch the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia,
Recallingfurther its resolution 34/92 A of 12 December
1979, by which it approved the Charter of the United
Nations Institute for Namibia, and its resolution 37 /233 E
of 20 December 1982, by which it approved amendments
to the Charter, 86
I. Takes note of the relevant parts of the report of the
United Nations Council for Namibia;
2. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia shall:
(a) Continue to formulate policies of assistance to
Namibians and co-ordinate assistance for Namibia pro­
vided by the specialized agencies and other organizations
and institutions of the United Nations system;
( b) Continue to act as trustee of the United Nations
Fund for Namibia, and, in this capacity, administer and
manage the Fund;
(c) Continue to provide broad guidelines and formu­
late principles and policies for the United Nations Insti­
tute for Namibia;
(d) Continue to co-ordinate, plan and direct the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia in consultation with
the South West Africa People's Organization, with the aim
of consolidating all measures of assistance by the special­
ized agencies and other organizations and institutions of
the United Nations system into a comprehensive assis­
tance programme;
(e) Continue to consult with the South West Africa
People's Organization in the formulation and implementa­
tion of assistance programmes for Namibians;
(/) Report to the General Assembly at its fortieth ses­
sion on the programmes and activities undertaken through
the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
3. Decides that the United Nations Fund for Namibia,
which comprises the General Account, the United Nations
Institute for Namibia Account and the Nationhood Pro­
gramme Account, shall be the primary source of assistance
to Namibians;
4. Expresses its appreciation to all States, specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system, governmental and non-governmental organiza­
tions and individuals that have made contributions to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia to support the activities
under the General Account, the activities of the United
Nations Institute for Namibia and the Nationhood Pro­
gramme for Namibia and calls upon them to increase their
assistance to Namibians through those channels;
5. Decides to allocate as a temporary measure to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia the sum of $1 million
from the regular budget of the United Nations for 1985;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia to intensify
appeals to Governments, intergovernmental and non-gov­
ernmental organizations and individuals for more gener­
ous voluntary contributions to the General Account, the

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Nationhood Programme Account and the United Nations
Institute for Namibia Account of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia in view of the increased activities undertaken
through the Fund, and, in this connection, emphasizes the
need for contributions in order to increase the number of
scholarships awarded to Namibians under the United
Nations Fund for Namibia;
1. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary con­
tributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
8. Requests the Office of the United Nations Commis­
sioner for Namibia, in order to mobilize additional
resources, to formulate, in consultation with the South
West Africa People's Organization, a programme of assis­
tance to the Namibian people to be undertaken by means
of projects co-financed by Governments and non-govern­
mental organizations;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organi­
zations and institutions of the United Nations system, in
the light of the urgent need to strengthen the programme of
assistance to the Namibian people, to make every effort to
expedite the execution of Nationhood Programme for
Namibia projects and other projects in favour of Namibi­
ans on the basis of procedures which will reflect the role of
the United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia;
1 0. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations and institutions of the
United Nations system that have contributed to the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia and calls upon them
to continue their participation in the Programme by:
(a) Implementing projects approved by the United
Nations Council for Namibia;
(b) Planning and initiating new project proposals in co­
operation with, and at the request of, the Council;
(c) Allocating funds from their own financial resources
for the implementation of the projects approved by the
Council;
1 1. Emphasizes the need for Namibians to gain practi­
cal on-the-job experience in various countries, and appeals
to all Governments to make generous contributions to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia to enable Namibians
trained under various programmes to be placed in admin­
istrations and institutions in diverse countries, particularly
in Africa;
1 2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for its contribution to the
financing and administration of the Nationhood Pro­
gramme for Namibia and the financing of the United
Nations Institute for Namibia and calls upon it to continue
to allocate, at the request of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, funds from the indicative planning figure for
Namibia for the implementation of the projects within the
Nationhood Programme and for the United Nations Insti­
tute for Namibia;
I 3. Calls upon the United Nations Development Pro­
gramme to raise the indicative planning figure for
Namibia;
1 4. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance pro­
vided by the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the World Food Programme to Namibian refugees and
requests them to expand their assistance in order to pro­
vide for the basic needs of the refugees;

39

1 5. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system which have waived agency support costs in respect
of projects in favour of Namibians, financed from the
United Nations Fund for Namibia and other sources, and
urges those that have not yet done so to take appropriate
steps in this regard;
1 6. Notes with appreciation that agreement has been
reached between the United Nations Development Pro­
gramme and the organizations of the United Nations sys­
tem to reduce overhead charges to 3.5 per cent for certain
types of project costs financed from the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
1 7. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligi­
ble for assistance through the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa and the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
1 8. Commends the progress made in the implementa­
tion of the pre-independence components of the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia and requests the
United Nations Council for Namibia to elaborate and con­
sider policies and contingency plans regarding the transi­
tional and post-independence phases of the Programme;
1 9. Commends the United Nations Institute for
Namibia for the effectiveness of its training programmes
for Namibians and its research activities on Namibia,
which contribute substantially to the struggle for freedom
of the Namibian people and to the establishment of an
independent State of Namibia;
20. Urges the specialized agencies and other organiza­
tions and institutions of the United Nations system to co­
operate closely with the United Nations Institute for
Namibia in strengthening its programme of activities;
2 1 . Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
through the United Nations Institute for Namibia, to final­
ize and publish at an early date a comprehensive reference
book on Namibia covering all aspects of the question of
Namibia as considered by the United Nations since its
inception, in accordance with an outline to be prepared by
the Council;
22. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in consultation with the Office of the United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia, to finalize and publish at an
early date a demographic study of the Namibian popula­
tion and a study of its educational needs;
23. Requests the United Nations Institute for Namibia
to complete the preparation, in co-operation with the
South West Africa People's Organization, the Office of the
United Nations Commissioner for Namibia and the
United Nations Development Programme, of a compre­
hensive document on all aspects of economic planning in
an independent Namibia, and requests the Secretary-Gen­
eral to continue to provide substantive support through
the Office of the Commissioner for the preparation of that
document;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to pro­
vide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia with the necessary resources for the performance
of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United
Nations Council for Namibia as the co-ordinating author­
ity for the implementation of the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia, as well as other assistance programmes.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984
