UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/14
6 April 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3359th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 April 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the continuing violence
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly the attacks on the
’safe area’ of Gorazde, and the recent acts of violence and terror,
including reported acts of ethnic cleansing in Banja Luka and Prijedor.
"The Council takes note of the letter from the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, of 2 April 1994
(S/1994/378), in which he reported, inter alia, on the hostilities in the
Eastern parts of his country. The Council, taking note also of the
assessment of the situation provided by the Secretariat and in the
Secretary-General’s reports (paras. 16 and 17 of S/1994/291 of
11 March 1994 and paras. 29 and 30 of S/1994/300 of 16 March 1994), calls
for an end to any provocative actions by whomsoever committed in and around
the ’safe areas’.
"The Council strongly condemns the shelling and infantry and artillery
attacks by the besieging Bosnian Serb forces against the ’safe area’ of
Gorazde in which many civilians have lost their lives and several hundreds
have been wounded. The Council takes serious note of the continuing
defiance of the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular of
resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) related to the protection of ’safe
areas’. The Council demands the immediate cessation of any further attacks
against the ’safe area’ of Gorazde and its population and calls upon those
concerned to take all measures to ensure full respect for the status of the
’safe areas’ in accordance with the relevant provisions of its resolution
824 (1993).
"The Council welcomes the measures being taken by UNPROFOR to
strengthen its presence in Gorazde, and the impending visit of the UNPROFOR
Commander for Bosnia and Herzegovina to further assess the situation. The
Council calls upon the parties to ensure that UNPROFOR troops have
unimpeded access to the area in and around Gorazde and to assure those

94-16858 (E)

060494

/...

S/PRST/1994/14
English
Page 2

troops’ safety and security. The Council underlines the importance it
attaches to ensuring the safety and security of UNPROFOR troops in and
around Gorazde.
"The Council stresses the need to achieve normal conditions of life in
Gorazde, including restoration of essential public services, with the
assistance of the United Nations, and with the cooperation of the parties.
"The Council deplores recent acts of violence and terror including
ethnic cleansing particularly in Prijedor and Banja Luka. It reaffirms
that the International Tribunal was established under its resolution
827 (1993) for the purpose of investigating crimes of this sort, and trying
persons accused of committing such crimes. The Council stresses the
importance it attaches to full compliance with international humanitarian
law in all its aspects throughout the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Council calls upon all parties to join the negotiation process
aimed at the peaceful resolution of the conflict in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and further calls for an immediate cease-fire, the
cessation of hostilities and an exchange of all persons imprisoned as a
result of the war. The Council welcomes the planned meeting between the
military commanders in Sarajevo under the auspices of UNPROFOR.
"The Council affirms its determination to remain seized of the
matter."

-----
