Resolution• adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

the regional economic commissions, the Economic and
Social Office in Beirut, the appropriate specialized
agencies and the Interna•tional Atomic Energy Agency,
to study the possibility of intensifying international industrial co-operation in furtherance of the purpose and
functions of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, taking into account the existing experiences and forms of such co-operation ;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to report
on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Industrial Development Board at its third session.
1626th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.

2300 (XXII). Multilateral food aid
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2096 (XX) of 20 December
1965 and 2155 (XXI) of 22 November 1966 on the
programme of studies on multilateral food aid, and
also the recommendation contained in annex A.11.6 of
the Final Act adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its first session, 28
Noting with appreciation the progress report of the
Secretary-General, 29
Taking note of the Food Aid Convention, which
forms part of the International Grains Arrangement
1967 and embodies, inter alia, the principle that food
aid benefits food-exporting developing countries as
well as food-deficit developing countries,
Stre;sing the need for ensuring the effective coordination of all food aid programmes while duly safeguarding the trade interests of the food-exporting and
food-importing countries, especially the developing
countries, and domestic agriculture in recipient countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, in consultation
with the executive heads of other interested international agencies and programmes, and bearing in mind
the need to safeguard duly the trade interests of the
food-exporting and food-importing countries, especially
the developing countries, and domestic agriculture in
recipient countries :
(a) To continue the programme of studies on multilateral food aid called for in General Assembly resolution 2096 ( XX) , in the light of the views concerning
the world food problem expressed at the fourteenth
session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, at the twentysecond session of the General Assembly and at the
second session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development;
( b) To give particular attention, in the next phase
of the study, to the problems of the co-ordinatioa of all
food aid programmes and to review and assess the
adequacy of existing multilateral institutional arrangements for handling, in case of need, a substantially increased volume of food aid, including the possibility of
modifying such arrangements;
28 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 32.
21 Official Records of the Economi, aNd s,,cial COffflcil, Forty-

third Stssion, Annezts, agenda items 2 and 13, documents
E/4352 and Add.I.

19

2. Invites the Governments concerned to make use
of multilateral facilities in implementing the Food Aid
Convention ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include information on the implementation of the present resolution in the final report to ·be submitted by him in
pursuance of resolution 2096 (XX).
1626th plenary M1etmg,
12 DeceMb1r 1967.

2301 (XXll). Food produetlon
The General Assembly,
Stressing the need to combat effectively the world
food shortage through the intensification of food production in the developing countries by means of multilateral and national action with a view to solving their
immediate and long-term food problems,
Noting the recent progress achieved in the production of a:bundant rice yields through the ·scientific application of the latest technology in increasing rice production, including the advances made in this regaTd
during the International Rice Year,
Realizing that through the application of the latest
technology the production of rice as the staple food
cereal of many of the developing countries could be
increased to a large extent to meet their basic food
needs and to alleviate the world food crisis in the
future,
l. Invites Member States, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, other United
Nations bodies, and the governmental and non-governmental agencies concerned with agricultural production
and food aid to intensify their efforts to increase production of the staple food cereals, particularly rice,
through the aforementioned application of· the latest
technology, taking into account the trade interests of
the food-exporting and food-importing countries, especially the developing countries ;
2. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations to submit a report to the Economic and Social Council on the progress made in
this field.
1626th plenary num,sg,
12 December 1967.

2305 (XXll). United Nadou Development
Decade
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2218 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 on the United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also its resolqtion 2087 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on the financing of economic development,
Recalling further its resolution 2158 (XXI) of
25 November 1966 on permanent sovereignty over
natural resources, .
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1260 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967, in which the Council noted with satisfaction that the Committee for
Development Planning had given preliminary thought
to the preparation· of guidelines and proposals for the
next decade,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1261 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967 on a review of
past experience and of possibilities for future action in
the field of economic development, .

30

Genernl Assembly-Twenty-l!eeond Session

Reaffirming that the possibility and advisability of
proclaiming a charter of development underlying international co-operation in the interests of economic, social
and cultural development deserve further consideration,
Reaffirming also that it is necessary to look ahead
to the next decade so that concerted international action will be taken for the accelerated social and economic
development of the developing countries in the light
of the experience gained during the present United
Nations Development Decade and with due regard to
safeguarding their economic interests,
Stressing the importance of intensifying the preparatory work for the next decade with a view to having,
before the end of the present decade, a clear and comprehensive picture of the specific goals and targets to
be attained by the international community in a common endeavour towards the accelerated economic and
social development of the developing countries,
Taking into account the fact that the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development will consider at
its second session the major problems of trade and development which will have an important bearing on the
prep!').rations for the next decade,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the
preparation of the survey requested of him in General
Assembly resolution 2218 A (XXI) and to submit the
survey to the Assembly at its twenty-third session
through the Economic and Social Council at its fortyfifth session ;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation w:ith the Committee for Development Planning
and the organizations in the United Nations system,
and on the basis of the results of the second session
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to incorporate suggestions on the appropriate
means of harmonizing measures that could be considered by international organizations, on the one hand,
and br developing and developed countries, on the
other, m the preliminary framework of an international
development strategy being prepared by him in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 2218 B (XXI)
for submission to the Assembly at its twenty-third session, with due regard to safeguarding the economic
interests of the developing countries ;

3. Urges Member States to consider taking appropriate steps to intensify national and international efforts to formulate and implement a dynamic international policy for the economic and social development
of the developing countries to be pursued during the
next decade ;
4. Stresses. the ~mport~nce of enlisting the support
of _wo~ld publtc opinion m favour of the policies and
obJechves to be pursued during the next decade and,
towards this end, the desirability for national and internation~l publjc informat~on media to take the necessary
steps m seeking the active co-operation and support of
the general public in the fulfilment of these objectives;

5. Decides to consider at its twenty-third session the
appropriate procedures to be followed for proclaiming
the 1970's as a second United Nations Development
D~c~de and for approving a programme of action
w1thm the framework of an international development
strategy for that decade.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

2306 (XXII). International Education Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Secretary-General's appraisal in his •
report entitled "United Nations Development Decade
at mid-point",30 and in particular his emphasis on the
development of human resources as the greatest po-tential resource of any country,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1274 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967 on the development
and utilization of human resources,
Recognizing the urgent need for a more effective
mobili~ation of efforts in education and training as an
essential element of a suCC'essful strategy of international development,
Rec?gnizing further the fundamental importance of
educ~t1on as a means of widening man's horizons, impro~mg mutual understanding and strengthening- international peace,
Convinced that an international education year on
the basis of appropriate planning would serve through?ut the world to mobilize energies and inspire initiatives
m education and training,
1. Decides to observe an International Education
Y~ar and provisionally designates the year 1970 for
this. purpose, subject to review at the twenty-fourth
sess10n of the (;eneral Assembly, in the light of the
preparatory work ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural
~rganiza!ion and other interested specialized agencies
m preparing a programme of activities to be undertaken
or initiated by Member States, by the United N8.tions
and _by the spec~alized agencies, particularly the United
~attons Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza!t0n, and by. o~~er interested intergovernmental bodies,
m order to 1mt1ate those world-wide activities in education ~hich constitute the purpose of the International
Educat10n Year;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a J?rogres~ report to the General Assembly at its twentyth1r_d session, through the Economic and Social Council
at ~ts forty-fifth . session, so that the Assembly may
dect~e, on the basis of those preparations, on the proclamation of the International Education Year.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.
2317 (XXII). The role of the Economic Commission for Europe in the development of
international economic co-operation

The General Assembly,
Ref~ng to t~e declaration adopted by the commemorative meetmg of the Economic Commission for
Europe to celebrate the Commission's twentieth anniversary,31 in which representatives of the Governments
partici~ating in the _wor~ of the Commission expressed
the. belief that the s1t~at~on now presenting itself in the
reg10n of that Comm1ss1on called for active work and
joint efforts in developing further the co-operation
~ithin the Commission's framework which was in the
mterests of all nations,
so Ibid., Thirty-!'inth Session, Annexes, agenda item 2, document E/4071. This report was subsequently issued in English
as a United Nations publication (Sales No.: 65.1.26).
81 Official Records of the Economk and Social C1111ncil
Forty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/4329), para. 'UIJ'.
