S/PV.8794

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8794

th meeting
Monday, 14 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Auväärt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Kakanur
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Kvalheim
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2021/519)
Letter dated 1 June 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/520)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-15068 (E)
*2115068*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8794

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2021/519)
Letter dated 1 June 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/520)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and Ms. Fatima
Maiga, independent consultant, founding member and
President of the Coalition des Femmes Leaders Nord,
Sud et Centre du Mali.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/519, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, and
document S/2021/520, which contains a letter dated
1 June 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to brief the Council on developments in
Mali and the evolution of the situation in that country.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council (S/2021/519) provides an update on the situation
on the ground, marked by continued insecurity in
northern and central Mali and the ongoing threat of
terrorist attacks affecting other parts of the country.
I briefed the Council in a closed meeting on the
events leading up to 24 May, when the President
and Prime Minister of the transitional Government
were overthrown. Allow me to briefly recap events
since then.
2/20

14/06/2021

As Council members are aware, the coup was
condemned by the Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), meeting in Accra on 30 May, and by the
African Union Peace and Security Council, meeting in
Addis Ababa on 1 June. Both organizations suspended
Mali from their respective membership. ECOWAS
reaffirmed the need to respect the transition time frame,
including the date set for the presidential elections,
namely, 27 February 2022. ECOWAS called for the
immediate appointment of a civilian Prime Minister
and reiterated its earlier decisions that the transitional
President, the Vice President and the Prime Minister
should not, under any circumstances, be candidates for
the elections aimed at restoring the constitutional order.
Colonel Assimi Goïta was sworn-in as President
of the transition in Bamako on 7 June. One the same
day, he signed a decree appointing the head of the
Mouvement du 5 juin-Rassemblement des forces
patriotiques, Mr. Choguel Maïga, as Prime Minister,
who announced the formation of a new Government,
on 11 June, made up of 28 members, among them six
women, by which women make up 21.42 per cent of the
new Government.
These events occurred nine months before the
end of the agreed transition period. Immediate action
is now required to initiate critical reforms and lay
the groundwork for a credible electoral process. That
entails an inclusive approach, strong Malian ownership
and, of course, political compromise. The steadfast
support of international partners will also remain vital
to ensuring the success of the transition. I would also
mention that the ECOWAS mediator, former President
of Nigeria Goodluck Jonathan, has been actively
involved in efforts to ensure the implementation of
the decisions taken, with the support of the local
follow-up committee, of which the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is a member. In that connection,
the ECOWAS mediator visited Mali on 8 and 9 June,
where he met with the follow-up committee and the
new transitional President and Prime Minister
The transitional President and the Prime Minister
reassured that they would respect the transitional
calendar, which envisages elections by February, and
that neither the President nor Prime Minister would
run for office. They also reiterated their commitment
to working with the signatory armed movements to
the Algiers process, who are represented in the new
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

Government, with a view to doing everything in their
power to accelerate the implementation of the Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
(spoke in English)
Those commitments now need to translate
into urgent and concrete action, which requires the
constructive contribution of all Malian stakeholders.
The time has come for Malian leaders to rise above
partisan politics and personal interests and work
together in earnest to address the crisis in the interest
of their country and its future. MINUSMA’s support
will remain critical in that regard.
That is all the more necessary as the security
situation in northern and central Mali remains of the
utmost concern. Its impact on the everyday lives of
people is devastating and continues to take a heavy
toll. At the first Cabinet meeting, the Prime Minister
reaffirmed that improving security remains a top
priority for the transitional Government. There are now
more displaced Malians than during at the peak of the
crisis in June 2013. Many of them live in very difficult
conditions, and reports of human rights violations
are deeply disturbing. Almost half of the schools in
Central Mali are closed, mostly due to the threat of
armed groups. In some areas marked by the presence
of violent extremist groups, school closures are as high
as 84 per cent.
Since my arrival in Mali on 5 May, I have visited all
MINUSMA’s main field offices. The testimonies of the
representatives of the local authorities and civil society
in Aguelhok, Tessalit, Kidal, Mopti, Douentza, Gao
and Menaka confirmed that the multitude of political,
governance and security challenges is driving human
suffering. While Bamako is the centre of political
attention and political engagement in the capital will
remain essential, the Mission’s efforts need to be fieldfocused. Insecurity and the lack of access to education
and water and other basic services were identified as
major challenges impacting the lives of Malian people
outside Bamako.
At the same time, all my interlocutors in the region
expressed appreciation for MINUSMA’s contribution.
Most of them urged MINUSMA to do more. Indeed,
expectations are high. That is understandable. Where
they live, there is little or no State presence, and the
Mission is seen as the only provider of security and other
basic services. MINUSMA is clearly making a tangible
impact, even if not everyone is aware of what is being

S/PV. 8794

done on the ground. But it is also clear that MINUSMA
is not in a position to meet all the expectations of
the local populations. That is why the Mission will
have to step up its strategic communication efforts to
ensure a better understanding of its mandate and its
own limitations.
Following my assumption of duties in MINUSMA,
the Mission developed a 60-day plan outlining priority
action to be implemented by the end of the Mission’s
mandate, on 30 June. In keeping with its mandated
strategic priorities, concrete initiatives were identified
to expedite the implementation of key provisions
under the peace agreement and to facilitate a more
inclusive political transition process and agreement on
the prioritization and sequencing of key reforms. We
also developed an action plan for central Mali, where
civilians are most at risk, which I will launch in Mopti
tomorrow. The plan is called An Ka Barokè — which
means “let’s talk together” — and focusses on promoting
political engagement to stabilize the centre, enhancing
the protection of civilians, fostering community
engagement, social cohesion and reconciliation,
and facilitating the return of State administration
and services, while strengthening the resilience and
participation of women and youth.
The implementation of the plan will benefit in
some areas from the establishment of the mobile task
force, which is a core part of the MINUSMA adaptation
plan, which is now partially operational. It has already
enabled the conduct of an integrated MINUSMA
mission to Tessit, with Government participation, which
was greatly appreciated by the local population. A unit
of the mobile task force is also scheduled to deploy in
Sector North to reinforce MINUSMA peacekeepers in
areas at risk.
The 60-day plan is based on several key guiding
principles; the most important being Malian
ownership and leadership. Achieving progress in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and the political
transition requires ownership by Malian leaders across
the spectrum and buy-in from the communities. That is
particularly important for central Mali. A coordinated
and coherent vision by the transitional Government
and stronger presence of the State are indispensable for
MINUSMA’s peacekeepers to be effective.
MINUSMA is also committed to fostering a more
people-centred and action-oriented approach. I am
convinced that placing people at the centre of the way

21-150683/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

14/06/2021

our operations are planned and implemented will make
them more accountable, locally grounded and effective.
Ultimately, we will be judged by the impact we have on
the lives of the people who suffer most and those we are
here to serve.

themselves and their children. That should be leveraged
wherever possible to expedite the way out of the crisis.
Let us focus on building their resilience and continue
to support their legitimate quest for a more stable and
peaceful future for their country.

MINUSMA is only one part of a much larger
international response. Consequently, leveraging
partnerships is critical to ensure that Mali receives
all the support it needs. That will entail strengthening
coordination within the Mission, with the United
Nations country team and other multilateral and
bilateral partners, in particular ECOWAS, the African
Union and the European Union. That is another
principle that must be obeyed, and that will be done in
close coordination with other United Nations presences
in the subregion and beyond.

The President: I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Wane for his briefing.

Achieving greater representation of women in
political and economic decision-making processes is
another aspect that is essential. I was impressed by the
resilience of the women I met in the field. They were
engaged, specific in all their concerns and requests
and action-oriented. There is still a long way to go to
achieve more effective participation so as to ensure
that their interests and experiences are adequately
taken into account and considered. The encroachment
of violent extremism on many Malian communities
presents a serious setback, as many extremist groups
violate the rights of women and seek to remove them
from the public sphere altogether.
Finally, Mali is vulnerable to the adverse effects
of climate change and diminished resilience. That is
poised to further intensify resource competition and
exacerbate conflicts. That is why Mali’s partners should
be encouraged to do more to support the Government in
addressing that daunting challenge.
Let me conclude by underscoring the need for
the continued support of the Security Council and the
international community more broadly. Mali is at a
critical juncture, and we cannot allow it to slide into
further instability, with far-reaching consequences for
the subregion and beyond. That would be failing the
Malian people, who deserve better. As challenging,
desperate and frustrating the situation in Mali is, I
was encouraged by the resolve of the Malian women,
men and youth whom I met during my visits to the
regions. They genuinely care about their country. They
are proud of their cultural heritage and rich history,
and they are determined to forge a better future for
4/20

I now give the floor to Ms. Maiga.
Ms. Maiga (spoke in French): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, as well as the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security and
OXFAM, for giving me the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the situation in Mali and the women
and peace and security agenda. I am Fatima Maiga,
President of a coalition of women from the signatory
groups of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and Director of the consulting firm ESEN,
which has notably piloted the process of integrating
women into the Agreement Monitoring Committee on
behalf of the Norwegian Embassy.
The realization of the women and peace and
security agenda in Mali remains dependent on strong
political will and relative political and institutional
stability. Unfortunately, the fifth post-coup transition
in Mali in 60 years of independence, two of which have
taken place under the current mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), shows us the long
way to go to stabilize Mali, in accordance with the
Mission’s primary objectives. It also shows that without
a more meaningful treatment of the root causes of the
multifaceted crisis that has shaken the country since
2012, the vicious cycle of instability will continue.
That includes the issues of inclusive and equitable
governance of land and productive resources and access
to justice.
My statement will focus on two points, together
with recommendations: first, the observation of a
marked deterioration in women’s rights before and
during the current transition; and secondly, the
priorities and challenges of the current transition in
relation to the women and peace and security agenda
and their implications for the MINUSMA mandate.
With regard to my first point, the 2020 to 2021
MINUSMA mandate has been marked by a strong trend
of closing the space for women’s rights in Mali, despite
notable progress. As part of that progress, nine women
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

from the signatory parties are now members of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee for the first time in
six years. In that regard, Norway is to be congratulated
for its pivotal role in achieving that result.
However, the overall situation of women’s rights
in Mali remains critical. There are 2.9 million women
and girls who are in need of emergency humanitarian
assistance. In areas under the partial control of armed
groups — estimated today as covering about twothirds of the territory — and sometimes under local
agreements between those groups and the besieged
populations, hundreds of thousands of girls and women
are today deprived of access to schools, health centres,
markets or fields. In addition, too many of them
continue to suffer sexual violence, including gang rape
and sexual slavery, with impunity for the perpetrators
and without knowledge of or access to the still too few
comprehensive care services. In 23 per cent of recorded
cases, survivors cannot access health care and 48 per
cent of health centres are not equipped with forensic
kits for rape cases.
Furthermore, the judicial treatment of the 115 cases
of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence
committed since 2012-2013, almost a decade ago, has
seen no progress to date. The repeated violations of Act
No. 052 on gender equality throughout the Government
implemented since its adoption in 2018 and, in a more
pronounced manner, during the 100 or so high-level
appointments made by the transitional authorities
from September 2020 to the present day. Lastly, the
suspension in 2020 by the transitional Government
of the draft law against gender-based violence, under
pressure from religious groups, was a setback for all
Malian women.
With regard to my second point, the Security
Council and MINUSMA have a key role to play in
putting the issue of gender and the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) back at the heart of the
transition’s priorities. Indeed, 8 of the 12 months of
MINUSMA’s new mandate will take place during the
new phase of the transition, which has set as a priority
the holding of free and credible elections by February
2022, as well as ensuring the security, stabilization and
protection of people throughout the country. It should
be noted that gender issues, in particular the prevention
and management of sexual violence and gender-based
violence, were not included among the six priorities
of the initial road map of the transition. The expected
process of adjusting those priorities for the remaining

S/PV. 8794

nine months of the transition must therefore be used
to try to strengthen their inclusive nature both from
the point of view of stakeholders and of geographical
and thematic coverage. That can be done only if
there is a real break with the wait-and-see attitude
that has largely prevailed over the past nine months
regarding the women and peace and security agenda,
despite being backed by a robust national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
particular, the women and peace and security agenda
must move from being just a general responsibility to
being the clearly defined responsibility of certain key
stakeholders and one that is subject to assessment.
Therefore, it is recommended that the Security
Council broaden the political and operational mandate
of MINUSMA beyond the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali to include current reconciliation
and peace efforts through political dialogue and
negotiations with armed groups, including those
designated as terrorists, in central Mali. In that
regard, we welcome the announcement by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane of the
launching of the plan for the centre of the country.
These recommendations in favour of negotiations are
in line with the 2020 inclusive national dialogue, which
were reaffirmed in the transition road map.
We also recommend the urgent strengthening of
the institutional gender mechanism and the means of
action of women’s civil society organizations to enable
them to monitor and influence the course of the two
priorities outlined earlier. A new mechanism entirely
dedicated to strengthening the transition and electoral
and negotiation processes by comprehensively and
effectively taking gender issues into account could
be envisaged.
We also recommend that the Security Council and
MINUSMA urgently support the transition authorities
in affirming and respecting Mali’s national and
international commitments, particularly with regard to
the representation of women in appointed and elected
posts, as well as humanitarian law and human rights
law, including in the context of negotiations with armed
groups. In that regard, the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) calling for the effective involvement of women
in such processes must be reaffirmed and implemented.
Finally, we call for according priority in the new
MINUSMA mandate to a tightened women and peace
and security agenda with precise indicators, particularly

21-150685/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

with regard to the issue of prosecuting cases of conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence and the
holistic care of survivors of such violence.
It goes without saying that the people of Mali
are in desperate need of peace and prosperity after a
decade of violent conflict and recurrent instability.
Those aspirations, however, will become a reality only
if women’s rights are safeguarded and women are truly
involved in building a lasting peace. I therefore call on
the members of the Security Council to support them
to that end.
The President: I thank Ms. Maiga for her briefing.
I would I would like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wane and Ms. Maiga for their briefings.
This is a particularly critical time for Mali. France
strongly condemned the coup d’état that led to the forced
resignation of the President and the Prime Minister of
the transitional Government. We have taken note of
Mali’s suspension from the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union.
We support the efforts of ECOWAS and the demands
that it has made.
As it indicated in its press statement on 26 May
(SC/14532), the Security Council will continue to follow
events closely. Highest priority must be accorded to the
holding of presidential elections on 27 February 2022,
in which the authorities responsible for the transition
will not be allowed to participate. As a temporary
precautionary measure, France has suspended its joint
military operations with the Malian armed forces
pending clarification. ECOWAS mediation efforts
have seen some progress, in particular the appointment
of a civilian Prime Minister and the formation of a
Government. We will closely follow the outcome of the
ECOWAS summit to be held on 19 June.
Given the precariousness of the situation, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) remains an essential
6/20

14/06/2021

tool. With regard to the renewal of its mandate, we
propose that it maintain its two strategic priorities:
first, support for the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which remains a
central issue for the stabilization of Mali; and, secondly,
its support for the stabilization of the central part of the
country. We will also recommend that it continue its
work on the protection of civilians, as intercommunal
violence persists.
Nonetheless, the task of addressing those issues
will remain incomplete so long as the Malians lack a
clear political strategy and fail to take resolute action
in dealing with all dimensions of the crisis, including
in particular the political dimension related to the
requirements set forth to conclude the transition and
the security dimension, as well as the humanitarian,
human rights and sustainable development dimensions.
We will call for the mandate to take into account those
aspects, as well as the crucial issues that concern
the full participation of women and young people in
political life and the effects of climate change, which
are one of the causes of the crisis in the Sahel.
We note that MINUSMA’s resources remain
limited in terms of addressing the situation in central
Mali. That priority was conferred upon MINUSMA in
2019 without providing it with the needed additional
resources. The Mission has only 2,000 peacekeepers
and three helicopters at its disposal every two weeks
in the area. We therefore would like to seriously
propose an increase in resources and the troop ceiling,
which would enable the Mission to protect civilians
more effectively and promote reconciliation among
communities without jeopardizing its operations in
the rest of the country. Such reinforcement would
complement the implementation of the adaptation plan,
which we support and call for the full implementation of.
Although the support mechanism for the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in coordination
with MINUSMA is very useful, it is not enough. We
believe that increased and predictable United Nations
support for the Joint Force is crucial. That would
involve the establishment a support office financed by
obligatory assessed contributions. Such a solution does
not require placing the Joint Force under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. France intends to
support the efforts of African countries to reach that
goal within the framework of a conversation that we
hope to see concluded as soon as possible.
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

Lastly, I would like to mention the announcement
made on 10 June by the President of the Republic
concerning the transformation of France’s military
presence in the Sahel. The transformation had
already been discussed at the N’Djamena summit
held in February. In terms of an approach, we are
currently holding consultations with our Sahelian and
international partners. The new framework will uphold
our commitments to MINUSMA and our international
partners at our side on the ground.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely apologize for keeping
the members of the Security Council waiting.
I have the honour of making this statement on behalf
of Kenya, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
and the Niger (A3+1).
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary General
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his
comprehensive briefing and efforts to stabilize Mali.
Our thanks also go to Ms. Fatima Maiga, President of
the Coalition des Femmes Leaders Nord, Sud et Centre
du Mali, for her informative briefing. I also welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Mali,
Mr. Issa Konfourou.
On the eve of the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate,
the attention of the international community has been
drawn to both encouraging and sometimes disturbing
events during the period under review. The A3+1
welcomes and appreciates the invaluable contribution
that MINUSMA continues to make to the stabilization
of Mali. We reiterate our support for its mandate,
which is more necessary than ever at this crucial time
in Mali’s march towards democratization, stabilization
and reconciliation. We reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Mali.
I will focus my remarks on two aspects, namely,
the main observations and the recommendations of the
A3+1.
First, with regard to the main observations, at the
political level, we welcome the efforts of the Malians
in having overcome recent turbulence and having
gotten the transition process back on track, including
the recent formation of a Government led by a civilian
Prime Minister, Mr. Choguel Maïga. We call on the new

S/PV. 8794

executive to spare no effort in resolutely pursuing the
implementation of the transitional road map, for which
the electoral calendar has already been published.
In that regard, it is more necessary than ever that
the international community maintain its support for
the transitional process until the holding of credible,
inclusive and transparent elections in February 2022. The
process must guarantee the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and youth.
We take this opportunity to commend the ongoing
commitment of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the crucial mediation
role played by its Special Envoy and the African Union.
The A3+1 also commends the good offices and efforts
to promote reconciliation on the part of MINUSMA,
which has consistently steered Malians to conciliatory
positions, both at the national and local levels.
Furthermore, we take note of the creation of the
Cadre stratégique permanent by the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad and the Platform coalition of
armed groups in order to optimize efforts to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali
and to operationalize joint mechanisms so as to better
address the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation in Mali. We encourage them to focus on
national unity and dialogue to advance the national
reconciliation agenda.
On the security front, Mali and other countries
of the Sahel continue to be exposed to the horrors of
terrorism. Moreover, the impact of the uncontrolled
departure of foreign fighters and mercenaries, coupled
with the proliferation of arms from Libya, underlines
the urgent need for a sustainable and holistic solution
for the Sahel.
Violent extremism, intercommunal violence and
transnational organized crime are on the rise and
require greater attention from the Security Council.
We remain concerned about the continued attacks on
civilians, MINUSMA and regional and international
armed forces. In that regard, the announcement of
Mali’s partners suspending military cooperation,
including the phasing out of Operation Barkhane raises
concerns for a Mali that is at a crossroads.
With regard to MINUSMA’s adaptation plan, the
results of the establishment and operationalization
of the mobile task force have been compelling
and encouraging.

21-150687/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

On the humanitarian front, the current situation
in Mali and the Sahel is a source of great concern.
The effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
food insecurity necessitate urgent funding for the
humanitarian response plan for 2021, of which only
14.3 per cent of the $563 million needed has been
secured. We must act urgently to save the 5.9 million
vulnerable people in Mali who need assistance, as a bad
rainy season is likely to have grave consequences if the
necessary aid is not provided in time.
As duly noted by the Special Representative, the
humanitarian situation, exacerbated by intercommunal
conflicts and food insecurity induced by the
effects of climate change, hinders stabilization and
peacebuilding efforts in Mali. The A3+1 therefore
believes that the analysis and integration of security
risks related to climate change is necessary as part of
MINUSMA’s mandate.
In the light of what I have mentioned here, I would
like to make several recommendations on behalf of the
A3+1.
We believe that the support so desperately needed
at this stage by the people of Mali must be driven by
the aspirations of the Malian people, who should take
ownership and be the central actors in the stabilization
and reconciliation process in their country. In
that respect, it is important to adjust international
intervention, including the role of MINUSMA.
Moreover, we call for better coordinated and more
coherent interventions to maximize their effects and
thereby give the transition and the establishment of
stable democratic institutions a guarantee of stability
and prosperity for the country and a better chance
of success.
In that context, the A3+1 encourages the Malian
authorities to capitalize on the progress made in the first
phase of the transition by ensuring that the timetable for
the elections and the 18-month duration of the transition
be respected, in accordance with the road map and the
ECOWAS recommendations. We also encourage them
to accelerate the implementation of the provisions of
the peace agreement, the protection of civilians and the
dialogue process in the centre of the country.
Furthermore, the A3+1 believes that sanctions can
only further complicate the already worrisome security
and humanitarian situation in Mali. In that regard,
we support the recommendations and decisions of the
8/20

14/06/2021

most recent ECOWAS summit on Mali. Moreover, the
decisions that partners take must not aggravate the
situation in Mali or jeopardize the achievements of the
fight against terrorism in the region.
In conclusion, the A3+1 would like MINUSMA’s
next mandate to focus on supporting the Malian
transition. The country will also need economic support
for rebuilding. That is why we call on all of Mali’s
partners and the international financial institutions to
support the Malian people in this critical phase.
While we appreciate the support of other partners
and MINUSMA to the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, the shortcomings of the support
mechanism identified in the Secretary-General’s recent
assessments and the suspension of military cooperation
with Mali call, on the one hand, for a more robust mandate
for MINUSMA and, on the other hand, for the removal
of the additional task of supporting the Joint Force,
pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017), in order to enable
the Mission to focus on its strategic priorities, given
the current situation on the ground. The establishment
of the United Nations Support Office dedicated to this
regional force and all other operational and effective
support mechanisms are critical to that end.
Finally, the A3+1 will support the extension of
MINUSMA’s mandate for one year, which should be
adjusted to reflect the reality on the ground, where
there is no peace to keep, and to enable the Mission
to ensure better protection of civilians and be more
involved in the resolution of intercommunal violence
in the country.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Wane, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing, and welcome the representative
of Mali to today’s meeting. I also listened attentively
to the statement by Ms. Maiga in her capacity as a
representative of civil society.
The situation in Mali bears on the security and
stability of the Sahel region, and even that of the African
continent as a whole. A stable, unified, prosperous
and progressive Mali is in the common interests
of the international community. At present, Mali
faces multiple challenges in the political, economic,
humanitarian, security and other fields. China hopes
that the Malian parties will prioritize the interests of
the country’s people and unite the people of Mali to
tackle the challenges together.
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8794

China notes that the Malian authorities reaffirmed
their commitment to the political transition. We hope
that all parties can advance the election preparations
in earnest, resolve differences through dialogue
and restore constitutional order as soon as possible.
China welcomes the fact that the Malian parties have
renewed their commitment to the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali.
China encourages more progress on restoring State
authority, the redeployment of armed forces and the
operationalization of the Northern Development Zone to
lay a solid foundation for the stability and development
of Mali.

Security Council resolution, and keep improving its
modes of support in order to meet the needs of the Joint
Force to the best of its abilities. China welcomes the
efforts of the European Union, the United Nations and
the G-5 Sahel aimed at intensifying cooperation in this
regard.

China supports the continuing important role of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union and supports solving African problems
in African ways by the African countries. Central
and northern Mali have seen frequent activities of
extremist forces, as well as increasing terrorist attacks
and intercommunal conflicts, resulting in numerous
civilian casualties and a humanitarian crisis. The
international community and relevant partner countries
will continue to support Mali’s counter-terrorism
operations to protect civilians. Military means alone
cannot solve the fundamental problems.

It is important to implement resolution 2518
(2020) and the recent presidential statement on
improving the safety and security of peacekeepers
(S/PRST/2021/11) by identifying vulnerabilities and
by solving key and difficult problems, in the light
of the situation on the ground. It is also important
to make greater efforts to strengthen peacekeeping
operations’ situational awareness, emergency response
and rescue capabilities, improve their ability to address
threats posed by improvised explosive devices, and
vaccinate peacekeepers.

As suggested by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2021/519), multi-pronged efforts are needed
on the political, economic, judicial and social fronts
in order to help Mali restore State authority, carry
out disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, achieve development, eliminate poverty
and improve the well-being of the people of Mali, with
a view to extirpating the root causes of conflicts while
treating their symptoms.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
Wane, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has
diligently fulfilled its mandate under very difficult
circumstances and has done a great deal of work in
order to maintain peace and stability in the country.
China appreciates that and will continue to support the
work of the Special Representative and the Mission.
China supports, in principle, the extension of
MINUSMA’s mandate and the Secretary-General’s
proposal to maintain the existing ceiling for uniformed
personnel. The Mission should continue to provide
logistical support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), in accordance with relevant

MINUSMA has experienced a palpable rise in
security risks this year. Eleven people have died so far,
which is heartbreaking. Accountability is an important
measure for improving the safety and security of
peacekeepers. China further welcomes the conviction
by the Bamako Court of Assizes of multiple suspects in
relation to attacking and killing peacekeepers.

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Wane for his
explanation of the latest developments in Mali and
wish him every success in his new responsibilities. I
also welcome the valuable participation of Ms. Fatima
Maiga in today’s meeting. Mexico hopes that the
Security Council will more frequently include women
representatives of civil society in its discussions. I also
welcome the presence of the representative of Mali in
the Chamber today.
My country deeply regrets the action by a group
from the Malian Defence and Security Forces that
culminated in the arrest and resignation of the
transitional president and prime minister last month.
This second suspension of the Constitutional order by a
military intervention in less than nine months hinders
the path towards a democratic transition and contributes
to the weakening of the State, which can only work to
the benefit of extremist groups.
We take note of the inauguration of Colonel Goïta
as President and the formation of a new Government
headed by Mr. Choguel Maïga. We urge them to resume
the transition process as soon as possible, in accordance
with the previously agreed terms and timetable and in

21-150689/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

accordance with the Security Council communiqué
(SC/14532) of 26 May, the road map and the Transition
Charter. We urge regional organizations, in particular
the Economic Community of West African States, to
exert their utmost influence on the new authorities in
order to avoid further setbacks in the transition process
and in the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
I wish to draw the attention of the Security Council
to three points.
First, it is essential that the new authorities give
absolute priority to the holding of free, inclusive and
credible elections. The attention of the Government
and the international community should be focused on
resolving such pending issues as finalizing the electoral
legal framework and the composition of the electoral
commission, integrating the voter register, and setting
up a security mechanism that will allow for the peaceful
conduct of the campaigns and orderly election days for
the constitutional referendum, the local and regional
elections and the legislative and presidential elections
throughout the country’s territory.
Mexico urges the Malian Government to take
the measures necessary to guarantee the participation
of women in the political process and to set aside at
least 30 per cent of posts of responsibility to women,
in accordance with the law. We regret that the newly
formed Government falls short in upholding this
minimum. We also expect the electoral authority to
do what is necessary to ensure the participation of
internally displaced persons and refugees.
Secondly, we condemn the terrorist activities and
intracommunal violence that continue to claim civilian
lives and aggravate the humanitarian situation. We
reiterate our concern about the expansion of violent acts
southwards and their escalation in such neighbouring
countries as Burkina Faso. We view with concern the
increasing sophistication of attacks perpetrated by
armed groups and the use of increasingly sophisticated
equipment. In this regard, I would like to hear the
Special Representative’s views on what additional
measures can be taken to combat the armed groups’
supply networks for weapons and military equipment.
Keeping in mind that the main responsibility for
protecting the population against violence lies with
the Malian State, Mexico calls on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and the international forces to
coordinate their actions to strengthen the capacities of
10/20

14/06/2021

the Malian security forces so that they can guarantee
the protection of civilians and the human rights of the
population. In this regard, we acknowledge the positive
results of MINUSMA’s work to reduce the number of
incidents against civilians in Ansongo. Also noteworthy
is the cooperation between the United Nations Police
and the European Union’s capacity-building mission to
train security forces in the Mopti region.
Thirdly, Mexico condemns the attack launched in
April against the MINUSMA base at Anguelhok, in
which regrettably four members of the Mission died.
We reiterate that such actions may constitute war
crimes. My country calls on the Malian authorities to
combat disinformation campaigns aimed at stirring up
animosity against MINUSMA in the region.
We welcome the first conviction in March of an
individual involved in two attacks against MINUSMA.
This precedent should pave the way for justice for
peacekeepers who have lost their lives in Mali.
In conclusion, my country expresses its full
support for MINUSMA and takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation on the renewal of its
mandate. Mexico will participate constructively in the
negotiations to strengthen the implementation of the
strategic priorities of this Mission with the protection
of civilians at the centre of its action.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Wane and Ms. Maiga for
their briefings today.
Yet again we are meeting following another
attack on the peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). I join colleagues in expressing
condolences to the brave peacekeepers injured in
the attack.
We join members of the international community in
calling for Mali to respect the schedule for making its
transition to a democratically elected Government. We
support the establishment by the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) of a mechanism to
monitor compliance with the transition period and the
holding of presidential elections on 27 February 2022,
as already scheduled. We support the statement issued
by ECOWAS following its extraordinary summit on
30 May, including its call for the immediate release
of detainees and those under house arrest, strict
adherence to the transition period of 18 months and
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8794

the appointment of a civilian Prime Minister and an
inclusive Government, as well as for the transitional
President, Vice President and Prime Minister not to be
candidates in the upcoming presidential election under
any circumstances.

But MINUSMA is only one piece of a sustainable
peace in Mali, and it cannot replace the Malian
Government. The transitional Government must
take greater ownership and credible steps to combat
impunity and protect civilians throughout Mali.

We reiterate our condemnation of the detention
and subsequent house arrest of the former transitional
president, prime minister and other officials. Their
detention is a direct assault on the country’s ongoing
transition to the return of democracy and on the rule
of law.

In the light of MINUSMA’s immense tasks,
we reiterate that it is important to maintain a clear
line between counterterrorism and peacekeeping to
protect the United Nations impartiality and personnel.
Neither United Nations-assessed peacekeeping funds
nor Chapter VII authorization are appropriate for
supporting the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), an offensive counter-terrorism
operation. The Joint Force is a coalition of domestic
forces and is directed by the G-5 Sahel Governments
and not the Security Council.

The United States will work with our partners
throughout the region to support respect for democracy,
human rights and the rule of law. We will consider a
range of foreign policy options in response to any
actions that impede the transition to a duly elected
Government. We stand firmly with the people of Mali
in their aspirations for democracy, peace, development
and respect for human rights.
It is critical that the February 2022 elections be free
and fair and administered by competent and impartial
election authorities, using transparent processes. We
strongly urge the transitional Government to ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
the elections. Women should be both on the ballot and
registered to vote.
At the same time, the transitional Government must
not lose sight of its primary responsibility for protection
of civilians and human rights. The transitional
Government must create conditions for stability and
address social grievances. This requires the full
implementation of the Algiers Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, especially the meaningful
inclusion of women and women-led civil society
organizations in the accord’s implementation. Further,
the transitional Government must work to re-establish
State authority, including civil, judicial and security
authority, throughout the country and take credible
steps to combat all forms of impunity, especially related
to violations of human rights and abuses.
The renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate must be
responsive to the fragile transition to democratic
governance, provide the needed logistical and security
support to the February 2022 elections, and prioritize
both the protection of civilians and the implementation
of the Algiers accord.

The United States is a committed partner to the G-5
Sahel countries. We support the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
with equipment, training and advisory support to fill
critical capability gaps on a bilateral basis. In the past
four years, we have committed more than $580 million
to providing security assistance and other support for
countering violent extremism to Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger. In addition to our
bilateral support, we are committed to working with
Council partners on identifying ways to support the
region together.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I too want to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Wane, for his briefing this morning. I wish to
welcome the presence of Ms. Maiga as a strong voice and
advocate for women in Mali. Her message, which was
thoughtful and forward-looking, has really resonated
with us this morning. She has Ireland’s support.
I also want to welcome our friend and colleague,
Ambassador Issa Konfourou, among us.
The events unfolding in Mali are deeply
concerning — we have heard that from several speakers.
Two weeks ago, this Council collectively called for the
release of all detained officials (see SC/14532). The
fact that today Bah N’Daw and Moctar Ouane remain
under house arrest is completely unacceptable. We
reiterate our call for their immediate, unconditional and
safe release.
We wish especially to welcome the constructive
leadership of the region in resolving this crisis. We
believe that parties should strictly adhere to the

21-1506811/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

conditions set out by the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union, which call for
compliance with the Transition Charter. The transition
is intended to be inclusive and lead to a return to
constitutional order and democratic elections within
the established 18-month timeline. We also commend
the good offices support provided by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) over recent weeks under
difficult circumstances.
The Transition Charter guarantees an inclusive
and democratically elected civilian Government for
the citizens of Mali. These guarantees must be upheld.
As set out in the Charter, the transitional President and
transitional Vice President are not eligible for election
in the presidential and legislative elections. We want to
see that respected.
Delaying elections will not help stability in Mali. We
are concerned that, as of yet, no decision has been taken
on the establishment of a single electoral management
body. We call for such a body to be appointed as soon
as possible, and it must be independent and inclusive.
We have said it before, but it bears repeating again
today — the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is vital to a just and
durable peace in Mali. There can be no doubt in the
minds of Malians that this is the case, and no wavering
from this path by the leadership of the country. As the
Special Representative said earlier, now is the time to
rise above the political challenges in the interests of
ordinary Malians and Malian society.
We encourage MINUSMA to continue outreach
in support of the peace agreement, not just at the
political level, but also at the local level. Increasing
understanding of and support for the agreement will
lead to greater buy-in and commitment at all levels. On
this point, my country, Ireland, speaks from experience.
I want to thank Ms. Maiga again for her powerful
call to action. As I see it, gender equality is not about
idealism, and neither should it be seen as a luxury to be
enjoyed only after peace is achieved; it is fundamentally
a peace and security issue in itself. Gender equality is
about the distribution of power in the interests of society
as a whole. For that reason, in Mali it is imperative that
civil society space for women be protected and, indeed,
increased and that women not be restricted in the public
sphere. I recently met with Malian women and, like
12/20

14/06/2021

the Special Representative, I found them engaged and
action-oriented. Above all they are courageous.
We believe that Malian women must be
encouraged, supported and empowered to participate
fully in the upcoming elections, both as voters and as
candidates on the ballot paper. Their representation is
also a critical consideration in the filling of Cabinet
positions. Supporting Malian women to assume those
responsibilities is in all our interests, and above all
in the interests of the people of Mali as a whole. On
that point, I want to underline that women’s political
participation is a right, not a request, and we regret
that not enough progress has been made, as we heard
this morning. We cannot, as Ms. Maiga has said, wait
and see.
We are deeply concerned by the lack of justice
afforded to victims and survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence in Mali. The documentation of conflictrelated sexual violence cases remains disturbingly low,
as we heard earlier. We call on MINUSMA to support the
Malian authorities in urgently prosecuting perpetrators,
and we urge the Malian authorities to adopt legislation
on sexual and gender-based violence, in compliance
with international and regional conventions, and to
establish specialized prosecutors and police units
dedicated to tackling this issue.
(spoke in French)
Impunity for conflict-related sexual violence and
for ongoing human rights violations committed by
several actors in Mali, including the armed forces, must
end. As a troop-contributing country to MINUSMA,
Ireland welcomes the progress made by the Malian
authorities with the first direct conviction for the murder
of a peacekeeper. This is an important milestone and
we encourage further progress in this regard.
In addition to the insurrection and the humanitarian
needs, insecurity continues to exacerbate the suffering
of Malians. We are concerned about the increase in
attacks on civilians. That increase underscores the
need to prioritize the protection of civilians within
MINUSMA’s mandate. It also demonstrates the urgent
need for the Malian authorities to take measures to
prevent and reduce violence against civilians. Persistent
violations against children are of great concern and the
Malian Government must ensure that child protection
measures are put in place.
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8794

In conclusion, we commend MINUSMA for its
important role in extremely difficult conditions. Its
work is crucial, and Ireland fully supports the renewal
of its mandate at the end of the month.

Amid these turbulent times, we are embarking on a
mandate renewal for MINUSMA. In addition to women
and peace and security, let me highlight three other
priority areas for Norway.

However, the challenges facing Mali cannot be
resolved by security efforts alone. We must address
the root causes of the instability. The upcoming
elections present an opportunity to usher in a new era
of democratic and inclusive governance. I would like to
reiterate the firm commitment of my country, Ireland,
to accompany Mali in these efforts.

Our first priority is the protection of civilians, in
particular children. We repeat our deepest condolences
for the victims of the recent horrific attacks in
Burkina Faso and elsewhere in the region. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane
mentioned, we also know that more than 1,300 schools
in Mali remain closed, which affects hundreds of
thousands of children. More than half of those closures
are the result of attacks and threats by armed groups.
Attacks on education have significant long-term
negative impacts on children and their communities.

Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for his
first briefing this morning. We also appreciated the
insights of Ms. Fatima Maiga — a treasured former
consultant at our Embassy in Bamako. We strongly
commend her leadership in strengthening the voices
of women in Mali. I also thank her for the kind words
she addressed to us. We also appreciate the presence of
Ambassador Issa Konfourou.
Recently, Norway joined Mali, the United
Kingdom and France in an event that underscored one
of the achievements Ms. Maiga has contributed to: the
increased participation of women in the Monitoring
Committee for the Algiers Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The ideas and recommendations
shared by those women clearly demonstrated why their
participation is a master key to progress.
But make no mistake — more inclusive processes
are still needed. Only days after that encouraging
event, another coup was reported in Mali, potentially
jeopardizing some of the hard-won progress achieved
to date. A huge responsibility now rests with those
who took it upon themselves to forcefully take over
Mali’s transition.
Let me be clear: we join the calls for the immediate
release of former transitional leaders from house
arrest and detention. We expect the recently appointed
transitional Government to respect the timeline for
holding inclusive, transparent and credible presidential
elections by March 2022. As the Transitional Charter
stipulates, neither the transitional President nor the
members of the transitional Government are eligible to
run for office in the elections. Norway strongly supports
the roles of the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in monitoring the transition.

There is no question that safe and unhindered
humanitarian access is crucial to protect and assist
people in need; provide education; and prevent and
respond to sexual and gender-based violence. We echo
the Secretary-General’s words that: “Mali needs now,
more than ever, leaders who stand together in the
interest of their country and the future of their children”
(see S/2021/519, para. 91).
My second point is the importance of ensuring
human rights and accountability, which is a prerequisite
for the trust-building needed to move Mali forward as
a country.
We are deeply concerned by the worsening human
rights situation, including the reported violations by
national, regional and international forces. We commend
MINUSMA for its efforts to support investigations into
allegations of human rights violations and abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law. We call
on the authorities to hold perpetrators to account. To
that end, Norway together with France is proud to
provide a specialized capacity-building police team
to MINUSMA.
We ask again for follow-up to the recommendations
of the International Commission of Inquiry for
Mali — a report requested by the parties to the Algiers
Agreement. A concrete first step could be a conference
on impunity and fair criminal justice, in line with the
Commission’s final recommendation. Norway stands
ready to provide its support.
Thirdly and finally, we know the effects of climate
change on security through its impact on increasingly
scarce resources. It is time for the Security Council

21-1506813/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

to follow the African Union and African leadership
and take climate and security seriously. At the same
time, we acknowledge that MINUSMA’s resources
are limited. That is why we are looking at ways to
financially support its climate and security work.
In conclusion, as we will also highlight in Norway’s
updated Sahel strategy later this month, we wish to
emphasize that security depends on inclusive and
sustainable development, good governance and respect
for the human rights of all Malians. They deserve to see
the Algiers Agreement become a reality.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General El-Ghassim Wane for his briefing
on the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the situation in that country. I also thank Ms. Fatima
Maiga for her comments.

14/06/2021

The security situation remains extremely difficult.
Extremists continue to terrorize the local population
and attack the Malian armed forces, United Nations
peacekeepers and contingents of other international
forces. The Malian armed forces and the Blue Helmets
continue to suffer casualties. Unfortunately, despite all
mediation efforts, intercommunal clashes in the central
part of the country continue unabated and are mainly
provoked by the activities of extremists.
The situation in the border territories of Mali,
Niger and Burkina Faso, where a terrible terrorist
attack against civilians was recently perpetrated, is
deeply disturbing. Russia expresses its sympathy to the
Governments and peoples of the countries of the region,
whose citizens are dying at the hands of terrorists. We
trust that both the Malian authorities and the authorities
of neighbouring States will take increasingly decisive
measures to eradicate terrorism from their soil.

We have taken note of the assurances of the new
authorities that all commitments undertaken previously
with regard to the transition period, including the
holding of a constitutional referendum and general
democratic elections within the agreed time frame, will
be honoured. Much will depend on the continuation of
dialogue among all interested parties with a view to
forming public consensus in the country and restoring
the constitutional order as quickly as possible.

The humanitarian situation is of great concern.
The numbers of people in need of food assistance
and of internally displaced persons have increased
dramatically, which requires a commensurate response
by the relevant humanitarian agencies. We must
recognize that the situation in Mali is critical for
the security of the region. We trust that the Malian
armed forces will continue to fully participate in the
operations of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and that the decisions by the
West African countries made in 2020 and 2021 to
step up the fight against terrorism will be translated
into action. The African Standby Force in the Sahel
region — which was a concept promoted by the African
Union Commission — deserves to be considered
in detail.

We believe that stabilizing the situation in the
country depends directly on the strict implementation
by the transitional Government and other political
forces of the Algiers Agreement. We trust that
constructive interaction with the signatory groups
will continue in that regard. We expect the process
of disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating excombatants and deploying new units to the north of
the country to be accelerated. In addition, governance
should be reformed, and conditions should be created
for the socioeconomic recovery of the affected areas,
including the northern development zone. The interests
of all the people in the country, especially those in its
northern territories, must be taken into account.

Continued close cooperation and coordination
between Bamako and MINUSMA is imperative.
We welcome the assistance provided by the Mission
to the G-5 Joint Force and stand ready to consider
modalities for its expansion. We also support plans
for adapting MINUSMA. It is clear that its priority
tasks remain to help restore constitutional order,
facilitate the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and strengthen the
security of the country. In that regard, the presence
of MINUSMA remains critical for ensuring further
stabilization. At the same time, we believe that the
Malians themselves should take the lead in overcoming
the current challenges.

It is clear that the improvement of the situation in
Mali, the implementation of the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, the elimination of terrorism
and the improvement of the socioeconomic situation
depend above all on internal political stability. Political
infighting, which has led to two acute crises over the
past year, has hardly helped the situation.

14/20

21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

Concerning the peace process in Mali, our
position has always rested on the premise that African
problems should be solved by African solutions. In
that context, we support the mediation efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union. We believe that despite the existing
divergence of views, it would be irresponsible in the
current situation to leave the country to fend for itself,
including by reducing military or economic assistance.
The stakes for the security of Mali and the region are
too high.
We reiterate our willingness to work closely with
all international actors to stabilize the situation in Mali
and in the region as a whole.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
El-Ghassim Wane and Ms. Maiga for their perspectives
and insights.
First, like many of my Council colleagues, I am
deeply concerned about the recent coup in Mali and its
consequences for the return to constitutional order, the
stability of Mali and the wider region, and the ability
of State institutions to uphold the rule of law. I join
others in regretting the attack on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) yesterday.
The United Kingdom therefore calls on the new
transitional authorities to meet the conditions set by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), in particular to prepare for elections
without delay, ensure the unconditional release of those
who remain detained and make certain that the rest of
the transition period is based on dialogue, consultation
and compromise.
As the Secretary-General sets out in his report
(S/2021/519), the former Government has taken a
number of steps in the right direction to make the
political process more inclusive and the needs and
aspirations of Malians will be met through inclusive
representation within Government and the active,
meaningful participation of all sectors of society,
including women.
Secondly, we urge the new transitional authorities
to uphold the commitments made by the former
transitional Government with respect to tackling
impunity for violations and abuses of human rights. We
welcome the trial and conviction of those responsible

S/PV. 8794

for killing a United Nations peacekeeper, but many
more Malians continue to wait for justice. We therefore
urge the transitional authorities to make progress on
trials and prosecutions, carry out a full and transparent
investigation into the assassination of the President of
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and
renew efforts to protect civilians.
Thirdly, we urge the transitional authorities to
renew their commitment to the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. Progress depends on full
ownership by all signatory parties and their involvement
in political and decision-making processes. We support
the call of the Secretary-General for an impact-oriented
and people-centred strategy for the central part of the
country — a strategy that brings together security,
governance and development responses under a clear
overarching vision. That strategy needs to be owned by
the Government, with MINUSMA present to support
its implementation.
The meeting that we hosted with France, Norway
and Mali last month on the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in Mali
demonstrated the real impact and value of increasing
women’s participation in the peace process.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom condemns the
coup and stands ready to support the efforts of ECOWAS
and the United Nations to ensure compliance with
ECOWAS conditions, make progress towards elections
and help ensure that human rights are protected and
promoted and that the rule of law is upheld.
Mr. Kakanur (India): Allow me to begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. ElGhassim Wane, and Ms. Fatima Maiga, independent
consultant, founding member and President of the
Coalition des Femmes Leaders Nord, Sud et Centre du
Mali, for their briefings on the recent developments
in Mali. We would also like to recognize the presence
of the Permanent Representative of Mali, Mr. Issa
Konfourou, at today’s meeting.
The unfortunate developments in Mali last month
have provided a reality check for the Security Council
with regard to the implementation of the transitional
road map. The repeated interventions by the Malian
military in the transition process have created challenges
for the way forward. Differences over the appointment
of members in the transitional Government resulting in

21-1506815/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

the arrest of its President and Prime Minister on 24 May
by the military clearly reflect the tenuous relations
among Malian stakeholders. The impact that those
developments may have on the time-bound transition is
a matter of serious concern.
We welcome the timely actions of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the African Union (AU), which have helped to partly
redeem the deteriorating political situation. We have
also taken note of the commitments expressed by the
new President with regard to the transition process,
as well as the appointment of the Prime Minister.
The Malian authorities need to quickly resume the
implementation of the transition road map and convene
legislative and presidential elections as scheduled in
early 2022.
The implementation of key provisions of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali remains
fundamental to lasting peace in Mali. In that regard,
we take note of the second meeting of the Monitoring
Committee in Kayes on 29 March, and welcome the
formation of a security and political coalition between
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the
Platform coalition of armed groups. The parties need
to agree, without further delay, on the deployment and
operationalization of the reconstituted army units; the
launch of next phase of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration; the creation of territorial police and
the reorganization of territories. These are the priority
areas that will help in addressing the security situation.
The precarious security situation, particularly in
central and northern Mali, remains a matter of serious
concern. The absence of State authority has contributed
to the worsening of the situation. The attacks carried
out by Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara against civilians
and international forces have increased. It is indeed
worrisome that terrorist activities in central Mali
continue unabated.
MINUSMA is playing an important role in
stabilizing the security situation in Mali through its
political and military support for the peace process. We
welcome the Mission’s confidence-building measures,
particularly the local peace accords in central Mali
that have helped reduce intercommunal violence and
promote reconciliation. We commend the efforts of
MINUSMA peacekeepers, who are functioning under
complex and challenging circumstances. We also take
16/20

14/06/2021

note of the progress in the implementation of the mobile
task force concept to strengthen the unity of effort
and command across the area of operations and of the
support extended to the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We reiterate the need for
more robust support from the Security Council and the
international community to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Against the backdrop of the attack on the
MINUSMA camp in Aguelhok on 2 April, we reiterate
our call to MINUSMA to further enhance measures to
ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. This
recent incident again underscores the urgent need to
upgrade the security infrastructure of camps of United
Nations peacekeepers. We also call on the Government
of Mali to bring to justice perpetrators of attacks against
United Nations peacekeepers. We take positive note of
the recent conviction for the killing of a MINUSMA
peacekeeper in 2015.
The primary responsibility to fight terrorists and
extremist armed groups lies with the Malian Defence and
Security Forces. MINUSMA peacekeepers are there to
support the implementation of the peace agreement and
its provisions. The tendency of burdening peacekeepers
with responsibilities that ought to fall primarily to the
host State or other relevant international organizations
must come to an end.
It is a matter of concern that MINUSMA
peacekeepers continue to face threats from improvised
explosive devices. The Mission should enhance
resources to counter that threat. We hope that this will
be adequately addressed during the discussion on the
MINUSMA mandate renewal later this month.
Mali is currently facing serious political and
security challenges. This delicate phase requires the
renewed commitment of all stakeholders in Mali to
the peace agreement and its implementation, as well as
ownership of the transition road map. The continued
support of bilateral and international partners to Mali,
including the United Nations, the AU and ECOWAS, is
much-needed in these challenging times. India remains
committed to supporting Mali to overcome the present
political and security crisis.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his comprehensive briefing.
I also thank Ms. Fatima Maiga for sharing her view.
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

We welcome Ambassador Issa Konfourou, Permanent
Representative of Mali, to today’s meeting.
Viet Nam is following closely the situation in Mali,
and we express our concerns about recent developments
that threaten the transition, further destabilize the
country and hamper the implementation of the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali. We
call on all stakeholders to exercise restraint and resolve
differences through dialogue and consultation. We
stress the need to ensure the full implementation of the
transition, which serves the long-term interests of the
Malian people. Nobody should shirk their commitments
and obligations under the peace agreement. We support
regional efforts, especially those led by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union (AU), to help stabilize the situation and
advance the transitional process in Mali.
With regard to security, we are gravely concerned
about the continued deteriorating situation, especially
in central and northern Mali. Terrorist attacks, violent
extremists and deadly intercommunal conflicts have
resulted in a rising death toll and threatened the
livelihoods of millions of Malian people. The limited
presence of State authority outside the central regions
is still worrisome. In order to address those security
challenges, we call for redoubled efforts towards
national reconciliation, the extension of State authority
and State services and improved security in the north
and centre of Mali.
On the humanitarian front, the country is facing
tremendous challenges, including food insecurity, the
adverse impacts of climate change, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the spread of violent extremism
and terrorism. At least 5.9 million people are in need
of assistance, while nearly 350,000 others, including
women and children, have been displaced. It is
estimated that more than 1.3 million people will face
food insecurity in 2021 — an increase of 36 per cent as
compared to November 2020. We therefore emphasize
the need to provide a safe and smooth passageway for
humanitarian aid in Mali and ensure access to basic
services for those in need. The transitional Government
and other stakeholders must comply with obligations
under international humanitarian law and protect
civilians, especially women and children.
MINUSMA has proved to be an essential
instrument in the maintenance of peace and security in
the country. The Mission has also provided significant

S/PV. 8794

logistical support to the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel in order to combat terrorism in the
Sahel. Nevertheless, MINUSMA is being deployed in
a complex and dangerous environment. The loss of
peacekeepers in recent months due to attacks shows the
urgency of taking further measures to ensure the safety
of peacekeepers.
We join other Member States in condemning
the attacks against civilians, security forces and
United Nations peacekeepers, and in expressing
condolences for those lost in recent attacks. Such
attacks are unacceptable, and their perpetrators must
be brought to justice. It is also crucial for MINUSMA
to have adequate equipment and resources to fulfil
its mandate. In that regard, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation of a one-year extension
of MINUSMA’s mandate, with its current authorized
troops and police ceiling.
Last but not least, we call for a holistic approach
to security, humanitarian and socio-development
challenges in Mali, including measures to address the
impacts of climate change.
We commend the tireless efforts of Special
Representative Wane and his team in their commitments
to peace and stability in the country. We reiterate our
support for the assistance of the United Nations and
the international community, especially ECOWAS, in
promoting the implementation of the transition and
stability in Mali. We also reaffirm our support for
the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Mali.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Estonia.
I would like to thank our briefers for their
comprehensive overviews and the insights they have
provided on the most recent developments in Mali. I
would also like to express Estonia’s full support for
the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the upcoming mandate renewal.
The political upheaval in Mali is extremely
concerning. Estonia condemns the forcible resignation
of the civilian President and the Prime Minister of the
transition. We take note that the new civilian Prime
Minister formed a Government over the weekend,
and we call on the country´s leadership to turn its
full attention to the fragile security situation. This

21-1506817/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

past weekend, yet another attack in the northern part
of the country left two soldiers dead. The civilianled transition has to continue in accordance with the
transition road map so that elections can take place
in February 2022. We welcome the engagement of
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
in supporting the political transition in Mali.
The Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
on Mali remains the basis of the peace process in Mali.
While we note positively that the Agreement Monitoring
Committee has regularly met, we strongly encourage
the parties to commit to taking concrete steps forward
in the very slow implementation of the Agreement. More
progress is needed in the redeployment and effective
use of reconstituted units of the army and in securing
the State presence and services in the north of Mali. It
is also important to note that all those obstructing the
peace process need to be held accountable.
It is of utmost importance to prepare for the elections
in an inclusive manner through a clear and transparent
process. In this regard, we underline the importance
of strengthening the role of women in all political
processes. The briefing by Ms. Maiga, whom we are
glad to welcome in the Council, has strongly made the
case for this. We welcome the increased representation
of women on the Agreement Monitoring Committee and
call on the parties to the Peace Agreement to increase
the representation of women on its subcommittees and
in other Agreement implementation mechanisms.
In order to bring relief to the continually dire security
situation, especially in the centre of the country, a clear
and comprehensive strategic approach is needed from
the Malian Government. The regional and international
efforts to bring stability to Mali are vital, but, in the
end, their role is to support the Government’s efforts.
We therefore need to see stronger ownership by Malian
authorities in restoring the State presence all over the
country, including judicial and police presences. That
will enable taking desperately needed control over
armed groups and extremist elements and will assist in
addressing the root causes of the instability.
Estonia remains concerned about the deteriorating
situation of the civilian population and the rapid
growth in human rights violations and abuses.
Deliberate targeting of civilians as well as the national
and international security presence by terrorists and
localized armed groups is unacceptable. Every effort
18/20

14/06/2021

needs to be made to stop this violence from spreading
any further.
An essential part in addressing the human rights
violations and abuses is the fight against impunity. The
conviction of an individual connected to two attacks
against MINUSMA personnel in 2015 is encouraging.
However, the mass violations and abuses in central
and northern Mali continue and unfortunately keep
growing, with the most vulnerable among the civilian
population, including women and children, paying the
highest price. We strongly urge the Malian authorities to
follow through with all announced investigations. The
only way forward to a lasting peace is to take concrete
action in breaking the cycle of impunity and ensuring
that all perpetrators of human rights violations and
abuses as well as violators of international humanitarian
law are brought to justice.
In conclusion, Estonia remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Mali. It is essential that
access to schools and other essential State services
will be granted in a safe manner. Moreover, taking
into account the adverse effects of climate change is an
important element of addressing the root causes of the
instability in Mali as well as in the wider Sahel region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by extending Mali’s warm congratulations
to the President on the second Estonian presidency
of the Security Council and by expressing our
great appreciation to the Chinese delegation for the
remarkable work it accomplished last month. Allow me
also to reiterate the deep gratitude of the people and the
Transitional Authorities of Mali to the Security Council,
as well as to Secretary-General António Guterres for
the invaluable and tireless efforts he has made in favour
of peace and stability in Mali and the Sahel.
The Government of Mali takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General under review (S/2021/519), and
I would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Mali, for
his faithful briefing and for his update on the latest
developments in the country since the publication of the
report. I also thank my sister Ms. Fatima Maiga for her
excellent and relevant briefing.
21-15068

14/06/2021

The situation in Mali

I acknowledge the observations that have just
been made about Mali. I can assure the members of
the Council that my country has already implemented
some of their requests and that efforts will continue
to be made to address many that remain. On behalf of
the Government of Mali, I would now like to make a
few comments on the report of the Secretary-General.
As the report so aptly sets forth, the period under
review was marked by sociopolitical tensions that led
to the events of 24 May 2021, and most significantly
to the resignation of the transitional president and
prime minister.
Following these developments, the Constitutional
Court of Mali, in a ruling dated 28 May 2021, declared
the presidency vacant and appointed Colonel Assimi
Goïta as Transitional President and Head of State.
Immediately after this proclamation, the Transitional
President began consultations with all the active
forces of the Malian nation, in particular the political
class, civil society, traditional and religious leaders,
and the signatories of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, in order to carry out an
uncompromising assessment of the current situation in
the country and to identify the ways and means for a
rapid return to constitutional order.
On 7 June 2021, before the Supreme Court of Mali,
Colonel Assimi Goïta was sworn in as Transitional
President. On the same day, he appointed a civilian prime
minister, Mr. Choguel Kokalla Maïga, who formed a
broad-based Government, in which representatives
of the signatory movements of the Agreement were
represented, including six women — or 22 per cent of
the 30 per cent required by our national legislation — to
conduct the priority actions of the transition.
Among these priorities, the Government will focus
on improving security, particularly with a view to
bringing State administration back to the areas of the
country most affected by the crisis, implementing the
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement as well as political
and institutional reforms, organizing transparent and
credible elections, and overseeing an end to impunity.
I would like to thank the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States for their constant support for Mali
and its people. Let me also not forget to acknowledge
the African Union and all our country’s bilateral and
multilateral partners as I reaffirm in this Chamber that
the transitional authorities are determined to honour all

S/PV. 8794

of Mali’s international commitments. In this respect,
I would like to stress the assurances given by the
Transitional President at his meeting with the signatory
movements in which he expressed his determination
to continue implementing the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, resulting from the Algiers
process. Moreover, our partners and the Council will
have noticed that despite the sociopolitical challenges
mentioned previously, our accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process had, by
30 April 2021, recorded the integration of 422 excombatants into the ranks of the reconstituted Malian
Defence and Security Forces.
In the same vein, the Transitional President is
committed to holding credible, fair and transparent
elections within the set time frame, with a view to
returning to the constitutional order. With regard to
the human rights situation, I would like to stress that
respect for human rights is one of the Government’s
priorities. The Malian State is aware of its primary
responsibility to protect people and their property.
Accordingly, the Government is resolutely committed
to bringing to justice those responsible for human
rights violations. We will also continue to work
for a significant improvement in the security and
humanitarian situation in the northern and central
regions of Mali. The necessity of appointing a Minister
in charge of refugees and internally displaced persons
has not escaped the attention of the new Government.
The success of the transition is the main
responsibility of the Malian people. I have just given the
Council a pledge of the commitment by the transitional
authorities to carrying out the agreed priority actions
within the planned time frame. However, I must also
forcefully say that the success of the transition in Mali
requires greater international solidarity. The crisis
in Mali is complex and deep; the very foundations
of the State are threatened. I would therefore like to
draw the attention of the international community
to the consequences of certain measures taken in
the wake of the events of 24 May 2021 that carry the
risk of annihilating the fragile gains made so far, in
the conditions Council members know, not only in
the implementation of the Agreement, but also in the
fight against terrorism. However, calling into question
this hard-won progress could dangerously exacerbate
instability in Mali and the Sahel region as a whole.
Mali therefore needs the support and solidarity
of its bilateral and multilateral partners. We would

21-1506819/20

S/PV.8794

The situation in Mali

have preferred to avoid sanctions under the current
circumstances. That is why I would like to appeal here
in the Chamber for the understanding of our partners
and the lifting of the sanctions, which are impacting a
country already weakened by several years of political,
security, economic and health crises.
At the regional level, indiscriminate and criminal
terrorist attacks of a particularly lethal nature have,
unfortunately, become a daily affliction for our civilian
population and for national and international forces
alike. The most recent mass killing in Burkina Faso on
4 June is a reminder of the urgent need to enhance the
coordination of our collective efforts in the fight against
terrorism and the growing insecurity in our region.
This is what drives our engagement within the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). It
is also what underpins our call to the Security Council
for a robust and adapted mandate, under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as for
predictable and sustainable funding for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, including through the United Nations. It is
furthermore the basis for our request for the creation
of a United Nations support office for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force.
As the Council prepares to consider extending the
MINUSMA mandate, I would like to inform it that

20/20

14/06/2021

MINUSMA continues to play a very important role
in protecting civilians, supporting the transition and
helping restore State authority throughout our national
territory, including through the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Mali
therefore strongly supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of MINUSMA
for another year.
I should like to take this opportunity to pay
heartfelt tribute to the personnel of MINUSMA for their
inestimable support for the efforts of the Government
in the stabilization of Mali under extremely difficult
and often perilous conditions. I would also like to
pay heartfelt tribute to all the victims — civilian and
military, foreign and Malian — who have lost their
lives in our country’s crisis.
In conclusion, I reiterate the gratitude of the
Government and the people of Mali to the French
Operation Barkhane, the MINUSMA troop-contributing
countries and all multilateral and bilateral partners
for their unwavering support for the achievement of a
definitive and lasting resolution of the Malian crisis.
The President: I will now adjourn the meeting so
that the Council can continue its discussion in closed
consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

21-15068
