United Nations

S/PV.4934

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4934

th meeting
Thursday, 25 March 2004, 5.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-28292 (E)

*
0
4
2
8
2
9
2
*

S/PV.4934

The meeting was called to order at 5.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the decision taken at the 4929th meeting of the
Security Council, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representative of Israel to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the decision taken at the 4929th meeting of the
Security Council, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to participate in the meeting in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will continue its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/240, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Algeria and the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): The
United States will vote against this draft resolution
because, in our view, it is silent about the terrorist
atrocities committed by Hamas; because it does not
reflect the realities of the conflict in the Middle East;
and because it will not further the goals of peace and
security in the region.
The United States is deeply troubled by the
killing of Sheikh Yassin. Israel’s action has escalated
tensions in Gaza and in the region and could set back
our effort to resume progress towards peace. But, as I
said in Tuesday’s open meeting, events must be
considered in their context, and the Security Council
does nothing to contribute to a peaceful settlement
when it condemns one party’s actions and turns a blind
eye to everything else occurring in the region.
This draft resolution condemns the killing of
Sheikh Yassin, the leader of Hamas, a terrorist
organization dedicated to the destruction of Israel. Last
week Hamas proudly proclaimed its responsibility for a
suicide bombing in the Israeli port of Ashdod that
killed 10 Israelis and injured 10 more. This draft
resolution does not condemn that attack, nor does it
condemn those responsible. In fact, it does not even
mention them, despite the fact that a number of
Council members specifically requested the inclusion
of such references.
This draft resolution also, as indicated in the
preambular language, refers only to the situation in the
occupied territories, ignoring the tragic events which
are occurring in Israel. The Council should focus on
ways to advance the goal of the two States — Israel
and Palestine — living side by side in peace and
security. The one-sided draft resolution before the
Council does not advance that goal.
The United States is committed to achieving the
vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security. We will support any action here in the Council
and, more importantly, on the ground in the region that
will further that goal, and will oppose any action that
would impede it. One-sided, unbalanced draft
resolutions by the Security Council such as the one
before the Council today would only detract from the
efforts of the Quartet and the international community
to resume progress on the path towards peace.

S/PV.4934

The President (spoke in French): I now put to
the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2004/240.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Spain
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Germany, Romania, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 11 in favour, one against and
three abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Security Council.
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation expresses its regret
that the Security Council was unable to respond to the
development of events in the Palestinian territories
resulting from the killing of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin,
spiritual leader of the Islamic movement Hamas.
Yesterday, the United Nations Commission on Human
Rights, as the outcome of a special meeting, adopted by
majority vote a resolution on the dangerous situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories that condemned
such actions by Israel and contained an appeal to the
Israeli Government to comply with the principles of
international humanitarian law and to refrain from any
and all forms of human rights violations in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
The Russian Federation’s position remains
unchanged. We believe that the phenomenon of
extremism must be eradicated. We condemn terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, as they violate the
most fundamental right of human beings: the right to
life. In the Security Council, we have consistently
voted in favour of resolutions condemning terrorist
acts, including those aimed at Israel’s civilian
population. We voted in favour of this draft resolution
because, inter alia, it contains a condemnation of all
terrorist attacks against civilians. From the very outset,

we favoured the drafting of a consensus approach that
would have ensured Council unity on this issue. We
believe that there were opportunities to achieve such a
consensus and that the consultations should have been
continued.
Once again, the Russian Federation calls upon the
Israeli and Palestinian sides to demonstrate restraint
and a high level of responsibility and to reject
unilateralism. Of particular importance in the current
situation are internationally coordinated efforts, under
the aegis of the Quartet of mediators, to bring the road
map to the level of practical implementation.
Mr. Baali (Algeria): Four days after the
horrendous assassination of Sheikh Yassin and six
other Palestinians, blown up by an Israeli missile as
they were leaving a mosque, the Security Council has
been unable to produce either a presidential statement
or a resolution condemning that extrajudicial killing
and calling for the cessation of that practice, which is
contrary to international law. As if doomed to fail
whenever it must deal with the intractable situation in
the Middle East, the Security Council has come to the
conclusion once and for all that it has nothing to say
about the terrible tragedy that is unfolding in that part
of the world.
By not condemning the extrajudicial killing of
Sheikh Yassin, the Security Council is not sending the
right message to the world, which has unanimously
condemned that crime. It is not sending the right
message to those who sincerely believe that the
Security Council is the custodian of international law.
But it is certainly sending the wrong message to Israel,
whose representative boasted two days ago in this very
Chamber about the crime committed and vowed to
continue the unlawful policy of extrajudicial killings.
During the past four days, the sponsors of the
just-vetoed draft resolution made every effort to
accommodate the concerns and the demands of all
those who wished to see the Security Council adopt a
common stance. The text we have before us is indeed a
fair and balanced attempt to satisfy every delegation. It
condemns the assassination of Sheikh Yassin, and it
also condemns all terrorist acts and acts of violence
and destruction against civilians. It calls for the
cessation of extrajudicial killings as well as of all acts
of violence, including acts of terrorism. It calls for
adherence to international law and for implementation
by the parties of their obligations and of the road map

3

S/PV.4934

in order to achieve the vision of two States living side
by side in peace and security. In spite of all that, that
balanced approach did not fully satisfy some
delegations, which I would still like to thank for their
efforts to arrive at a general agreement.
While thanking the members of the Council who
voted in favour of the draft resolution, I would like to
express our deep regret that the Council has again
failed to assume its responsibilities.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Germany abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution at issue. The reason is
that the draft resolution addresses the recent events in
the Middle East in an unbalanced manner.
The Council of Foreign Ministers of the European
Union (EU), on 23 March, unequivocally condemned
the extrajudicial killing of Hamas leader Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin and of six other Palestinians by Israeli
forces. The EU, including Germany, has always
opposed extrajudicial killings. My Government
believes not only that they are contrary to international
law but also that they undermine the concept of the rule
of law, which is a key element in the fight against
terrorism. I reiterated that position, and our position on
the Middle East conflict, in no uncertain terms during
the open meeting of the Council two days ago.
At the same time, Germany and the EU have in
the past repeatedly condemned the terrorist atrocities
that have resulted in the deaths of hundreds of Israelis.
Just last week, two terrorist attacks in Ashdod claimed
10 innocent lives. The draft resolution does not address
those facts in an appropriate manner, as did the
declaration of the EU ministers a couple of days ago.
We tried hard to be able to vote in favour of the
draft resolution by introducing balancing language
from the declaration of the EU foreign ministers.
Germany, for its part, feels bound by the statement of
the EU’s Council of Foreign Ministers of three days
ago, which clearly condemned the wrongdoings of both
sides. Consequently, Germany was not able to vote in
favour of a draft resolution that falls short of that
common European position.
Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French):
Romania abstained in the voting on the draft resolution
under consideration. Unlike the texts, submitted in the
past in other multilateral forums, that Romania was
able to support, the draft before us does not ensure that
the general context in which the death of Sheikh Yassin

4

took place is taken into account in a similar manner.
Nevertheless, we appreciated the efforts of the text’s
negotiators to reconcile the different points of view
expressed.
Aside
from
the
document’s
procedural
difficulties, it should have been very clear on substance
and should have taken into account my delegation’s
position on the problem just considered by the Council.
Indeed, Romania believes that extrajudicial killings are
unacceptable and contrary to international law.
Romania emphasizes once again that any terrorist act is
unacceptable and must be condemned.
The implementation of the road map must resume
without further delay. That settlement plan has been
accepted by the parties. It is the only one that provides
an appropriate framework to achieve — through
negotiation and with the support of the international
community, represented by the Quartet — a just and
lasting solution based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and on the vision of two States living
together in peace and security within safe and
internationally recognized borders.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom has consistently condemned
extrajudicial killings. We recognize Israel’s right to
defend itself against terrorism, but it must act in
accordance with international law. The killing of
Sheikh Yassin was unlawful and will serve only to
perpetuate the vicious cycle of violence.
The United Kingdom has also repeatedly
condemned terrorist atrocities committed by terrorist
groups and which have caused hundreds of Israeli
civilian deaths. The Palestinians must take immediate
and effective action to stop the terrorism emanating
from the occupied Palestinian territories, in line with
their obligations under the road map.
On Monday, 22 March 2004, the United Kingdom
supported a European Union statement which
condemned the killing of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin but did
so in a balanced way. The United Kingdom abstained
on the resolution before us tonight because it was
unbalanced. It singled out one party as the perpetrator
of violence. It failed to condemn terrorist atrocities
against Israel and it limited its condemnation of
terrorist attacks to those against civilians.
Let me be clear, Sir, the United Kingdom would
have voted for this resolution if its proposers had

S/PV.4934

accepted an amendment reflecting the positions set out
by the European Union on 22 March. That amendment
would have replaced existing operative paragraph 2, by
another text. That text would have condemned terrorist
atrocities which have resulted in the deaths of hundreds
of Israelis, as well as all acts of violence and
destruction. That very reasonable amendment was not
accepted.
There will be no military solution to this conflict.
Our focus should be on moving the peace process
forward. The key is now for both sides to take
immediate steps to implement their obligations under
the road map and to refrain from actions which will
only serve to escalate violence in the region, leading to
yet more loss of life.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
regrets the fact that it was not possible to reach
unanimous agreement on this draft resolution. Chile
voted in favour of the draft resolution because we feel
that extrajudicial execution is an act of violence and
therefore needs to be condemned. Although any State
has the right to protect its citizens from terrorist
attacks, it must do so in accordance with the norms of
international law. Moreover, Chile is of the view that
operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution contains a
condemnation of suicide attacks against civilians only.
We also stress the urgent need for all parties to meet
their obligations under the road map, as called for
under Security Council resolution 1515 (2003).
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation voted in favour of the resolution for the
reasons we stated a few days ago in this Chamber,
which were based on the two main ideas contained in
last week’s declaration by the Council of Ministers of
the European Union.
Spain opposes any terrorist acts, whatever their
source and whatever their motivation may be. A bomb
in a bus in Tel Aviv, a bomb in a train in Madrid, a
bomb in a building in New York or in Casablanca —
all are terrorist acts. They are all equally reprehensible
and unjustifiable. We condemn them in the strongest
terms and my delegation has made every effort to
embody this idea in operative paragraph 2 of the
resolution.
But, we are also opposed to and condemn
extrajudicial executions. The Security Council could
not remain passive in the face of the act committed
three days ago. It was contrary to international law and,

as has been stated here, it will disastrously fuel tension
and hostility in the region.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The reasons that lead
to the affirmative vote by Brazil on the draft resolution
are contained in the statement by my delegation during
the Security Council’s 4929th meeting, held on 23
March 2004.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
France voted in favour of the draft resolution
submitted by Algeria because we believe that the
Security Council should send a strong and clear
message to the parties in the present context of
extremely heightened tensions in the region.
The text was considerably amended and improved
during the negotiations over the last 48 hours. The text
ultimately reproduces the balance of the declaration of
the Ministers of the European Union and condemns the
killing of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin as an extrajudicial
execution which is a practice that France has always
opposed as contravening international law. The text
also condemns all terrorist acts against civilians.
France has systematically condemned terrorist acts,
those heinous acts which have killed hundreds of
Israelis since September 2000.
Finally, we appeal to the parties to respect
international law and fulfil their obligations within the
framework of the road map. The road map is the only
possible path. Violence is not an option and must
cease.
I regret that it has not been possible to achieve
consensus. France finds it particularly regrettable that
the Council, once again, finds itself paralysed
regarding this pivotal issue for stability and for
international peace.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
The Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked
for the floor. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Today’s events are indeed regrettable. The Security
Council was once again prevented, because of the
twenty-eighth use of the veto by the United States on
the question of the occupied Palestinian territories. I
would say the Council was unable to assume its

5

S/PV.4934

responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
What is even more regrettable is that this action
takes place amidst the very severe tension within the
Middle East, including the negative effects that will be
a consequence of the inability of the Council to adopt a
measure as happened today.
There is no doubt that millions of people will be
unable to understand what happened today and this
action will therefore not contribute to calming the
situation or be a push towards moderation or dialog in
the region. The Arabs have shown great flexibility in
the past few days in a serious attempt to adopt a
unanimous decision. Before today’s action, we had
considered a presidential statement that naturally, we
had hoped to adopt by consensus. Again, the Arab side
did this because we fully understood that the way in
which the Council’s work concluded was not in the
interests of any responsible party or any party that is
anxious to see peace prevail in the area. As the
representative of Algeria stated earlier, the draft
resolution, which has not been adopted, contained a
very clear condemnation of all terrorist attacks against
any civilians as well as all acts of violence and
destruction.
Regrettably, however, the super Power that voted
against the draft resolution made suggestions that were
impossible to accept. Of course, we would have liked
to have seen more countries voting in favour of the
draft resolution in the Council, but, once again,
proposals were made that we simply could not accept
for various reasons, including legal aspects that were
perfectly clear. Allow me to cite an example: there was
an attempt to broaden the definition of terrorist attacks
in a way that would not confine the definition to
attacks against civilians. That is indeed bizarre and
unacceptable, particularly in a case involving foreign
occupation.
All we hope for now is a clear stance in the near
future that will make Israel, the occupying Power,
understand that it cannot continue its illegal policies,
especially extrajudicial killings. This will require a
clear position, particularly — if I may speak frankly —
from the United States of America. Very modestly and
humbly, we call upon the United States to reassess its
position on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We call
upon the United States to adopt more neutral, objective
and fair positions to enable it to assume its natural role

6

as the sponsor of the peace process and a member of
the Quartet, with a view to the implementation of the
road map and the establishment of peace based on the
principle of two States, Palestine and Israel.
We would like to express our deep appreciation to
Algeria, the Group of Arab States, the members of the
Non-Aligned Movement, the members of the Council
and, of course, all countries that voted in favour of the
draft resolution today. Our Palestinian people express
to all of them their thanks and deep appreciation.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor. I now
give him the floor, and I call on him now.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to thank those countries that bravely and with great
integrity did not vote for this draft resolution. We are
gratified that this draft resolution was not adopted. This
draft resolution should never even have been
considered. A draft resolution mentioning Sheikh
Yassin without mentioning Hamas is shameless and
hypocritical. Describing Sheikh Yassin as an innocent
bystander leaving prayers, without identifying him as
the arch-terrorist that he was, makes a mockery of this
Council. I was especially dismayed by those Council
members who described Sheikh Yassin as the spiritual
leader of the Islamic movement Hamas. This is sad and
alarming, especially coming from countries which have
themselves suffered from terrorism and continue to do
so.
Ignoring the leaders of terror will not make terror
go away and sends a dangerous message worldwide. I
would also like to ask those Council members which
were recently victims of horrendous terror the
following question: If you knew, before the bloody
massacre of your citizens, who was going to carry out
that horrendous act, would you have sat still and let it
happen?
Sheikh Yassin stood at the head of an
organization that was committed to destroying Israel
and to destroying the road map and every other peace
initiative through the cold-blooded murder of innocent
civilians. He was the head of an organization that has
been recognized and declared as a terrorist organization
by most of the world’s freedom-loving countries,
including the whole of the European Union. In fact, it
has been recognized as such in most parts of the world,
with the exception of this Chamber.

S/PV.4934

The Security Council, which has endorsed the
road map and is charged with the maintenance of
international peace and with pursuing the global war on
terrorism, would have committed an unforgivable act
of hypocrisy had it come to the defence of a man
whose life’s work and legacy was the eradication of
peace, a man who was nothing less than a mass
murderer and the godfather of terrorism. We are indeed
grateful to those members of the Council that
recognized this fact and voted accordingly.
Two weeks ago, Ahmed Yassin proudly —
gloatingly — took responsibility for a double suicide
bombing at the Ashdod port, which killed 10 innocent
people. The bombers were in fact planning a megaattack targeting chemical storage tanks at the port. Had
they been successful, there would likely have been
fatalities in the multiple hundreds. I wonder whether
the reaction to Israel’s defensive operation would have
been the same had, by a cruel twist of fate, the Ashdod
attack achieved its objective. After the Ashdod attack,
the Council was silent, in the same way that it has been
silent after the hundreds of other terrorist attacks that
Yassin orchestrated and proudly claimed as his own.
Yet the sponsors of this draft resolution would have
had the Council break that silence to defend the very
man responsible for those attacks. There is simply no
way to justify this double standard.
We hope that those Council members that were
prepared to support this distorted text that was
presented to them will have the decency in the future to
support draft resolutions that focus on the kind of
horrific acts of Palestinian terrorism for which Yassin
and his co-conspirators have been responsible.
The fight against terrorism and for peace
continues. Only yesterday, we all witnessed, with
horror and disbelief, the abyss into which the
Palestinian strategy of terrorism and murder has
descended. Not for the first time, a young Palestinian
boy no older than 14 years old was used as a suicide
bomber. This proves once again, sadly, that there will
probably not be peace until the Palestinians learn to
love their children more than they hate us.
If the international community is serious about
advancing the peace process for both Israelis and
Palestinians, we must stop tolerating initiatives that
pretend that the defensive response to terrorism is
worse than terrorism itself. We cannot send the

message that terrorists will be immune and satisfy
ourselves with routine condemnations.
The Security Council has a responsibility to the
victims of terrorism and to the cause of peace. It cannot
meet that responsibility by devoting meeting after
meeting to pandering to Arab Group initiatives that
seek to demonize Israel and ignore Palestinian
obligations. The Council can only meet its
responsibility by addressing the reality that those
Palestinian terrorist organizations and the regimes and
leaders sponsoring them are the true enemies of peace.
Unless and until they are confronted and defeated,
progress towards a two-State solution under the road
map will be held hostage.
The President (spoke in French): The Permanent
Observer of Palestine has asked to speak, and I give
him the floor.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): I promise that my
further statement will be brief. Palestine, of course, is
not yet a Member of the United Nations; it is obviously
not a member of the Security Council; and it is not my
intention to defend the Council against undiplomatic
attacks — undiplomatic to say the least. However, I
feel the need to make a few quick points.
For the record, we believe that the problem with
the Security Council has never been that the Council
was anti-Israel. The real problem is that the Council
has long tolerated and allowed illegal Israeli actions; it
has tolerated and allowed foreign occupation for more
than 36 years — occupation that has been transformed
into blatant colonialism: colonizing Palestinian land,
destroying the lives of a whole people and preventing
the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including our right to exercise our
sovereignty in our State, Palestine. That has been the
problem, and nothing else.
Secondly, we object to the low-level and, I would
say, immoral attempts to link illegal Israeli practices
and policies with the international fight against
terrorism. Israel is not a passive, peaceful country that
is subject to attacks from outside. Israel is a terrible
occupying Power that has never stopped violating all
aspects of international law and international
humanitarian law in particular. Israeli policies are not
part of the battle against international terrorism; they
are part of the problem of creating terrorism.

7

S/PV.4934

Finally, we have had it, frankly, with Israel’s
actions outside this building against us. We have had it
with Israel’s statements outside this building against
the Palestinian people. But in this Chamber, it is too
much. Statements such as “the Palestinian people do
not love their children” or “the Palestinian people send
their children to die because of their hatred of Israel”
are statements that are full of racism and that reflect a
kind of attitude that should be rejected out of hand —
and I am trying to do that now.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has asked to speak, and I give
him the floor.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I am sorry that I have to
take the floor again, but I must say that I am somewhat
dismayed, bewildered and shocked by the audacity of
an entity that has given the world aeroplane hijackings
and hostage kidnappings — and that, in fact, invented
suicide bombings — trying to give us a lesson in
democracy, human rights, international law and law
and order.

8

There is a very clear connection between
Palestinian terror and international terror. Terror is
terror. There is no difference between Palestinian terror
and international terror, as there is no difference
between Hamas and Al Qaeda. Therefore, I think that
the Members of the United Nations and the members of
the Security Council should realize, sadly, that until the
Palestinians realize that they are on the wrong side of
the fight against terrorism and decide to choose the
path of peace and reconciliation — as has been offered
to them by Israel time and time again and as has been
rejected by them time and time again — they will,
sadly, probably not be Member of the United Nations
for a long time to come.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
