S/PV.8233

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8233rd meeting

Saturday, 14 April 2018, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10891 (E)
*1810891*

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I have been following
closely the reports of air strikes in Syria conducted by
the United States, France and United Kingdom. Last
night at 10 p.m. New York time, the United States
President announced the beginning of air strikes with
the participation of France and the United Kingdom,
indicating they were targeting the chemical-weapons
capabilities of the Syrian Government to deter
their future use. The statement was followed by
announcements from Prime Minister May and
President Macron.
The air strikes were reportedly limited to three
military locations inside Syria. The first targets
included the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research
Centre at Al-Mazzah airport in Damascus, the second
an alleged chemical-weapons storage facility west
of Homs and the third an alleged chemical-weapons
equipment storage site and command post, also near
Homs. The Syrian Government announced surface-toair missile responsive activity. Both United States
and Russian sources indicated there were no civilian
casualties. However, the United Nations is unable to
independently verify the details of all those reports.
As Secretary-General of the United Nations, it
is my duty to remind Member States that there is an
obligation, particularly when dealing with matters of
peace and security, to act consistently with the Charter
of the United Nations, and with international law in
general. The Charter is very clear on these issues.
2/26

14/04/2018

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
I call on the members of the Security Council to unite
and exercise that responsibility, and I urge all members
to show restraint in these dangerous circumstances and
to avoid any act that could escalate matters and worsen
the suffering of the Syrian people. As I did yesterday
(see S/PV.8231), I stress the importance of preventing
the situation from spiralling out of control.
Any use of chemical weapons is abhorrent, and
the suffering it causes is horrendous. I have repeatedly
expressed my deep disappointment that the Security
Council has failed to agree on a dedicated mechanism
for ensuring effective accountability for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. I urge the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities and fill that gap, and I
will continue to engage with Member States to help
to achieve that objective. A lack of accountability
emboldens those who use such weapons by providing
them with the reassurance of impunity, and that in
turn further weakens the norm proscribing the use
of chemical weapons, as well as undermining the
international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture as a whole.
The seriousness of the recent allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Douma requires a thorough
investigation using impartial, independent and
professional expertise. I reaffirm my full support for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and its Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic in undertaking the required investigation.
The team is already in Syria. I am informed that its
operations plan for visiting the site is complete and that
the Mission is ready to go. I am confident it will have
full access, without any restrictions or impediments to
its performance of its activities.
To repeat what I said yesterday, Syria represents the
most serious threat to international peace and security
in the world today. In Syria we see confrontations
and proxy wars involving several national armies, a
number of armed opposition groups, many national and
international militias, foreign fighters from all over
the world and various terrorist organizations. From the
beginning, we have witnessed systematic violations of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international law in general, in utter
disregard of the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations. For eight long years, the people of Syria
have endured suffering upon suffering. They have lived
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

through a litany of horrors, atrocity crimes, sieges,
starvation, indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure, the use of chemical weapons,
forced displacement, sexual violence, torture, detention
and enforced disappearances. The list goes on.
At this critical juncture, I call on all States
Members to act consistently with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, including the
norms against chemical weapons. If the law is ignored,
it is undermined. There can be no military solution
to the crisis. The solution must be political, and we
must find ways to make real progress towards a
genuine and credible political solution that meets the
aspirations of the Syrian people to dignity and freedom,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). I have asked
my Special Envoy to come to New York as soon as
possible to consult with me on the most effective way
to accelerate the political process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his valuable briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia has called this emergency meeting of
the Security Council to discuss the aggressive actions
of the United States and its allies against Syria. This is
now our fifth meeting on the subject in a week.
President Putin of the Russian Federation made a
special statement today.
“On 14 April, the United States, with the support
of its allies, launched an air strike on military and
civilian infrastructure targets in the Syrian Arab
Republic. An act of aggression against a sovereign
State on the front lines in the fight against
terrorism was committed without permission from
the Security Council and in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms and principles
of international law. Just as it did a year ago, when
it attacked Syria’s Al-Shayrat airbase in Syria, the
United States took a staged use of toxic substances
against civilians as a pretext, this time in Douma,
outside Damascus. Having visited the site of the
alleged incident, Russian military experts found
no traces of chlorine or any other toxic agent. Not
a single local resident could confirm that such an
attack had occurred.

S/PV. 8233

“The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has sent experts to
Syria to investigate all the circumstances. However,
a group of Western countries cynically ignored this
and took military action without waiting for the
results of the investigation.
“Russia vehemently condemns this attack on
Syria, where Russian military personnel are helping
the legitimate Government to combat terrorism.
“The actions of the United States are making
the already catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Syria even worse, inflicting suffering on civilians,
for all intents and purposes enabling the terrorists
who have been tormenting the Syrian people for
seven years, and producing yet another wave
of refugees fleeing the country and the region
in general. The current escalation of the Syrian
situation is having a destructive effect on the entire
system of international relations. History will
have the last word, and it has already revealed the
heavy responsibility that Washington bears for the
carnage in Yugoslavia, Iraq and Libya.”
Russia has done everything it could to persuade the
United States and its allies to abandon their militaristic
plans threatening a new round of violence in Syria and
destabilization in the Middle East. Today, and at the
Council meeting we called yesterday (see S/PV.8231),
the Secretary-General expressed his concern about how
events are developing. Washington, London and Paris,
however, preferred to let the calls for sanity go unheard.
The United States and its allies continue to
demonstrate a flagrant disregard for international law,
although as permanent members of the Security Council
they have a special duty to uphold the provisions of
the Charter. It was a disgrace to hear an article of the
United States Constitution cited as justification of
this aggression. We respect the right of every State to
honour its own fundamental law. But it is high time that
Washington learned that it is the Charter of the United
Nations that governs the international code of conduct
on the use of force. It will be interesting to see how the
peoples of Great Britain and France react to the fact
that their leaders are participating in unlawful military
ventures that invoke the United States Constitution.
These three countries constantly lean towards
neocolonialism. They scorn the Charter and the Security
Council, which they attempt, shamelessly, to use for
their own unscrupulous purposes. They do no serious

18-108913/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

14/04/2018

work in the Council. They refuse to consult with us,
while falsely assuring everyone of the opposite. They
are undermining the Council’s authority.

are their clients. This was backed up by mythical
secret intelligence. Their masks — or rather the White
Helmets — have come off once again.

The alleged use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
city of Douma has been cited as the excuse for this
aggression. After an inspection by our specialists,
Russia’s representatives stated unequivocally that no
such incident took place. Moreover, people were found
to have taken part in staging the incident, which was
inspired and organized by foreign intelligence services.

We have become accustomed to the fact that their
efforts to achieve their dubious geopolitical aims,
the aggressor countries deliberately blame the socalled Assad regime for every evil. There has been a
trend recently to shift the blame onto Russia, which,
as they tell it, has been unable to restrain Syria’s socalled dictator. All of this goes according to a triedand-true formula, whereby a provocation results in a
false accusation, which results in a false verdict, which
results in punishment. Is that how these people want
to conduct international affairs? This is hooliganism
in international relations, and not on a petty scale,
given that we are talking about the actions of key
nuclear Powers.

After the matter emerged, the Syrian authorities
immediately invited experts from the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to try to
establish all the circumstances through a field mission
to Douma. The visa formalities were dealt with quickly
and security guarantees given. As the air strikes began,
the specialists were already in Syria and preparing to
begin their work.
I would like to remind Council members and
everyone else that on 10 April (see S/PV.8228), when
our draft resolution (S/2018/322) on ensuring the
security of the work of the OPCW’s special mission was
blocked, we were assured that there was no need for
such a document. They said that no additional effort on
the part of the Security Council was necessary to ensure
that the mission could reach Douma and conduct an
investigation of the chemical incident. Now, however,
we can see that we were absolutely right.
Yesterday, some of our colleagues — some out of
naivety and others out of cynicism — told us that this
situation had allegedly arisen owing to the lack of an
independent investigative mechanism. The aggression
today has shown, as we said, that this had nothing
whatever to do with it. The OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mission (JIM) was in place during
last year’s attack on the Al-Shayrat airbase, but that
did not stop the United States from launching a missile
attack. After that, the JIM spent six months tailoring
its conclusions to justify the strike. We have said over
and over again that they do not need any investigations.
They did not need them then and they do not need them
now. The organizers of the aggression did not even wait
for the international organization that is authorized to
establish the basic facts to do so. Apparently they had
established and instantly identified the perpetrators,
after disseminating rumours about them through
social networks with the help of the militias they
sponsor and the non-governmental organizations that
4/26

Several missiles were aimed at the research centre
facilities in Barzeh and Jamraya. There have been two
recent OPCW inspections there with unrestricted access
to their entire premises. The specialists found no trace of
activities that would contravene the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Syria’s scientific research institutions are
used for strictly peaceful activities aimed at improving
the efficiency of the national economy. Do they want
Syria to have no national economy left at all? Do they
want to kick this country — only a few years ago one
of the most developed in the Middle East — back into
the Stone Age? Do they want to finish whatever their
sanctions have not yet accomplished? And yet they still
contrive false breast-beating about the sufferings of
ordinary Syrians. But they have no interest in ordinary
Syrians, who are sick of war and glad about the
restoration of the legitimate authorities in the liberated
territories. Their aggressive actions merely worsen the
humanitarian situation that they claim to care about
so deeply. They could end the conflict in Syria in the
space of 24 hours. All that is needed is for Washington,
London and Paris to give the order to their tame
terrorists to stop fighting the legitimate authorities and
their own people.
The attacks were aimed at Syrian military
airfields that are used for operations against terrorist
organizations, a highly original contribution to
the fight against international terrorism, which, as
Washington never tires of saying, is the sole reason
for its military presence in Syria, something that we
are extremely doubtful about. Rather, it is becoming
increasingly clear that those in the West who hide
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

behind humanitarian rhetoric and try to justify their
military presence in Syria based on the need to defeat
the jihadists are in fact acting in concert with them
to dismember the country, a design confirmed by the
categorical refusal of the United States and its allies to
assist in the restoration of the areas of Syria that have
been liberated by Government forces.
Their aggression is a powerful blow and a threat to
the prospects for continuing the political process under
the auspices of the United Nations, which, despite the
real difficulties, is moving forward, albeit at varying
speed. Why do they bother endlessly pinning all their
hopes on the Geneva process when they themselves are
driving it straight towards yet another crisis? We urge
the United States and its allies to immediately halt their
acts of aggression against Syria and refrain from them
going forward.
We have proposed a brief draft resolution for the
Council’s attention on which we request that a vote
be held at the end of this meeting. We appeal to the
members of the Security Council. Now is not the time
to evade responsibility. The world is watching. Stand
up for our principles.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today.
This is the fifth Security Council meeting in the
past week in which we have addressed the situation in
Syria. A week has gone by in which we have talked. We
have talked about the victims in Douma. We have talked
about the Al-Assad regime and its patrons, Russia and
Iran. We have spent a week talking about the unique
horror of chemical weapons. The time for talk ended
last night. We are here today because three permanent
members of the Security Council acted. The United
Kingdom, France, and the United States acted not in
revenge, not in punishment and not in a symbolic show
of force. We acted to deter the future use of chemical
weapons by holding the Syrian regime responsible for
its crimes against humanity.
We can all see that a Russian disinformation
campaign is in full force this morning, but Russia’s
desperate attempts at deflection cannot change the
facts. A large body of information indicates that the
Syrian regime used chemical weapons in Douma on
7 April. There is clear information demonstrating
Al-Assad’s culpability. The pictures of dead children
were not fake news; they were the result of the Syrian
regime’s barbaric inhumanity. And they were the result

S/PV. 8233

of the regime’s and Russia’s failure to live up to their
international commitments to remove all chemical
weapons from Syria. The United States, France and the
United Kingdom acted after careful evaluation of those
facts. The targets we selected were at the heart of the
Syrian regime’s illegal chemical-weapon programme.
The strikes were carefully planned to minimize civilian
casualties. The responses were justified, legitimate
and proportionate. The United States and its allies did
everything they could to use the tools of diplomacy to
get rid of Al-Assad’s arsenal of chemical weapons.
We did not give diplomacy just one chance. We
gave it chance after chance. Six times. That is how
many times Russia vetoed Security Council resolutions
to address chemical weapons in Syria. Our efforts
go back even further. In 2013, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013), requiring the Al-Assad
regime to destroy its stockpile of chemical weapons.
Syria committed to abiding by the Chemical Weapons
Convention, meaning that it could no longer have
chemical weapons on its soil. President Putin said that
Russia would guarantee that Syria complied. We hoped
that this diplomacy would succeed in putting an end to
the horror of chemical attacks in Syria, but as we have
seen from the past year, that did not happen.
While Russia was busy protecting the regime,
Al-Assad took notice. The regime knew that it could
act with impunity, and it did. In November, Russia used
its veto to kill the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, the main tool we had to figure out who
used chemical weapons in Syria. Just as Russia was
using its veto (see S/PV.8107), the Al-Assad regime
used sarin, leading to dozens of injuries and deaths.
Russia’s veto was the green light for the Al-Assad
regime to use these most barbaric weapons against the
Syrian people, in complete violation of international
law. The United States and our allies were not going to
let that stand. Chemical weapons are a threat to us all.
They are a unique threat — a type of weapon so evil
that the international community agreed that they must
be banned.
We cannot stand by and let Russia trash every
international norm that we stand for, and allow the
use of chemical weapons to go unanswered. Just as the
Syrian regime’s use of chemical weapons last weekend
was not an isolated incident, our response is part of
a new course charted last year to deter future use of
chemical weapons. Our Syrian strategy has not changed.

18-108915/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

However, the Syrian regime has forced us to take action
based on its repeated use of chemical weapons.
Since the April 2017 chemical attack at Khan
Shaykhoun, the United States has imposed hundreds
of sanctions on individuals and entities involved in
chemical-weapons use in Syria and North Korea.
We have designated entities in Asia, the Middle East
and Africa that have facilitated chemical-weapons
proliferation. We have revoked the visas of Russian
intelligence officers in response to the chemical attack
in Salisbury. We will continue to seek out and call out
anyone who uses and anyone who aids in the use of
chemical weapons.
With yesterday’s military action, our message was
crystal clear. The United States of America will not
allow the Al-Assad regime to continue to use chemical
weapons. Last night, we obliterated the major research
facility that it used to assemble weapons of mass
murder. I spoke to the President this morning, and he
said that if the Syrian regime should use this poison gas
again, the United States is locked and loaded. When
our President draws a red line, our President enforces
the red line.
The United States is deeply grateful to the United
Kingdom and France for their part in the coalition
to defend the prohibition of chemical weapons. We
worked in lock step; we were in complete agreement.
Last night, our great friends and indispensable allies
shouldered a burden that benefits all of us. The civilized
world owes them its thanks. In the weeks and months to
come, the Security Council should take time to reflect
on its role in defending the international rule of law.
The Security Council has failed in its duty to hold those
who use chemical weapons to account. That failure is
largely due to Russian obstruction. We call on Russia to
take a hard look at the company it keeps, live up to its
responsibilities as a permanent member of the Council,
and defend the actual principles the United Nations was
meant to promote.
Last night, we successfully hit the heart of Syria’s
chemical weapons enterprise, and because of these
actions we are confident that we have crippled Syria’s
chemical weapons programme. We are prepared to
sustain this pressure if the Syrian regime is foolish
enough to test our will.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): These are uncertain
times and today we deal with exceptional circumstance.
Acting with our American and French allies, in the early
6/26

14/04/2018

hours of this morning the United Kingdom conducted
coordinated, targeted and precise strikes to degrade
Al-Assad’s chemical weapons capability and deter their
future use. The British Royal Air Force launched Storm
Shadow missiles at a military facility some 15 miles
west of Homs, where the regime is assessed to keep
chemical weapons in breach of Syria’s obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention. A full assessment
has not yet been completed, but we believe that the
strikes to have been successful. Furthermore, none of
the British, United States or French aircraft or missiles
involved in this operation were successfully engaged by
Syrian air defences, and there is also no indication that
Russian air defence systems were employed.
Our action was a limited, targeted and effective
strike. There were clear boundaries that expressly
sought to avoid escalation, and we did everything
possible, including rigorous planning, before any
action was undertaken to ensure that we mitigated and
minimized the impact on civilians. Together, our action
will significantly degrade the Syrian regime’s ability
to research, develop and deploy chemical weapons and
deter their future use.
The United Kingdom Prime Minister has said that
we are clear about who is responsible for the atrocity
of the use of chemical weapons. A significant body of
information, including intelligence, indicates that the
Syrian regime is responsible for the attack we saw last
Saturday. Some of the evidence that leads us to this
conclusion is as follows.
There are open source accounts alleging that a
barrel bomb was used to deliver the chemicals. Multiple
open source reports claim that a regime helicopter was
observed above the city of Douma on the evening of
7 April. The opposition does not operate helicopters or
use barrel bombs. And reliable intelligence indicates
that Syrian military officials coordinated what appears
to be the use of chlorine in Douma on 7 April. No other
group could have carried out this attack. Indeed, Da’esh,
for example, does not even have a presence in Douma.
The Syrian regime has been killing its own people
for seven years. Its use of chemical weapons, which
has exacerbated the human suffering, is a serious
crime of international concern as a breach of the
customary international law prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons, and that amounts to a war crime
and a crime against humanity. Any State is permitted
under international law, on an exceptional basis, to
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

take measures in order to alleviate overwhelming
humanitarian suffering. The legal basis for the use
of force for the United Kingdom is humanitarian
intervention, which requires that three conditions to
be met.
First, there must be convincing evidence, generally
accepted by the international community as a whole,
of extreme humanitarian distress on a large scale,
requiring immediate and urgent relief. I think that the
debates in the Council and the briefings we have had
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and others have proved that. Secondly, it must be
objectively clear that there is no practicable alternative
to the use of force if lives are to be saved. I think that
the vetoes have shown us that. Thirdly, the proposed
use of force must be necessary and proportionate to
the aim of relief of humanitarian suffering. It must be
strictly limited in time and in scope to this aim. I think
we have heard both in my intervention in Ambassador
Haley’s how that has also been met.
The history of the Syrian conflict is a litany of
threats to peace and violations of international law.
The Security Council has met 113 times since the
Syrian war started. It was therefore not for want of
international diplomatic effort that we find ourselves in
this position today.
After a pattern of chemical-weapons use since
the outbreak of the conflict, Al-Assad defied the
international community in 2013 by launching a sarin
gas attack on eastern Ghouta, which left more than 800
people dead. Despite the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013) and despite four years of patient engagement,
Syria continues to use chemical weapons against its
people and has failed to answer a long list of serious
questions. The only conclusion we can reach is that
Syria has not declared or destroyed all of its chemical
weapons, despite its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention. This is not assertion on our
part but a matter of record, and I draw the Russian
Ambassador’s attention to his points about Barazan
and Jimrya. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) still has unanswered
questions and discrepancies. He knows this. We all
know this. The Council was briefed by the OPCW
Director-General.
Resolution 2118 (2013) decides in the event of
non-compliance to impose measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter. Yet on 28 February 2017, when

S/PV. 8233

the United Kingdom together with France, proposed
a draft resolution (S/2017/172) taking measures under
Chapter VII short of the use of force, Russia vetoed (see
S/PV.7893). The very least the Security Council should
have been able to do was to follow up on the findings
of the report of the Joint Investigative Mechanism by
extending its mandate. Yet four times Russia vetoed
different proposals from different Council Members to
do just that.
The Syrian regime and it supporters are responsible
for the gravest violations of international humanitarian
law in modern history. They have used indiscriminate
weapons, notably barrel bombs and cluster munitions,
against civilians, and they have deliberately targeted
medical facilities and schools, as well as humanitarian
personnel and civilian objects. They have used sieges
and starvation as methods of warfare, accompanied by
attacks on opposition-held civilian areas. The regime
has persistently obstructed humanitarian aid and
medical evacuations. Tens of thousands of people have
been illegally detained, tortured and executed by the
regime. This is one of the most serious challenges to
the international non-proliferation regime we have ever
faced. A State party has violated the Chemical Weapons
Convention, it has defied the Security Council, and it
has broken international law.
Repeated attempts over several years to hold them
to account have been met with Russian obstruction and
resistance. In the Security Council, we have repeatedly
attempted to overcome this obstruction without success.
We are faced with a litany of violations, no sense of
guilt, no sense of regret, no sense of responsibility, a
shameful record, wrapped in a mix of denial, deceit
and disinformation.
I would invite those like the Russian Ambassador
who speak about the Charter to consider the following.
It is hard to believe that it is in line with the principles
and purposes of the Charter to use or condone the use of
chemical weapons, and in the United Kingdom’s view
it cannot be illegal to use force to prevent the killing of
such numbers of innocent people. I will take no lessons
in international law from Russia.
Despite all the foregoing, we would like to look
forward. The United Kingdom, together with France and
the United States, will continue to pursue a diplomatic
resolution to the Syrian crisis. My French colleague
will say more about our work in a few moments. We
believe that it must comprise four elements.

18-108917/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

First, Syria’s chemical weapons programme
must be ended and the chemical weapons stockpiles
destroyed once and for all. Secondly, there must be an
immediate cessation of hostilities and compliance with
all Security Council resolutions, including those that
mandate humanitarian access. Thirdly, the regime must
return to the Geneva talks and agree to engage on the
substantial agenda put forward by the United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Fourthly and finally,
there must be accountability for the use of chemical
weapons and other war crimes in Syria.
The Secretary-General rightly highlighted the
political process. We propose that, as we members of
the Security Council will all be together next weekend
in the retreat with the Secretary-General very kindly
hosted by Sweden, we use that opportunity to reflect
on next steps and the way back to the political process.
And with our allies, we stand ready to work with all
members of the Security Council towards this end.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): A week
after the chemical massacre in Douma and a day after
last night’s strikes, I want to say again straight away to
those who pretend to wonder that France has no doubt
whatsoever about the responsibility of the Al-Assad
regime in this attack. This morning we made public
a notice comprising information collected by our
intelligence services. We dismiss those who try once
again to challenge what is obvious and to disguise the
facts before the world.
For years now, Bashar Al-Assad, with the active
support of his allies, has been devising a strategy of
destruction designed to crush any opposition with
contempt for the most basic principles of humanity
and at the cost of the lives of hundreds of thousands
of civilians in Syria. We saw it in Aleppo, in Homs, in
eastern Ghouta. For years, the Syrian regime has used
the most terrifying weapons of destruction — chemical
weapons — to massacre and terrorize its civilian
population. We had another demonstration of this in
Douma, as we had seen before in Khan Shaykhun,
Sarmin, Telemens and Qaminas, where its responsibility
was clearly established by the Joint Investigative
Mechanism of the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). No
one can say he or she did not know.
For years, the Syrian regime has systematically
and repeatedly violated all its international obligations.
The list of such violations is long; it is overwhelming.
8/26

14/04/2018

We all know them: violations of all international
chemical-weapons obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention, to which Syria has been a party
since 2013, and the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which
prohibits the use of such weapons against civilians;
violations of the very foundations of international
humanitarian law, namely, the principles of distinction,
precaution and proportionality; violations of successive
Security Council resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209
(2015) and 2235 (2015) and, by the same token, of its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations;
finally, the use of chemical weapons against civilian
populations constitutes a war crime within the meaning
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court. In
August 2013, the Secretary-General even described the
use of chemical weapons as a crime against humanity.
In view of the repeated and proven violations by the
Damascus regime of all the rules on which our security
is based, France has consistently called for strong action
by the international community. We have made every
effort to ensure that these horrors do not remain without
consequences at the United Nations and the OPCW
and that they are stopped. The Security Council had
undertaken by successive resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209
(2015) and 2235 (2015) to impose coercive measures
within the meaning of Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations in the event of new violations. It
has been prevented from acting in conformity with
its commitments because of the vetoes systematically
used by Russia. By making such systematic use of its
veto in the Security Council, Russia has betrayed the
commitment it made to the Council in 2013 to ensure
the destruction of the Syrian chemical arsenal. The
Security Council’s blockade of the mass atrocities
committed in Syria is a deadly and dangerous trap from
which we must escape.
When it ordered the 7 April chemical attack, the
Syrian regime knew exactly to what it was exposing
itself. It wanted to once again test the international
community’s threshold of tolerance and it found it. In
the face of this attack on the principles, values and rights
that are the basis of United Nations action, silence is no
longer a solution. We cannot tolerate the downplaying
of the use of chemical weapons, which is an immediate
danger to the Syrian people and to our collective
security. We cannot let the deadly genie of proliferation
out of its bottle. We had clearly warned Al-Assad’s
regime and its supporters that such a transgression
would not remain without reaction. We have acted in
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

accordance with our role and responsibility. We have
done so in a controlled, transparent framework, taking
care to avoid any escalation with the actors present
on the ground. The President of the Republic and the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of France have spoken on
this subject.
Some who for years have flouted the most
elementary rules of international law now assert that
our action is contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations. I would remind them that the Charter was
not designed to protect criminals. Our action is fully
in line with the objectives and values proclaimed from
the outset by the Charter of the United Nations. The
Organization’s mission is “to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law can
be maintained”. This action was indeed necessary in
order to address the repeated violations by the Syrian
regime of its obligations — obligations stemming from
the law, treaties and its own commitments.
Finally, our response was conceived within an
proportionate framework, with precise objectives.
The main research centre of the chemical weapons
programme and two major production sites were hit.
Through those objectives, Syria’s capacity to develop,
perfect and produce chemical weapons has been put out
of commission. That was the only objective, and it has
been achieved.
My country, which knew at first hand the devastating
effects of chemical weapons during the First World
War, will never again allow impunity for their use.
We will never stop identifying those responsible, who
must be brought to justice. That is the purpose of the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons, which we launched last January.
Allow me to stress this point: last night’s strikes
are a necessary response to the chemical massacres in
Syria. They are a response in the service of law and our
political strategy to put an end to the Syrian tragedy.
To be more specific, we have four imperatives on
the Syrian issue that are in the immediate interest of
Syrians, but also in the interest of the entire international
community, as the Secretary-General reminded us, and
I want to thank him for his briefing. Let me recall those
four imperatives.
First, the Syrian chemical-weapons programme
must be dismantled in a verifiable and irreversible way.
We must spare no effort to establish an international

S/PV. 8233

mechanism for establishing responsibility, to prevent
impunity and to prevent any repeat attempts to the
Syrian regime to use chemical.
Secondly, terrorism must be eradicated by
permanently defeating Da’esh. That is a long-standing
commitment that still requires genuine effort to ensure
a definitive victory.
Thirdly, there must be a ceasefire throughout
the Syrian territory and humanitarian access to the
civilian populations, as required by Security Council
resolutions. We need full and unhindered humanitarian
access in order to help people in need, in accordance
with resolution 2401 (2018). In particular, it is essential
and urgent that humanitarian convoys safely reach
eastern Ghouta on a daily basis.
Fourthly, we need a crisis-exit strategy, with a
lasting political solution. We can sustainably resolve the
Syrian crisis only through an inclusive political solution
on the basis of the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). We have been calling for that for seven
years. It has never been so urgent to implement it and
to relaunch genuine negotiations under the auspices of
the United Nations with a view to achieving a political
transition in Syria.
Only that road map will allow us to finally emerge
from the Syrian impasse. France is ready to tackle it,
as of today, with all those who are ready to put all their
efforts to that end. In that spirit, at the initiative of
France and in line with President Emmanuel Macron’s
statement tonight, we will submit as soon as possible
a draft resolution on those different aspects with our
British and American partners.
Today I ask Russia, first and foremost, to call on the
Damascus regime to enter into a plan for a negotiated
solution so that the long-lasting suffering of Syrian
civilians can finally be brought to an end.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Just yesterday we were gathered in this Chamber for
a meeting on the situation in Syria, during which China
made clear its position on the issue of Syria, expressed
profound concern about the further escalation of the
tensions in Syria and made a clarion call for a political
solution to the issue of Syria (see S/PV.8231). I would
like to restate the following.

18-108919/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

China has consistently stood for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and against the use of force
in international relations. We advocate respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of all countries. Any unilateral military
actions that circumvent the Security Council contravene
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, violate the basic norms enshrined in
international law and those governing international
relations, and would hamper the settlement of the
Syrian issue with new compounding factors. We urge
all the parties concerned to refrain from any actions
that may lead to a further escalation of the situation,
to return to the framework of international law and to
resolve the issue through dialogue and consultation.
China believes a comprehensive, impartial
and objective investigation of the suspected
chemical-weapons attack in Syria is necessary in order
to arrive at a reliable conclusion that can withstand
the test of history. Until that happens, no party must
prejudge the outcome.
There is no alternative to a political settlement in
resolving the Syrian issue. The parties concerned in the
international community should continue to support
the role of the United Nations as the main mediator and
should work together unremittingly towards a political
settlement of the Syrian issue.
I would like to restate that China stands ready to
continue its positive and constructive role in the efforts
to achieve a political settlement of the Syrian issue in
the interests of peace and stability in the Middle East
and in the world at large.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan expresses
its serious concern about the sharp escalation of the
situation in Syria. We call on all parties to prevent
further military escalation and take effective steps
aimed at restoring confidence and establishing peace
and ensuring security in the long-suffering land of
Syria on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
We called yesterday and the day before yesterday,
and every time when we have observed increasing
tensions, in this Chamber for responsible action in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. Who else, if not Council members,
should show the world an example of compliance with
the principles and provisions of the Charter?
10/26

14/04/2018

We are telling others to strictly follow international
law and order, but sadly, yesterday we witnessed
a different example. Whatever action taken under
whatever good pretext cannot and will not justify the
military use of force. Violence carried out against
violence will never bring about peace and stability.
Kazakhstan’s position has always been, and continues
to be, that military action is the last resort, to be used
only in cases approved by the Security Council. There
was no approval by the Council of the military strikes
that took place yesterday.
“Humanity hoped that the twenty-first century
would herald a new era of global cooperation. This,
however, may turn out to be a mirage. Our world
is once again in danger and the risks cannot be
underestimated... The threat is a deadly war on a
global scale... Our planet is now on the edge of a new
cold war that could have devastating consequences
for all humankind.” (S/2016/317, annex, p.2)
That is an exact quote from the manifesto of my
President, entitled “The World. The Twenty-First
Century”, of 31 March 2016. Just yesterday SecretaryGeneral António Guterres confirmed, to our regret, that
the Cold War is back with a vengeance (see S/PV.8231).
Kazakhstan appeals to the parties to adhere to both
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. We think that the time has come for serious
talks encouraging the United States and the Russian
Federation, given their standing as the co-Chairs
of the International Syria Support Group and their
respective influence on the parties, to move actively in
the direction of finding middle ground and a political
settlement to the conflict in Syria. The United Nations
has a vital role to play in convening those negotiations
and helping the parties resolve their disputes.
My delegation is also extremely concerned
about recent developments and the lack of unity
among Security Council members with regard to
the chemical attack in Syria. From its early days of
independence, through a series of practical steps,
Kazakhstan has consistently promoted peace initiatives
in the international arena to achieve disarmament,
non-proliferation and the prohibition of weapons of
mass destruction, including chemical weapons, and
strongly condemns their development, testing and use.
I repeat: Kazakhstan strongly condemns the use of
chemical weapons.
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

It is important to conduct a thorough, objective
and impartial investigation into all aspects of the
alleged chemical attack in Douma so as to enable the
international community to render a fair verdict against
the perpetrators, in full compliance with international
law. The Government and other parties must thoroughly
execute their obligations to comply with the relevant
recommendations made by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations by accepting designated personnel, while
providing for and ensuring the security of the activities
undertaken by such personnel.
We would like to remind the members of the
Council that Kazakhstan’s principled position is not
only to condemn in the strongest terms the use of
weapons of mass destruction by anyone, in particular
against the civilian population, but also to resolve
conflicts exclusively by peaceful means. President
Nazarbayev stressed in his manifesto that the main tools
for resolving disputes among States should be peaceful
dialogue and constructive negotiations on the basis
of equal responsibility for peace and security, mutual
respect and non-inference in the domestic affairs of
other States. Preventing the escalation of conflict and
ending wars are the most challenging tasks; there are no
other reasonable options. World leaders must treat such
tasks as the highest priority on the global agenda. We
must also respect the sovereignty of States Members
of the United Nations and the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter.

S/PV. 8233

under the auspices of the United Nations Office
in Geneva.
We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, achieving their
aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support
to contain the negative impact of spoilers and to help
Syrians combat terrorism and build their State on a firm
and stable foundation. Kazakhstan has always stood for
dialogue and the resolution of international conflicts.
All parties must ensure that the situation does not
further deteriorate. Military means will not work; only
political solutions will succeed. My President warned
that there will be no winners in any modern war, as
everyone will be on the losing side. He proposed to
work towards the total elimination of war and a world
without conflict.
Finally, we again call upon all relevant parties to
persist in diplomatic efforts, seek political solutions,
engage in dialogue and support the United Nations as
the main mediation channel. Kazakhstan is ready to
work with all colleagues to preserve peace and security
on the basis of mutual understanding, goodwill and
determination to make the world a safer place.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

We urgently need a political solution. Only a political,
diplomatic approach, dialogue and confidence-building
measures in the spirit of the Charter and Security
Council documents on preventive diplomacy and
sustaining peace can bring about proper results. We
therefore call upon the international community to
show political will to overcome differences and resume
negotiations, in the belief that only a United Nationsled political transition in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) can end the Syrian conflict, which, in turn,
can advance only if the Council is united.

Poland views the recent events in the context of
repeated chemical-weapons attacks against Syria’s
civilian population as a consequence of the impunity
enjoyed by the perpetrators so far. The lack of an
appropriate response encourages a greater number of
attacks with the use of weapons that are both banned
under international law and blatantly inhumane. In
such circumstances the international community
cannot remain passive. It should take all the necessary
measures to prevent such attacks from being repeated
in the future, in particular against a defenceless
civilian population. At the same time, the competent
international bodies should take decisions that will
enable the perpetrators to be identified and brought
to justice.

There is great need to continue to support the aims
of the Astana talks and further the Geneva negotiations
in order to see positive results. All parties at the
international, regional and Syrian levels should support
an immediate ceasefire and seriously and objectively
move forward without any preconditions within the
framework of the International Syria Support Group,

We fully understand the reasons behind the action
taken last night by the United States, the United
Kingdom and France against Syrian chemical-weapons
capabilities. We support that action, as it is intended
to deter chemical-weapons attacks against the people
of Syria. Let me underline that it is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council to set up an

18-1089111/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

investigative mechanism to examine the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. In that context, we reiterate our
disappointment with the politically motivated Russian
veto on the proposal for establishing an independent,
impartial investigative mechanism on the use of
chemical weapons in Syria.
Poland will continue its international efforts aimed
at the complete elimination of chemical weapons. The
use of such weapons is unacceptable and should be
prosecuted vigorously in every instance and location in
which they are used. Poland calls for refraining from
actions that could escalate the situation.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s important meeting. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
The conflict in Syria is now in its eighth year. That is
longer than the Second World War. President Al-Assad
is responsible for one of the worst and most enduring
humanitarian disasters of our time. From the beginning
of the crisis, we have witnessed terrible violations and
violence and a flagrant lack of respect for international
law, in particular by Syrian Government forces. We
must also never forget the atrocities committed by
Da’esh. As the Secretary-General stated yesterday, we
have witnessed
“systematic violations of international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
law tout court — in utter disregard for the letter
and the spirit of the United Nations Charter”.
Indeed, there are numerous and flagrant violations of
Security Council resolutions, international protocols
and conventions
Chemical weapons have been used repeatedly in
Syria. The Joint Investigative Mechanism concluded
that the Syrian authorities were responsible for four
chemical-weapons attacks, and Da’esh for two. The use
of such weapons is abhorrent, intolerable, a war crime
and a crime against humanity. That is why, as has been
noted here before, the international community banned
their use in the international armed conflict more than a
century ago. Subsequent developments have confirmed
the prohibition of the use of chemical weapons as a
norm of customary international law. We will spare
no effort to end the use and proliferation of chemical
weapons by State or non-State actors anywhere in the
world. Those responsible for such crimes must be held
accountable; there can be no further impunity.
12/26

14/04/2018

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
to act in response to threats to international peace and
security. It is our joint responsibility to uphold the
prohibition on the use of chemical weapons in armed
conflict. It is our common legal and moral duty to
defend the non-proliferation regimes that we have
established and confirmed. That is best done through
true multilateralism and broad international consensus.
In that regard, we welcome the deployment of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapon’s
Fact-finding Mission to Syria and we look forward to
its findings.
It is regrettable that the Council was unable to come
together and agree on a timely, clear and unified response
to the repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
regret that Russia, again this week, blocked the Council
from setting up a truly impartial and independent
attribution mechanism. That has contributed to the
situation in which we find ourselves now. The use of
chemical weapons is a serious violation of international
law and it constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. Deterrence and prevention of their use
is the concern of the entire international community.
We therefore share the rage and anger and are appalled
by the repeated use of such weapons in Syria. It is
necessary to rid Syria of chemical weapons once and
for all, and hold those responsible accountable. At
the same time, as the Secretary-General said in his
statement yesterday, there is an obligation, particularly
when dealing with matters of peace and security, to act
consistently with the Charter of the United Nations, and
international law in general.
We are at a dangerous moment. We call for restraint
and for avoiding any acts that could escalate, or further
fuel, tensions. We need to avoid the situation spiralling
out of control. Over the past few days, we have tried to
ensure that all peaceful means to respond are exhausted.
We worked tirelessly so that no stone was left unturned
in efforts to find a way for the Council to shoulder its
responsibility in accordance with the Charter. We have
shared a proposal with Council members to achieve
that objective by inviting the Secretary-General to
come back to the Council with a proposal. In order to
be successful, diplomacy needs to be backed by clear
demands. The Secretary-General called on the Council
to take action, but regrettably the Council could not
unite. It was indeed a missed opportunity, but we stand
ready to continue those efforts.
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8233

In the light of all that has now happened, it is more
critical than ever to avoid an escalation and revert to
the track of diplomacy for a political solution in line
with resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our total
support for the United Nations-led political process,
which urgently needs to be reinvigorated, as well as
the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) for the
cessation of hostilities. Humanitarian access can wait
no longer. A sustainable political solution is the only
way to end the suffering of the Syrian people. Let us
all then rally around that objective. Let us redouble
our efforts and put an end to the long, brutal and
meaningless conflict once and for all.

not let the Syrian regime and the Russian Federation
think for a moment that we will waver in our pursuit
of full accountability for the perpetrators of past
chemical attacks. We will not settle for anything less
than an independent, impartial attribution mechanism,
so that the culprits of those heinous attacks can be
identified and held accountable. We call on the Russian
Federation to stop opposing that. The use of chemical
weapons is a serious violation of international law and
may constitute a war crime or crime against humanity.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes
that the international community must fully uphold
the standard that the use of chemical weapons is never
permissible. Impunity cannot, and will not, prevail.

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his briefing today. Both yesterday and today, he
spoke of the litany horrors that the Syrian population
has experienced in the past seven years, of which
the chemical-weapons attacks are among the most
gruesome. The world hardly needs reminding of the
unspeakable suffering that countless Syrian men,
women and children have endured. It is a suffering
that comes at the hands of Al-Assad and his allies.
The Syrian regime has left the world no doubt as to
its willingness to unleash terror on its own population.
The repeated use of chemical weapons counts as the
most cynical expression of that campaign. Just a week
ago, the world was yet again confronted with reports of
chemical-weapons use — that time in Douma.

However, should the Council continue to suffer from
the paralysis inflicted by a single permanent member,
we must not forget that the United Nations is bigger
than the Council alone. We have strong leadership at
the top of the United Nations Organization, and we have
a powerful General Assembly. Both have to consider
all instruments to advance accountability for the use
of chemical weapons. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes every option to establish an independent and
impartial mechanism, whether within the framework
of the United Nations framework or of other relevant
international organizations, as long as it results in
a mechanism that can establish who is responsible,
so that the perpetrators can subsequently be held to
account. Any new mechanism should build upon the
important work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and the ongoing Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission. It is therefore
crucial that the Mission have complete and unhindered
access to all information and sites it deems necessary to
conduct its investigations with regard to the attack with
chemical weapons in Douma last weekend.

All the while, the Russian Federation has made
clear to the world its readiness to stand by Al-Assad
every step of the way. It has blocked draft resolutions
in the Council that could have stopped the violence.
I call upon all members of the Security Council to
support a collective, meaningful response to the use of
chemical weapons. But even if the Council fails to act,
it should be clear to the world that the use of chemical
weapons is never permissible. Against the background
of past horrors and the unabated risk of recurrence,
the response by France, the United Kingdom and the
United States is understandable. The response was
measured in targeting a limited number of military
facilities that were used by the Syrian regime in the
context of its illegal chemical-weapons arsenal. The
action taken by those three countries made clear that
the use of chemical weapons is unacceptable.
Last night’s response was aimed at reducing the
capabilities to execute future chemical attacks. But do

The international norms against the use of chemical
weapons must be respected, and the Syrian people must
be relieved from the violence, hardship and injustice
that has haunted them for so long. To that end, we call
for a political solution and an immediate cessation of
violence, as agreed upon earlier by the Council, as well
as full, unhindered and immediate humanitarian access.
We reiterate our determination to achieve justice for the
victims. The need to collectively stand up for the fate of
the Syrian people is now more apparent than ever.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his presence and participation

18-1089113/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

in this meeting. Bolivia would also like to thank the
Russian Federation for its initiative in convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council. Today is a
dark day in the history of the Council. Three permanent
members have made the decision, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, to take unilateral action
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
another State Member of the Organization.
Bolivia would like to clearly and categorically
express its condemnation of the use of chemical weapons
or the use of chemical substances as weapons, as it is
unjustifiable and criminal wherever and whenever it
happens, by whomever, given it constitutes a serious
crime against international law and international
peace and security. Those responsible for committing
such terrible and criminal acts must be identified,
investigated, prosecuted and punished with the utmost
rigour. Bolivia continues to demand a transparent
and impartial investigation to determine who the
culprits are.
Aside from that topic, the purpose of this meeting
is linked to the fact that, as I stated, three permanent
members of the Council have used force in breach
of the Charter. It is impossible to combat the alleged
violation of international law by violating international
law. Bolivia is surprised by the fact that, given that, they
have a greater a greater responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the permanent
Council members bypass the United Nations when it
suits them. They advocate for multilateralism as long
as it serves their purposes and then simply discard it.
When multilateralism is no longer in their interest, it no
longer concerns them.
This is not the only case in which, sadly, unilateral
action has been used. We recall, and will not tire in
recalling, such use in Iraq in 2003 and in Libya in 2011.
Any such action must be authorized by the Security
Council under the Charter of the United Nations. All
unilateral actions run counter to international law, as
well as to the values and principles of the Charter. Bolivia
rejects the use and the threat of the use of force. Unilateral
actions not only respond to the specific interests of
those who carry them out, but are also measures that
are — allow me to use the word — imperialist. It so
happens that the empires that we mentioned earlier
consider themselves morally superior to the rest of
the world. They consider themselves exceptional and
indispensable, and therefore believe that they are above
the law and international law, but in reality the interest
14/26

14/04/2018

of those who unilaterally use force and violate the
Charter is not to advance democracy or freedom or to
combat the use of chemical weapons. Their goal is to
expand their power and domination.
What we have witnessed over the past few hours
is an attack on the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which has not begun the work that was
scheduled to begin today. A unilateral attack is an attack
on multilateral organizations, such as the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. It is an
attack on the Council and its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. It is an
attack on the Charter, and it is an attack on the entire
international community. I wonder, with regard to the
permanent members that used force just a few hours
ago, how much money have they invested in arming
and training the armed groups in Syria? What natural
resources are they after? With what moral authority
will they be able invoke the Charter in the future?
Sadly, the history of violating the purposes and
principles of the Charter is a long one. We mentioned
Libya and Iraq, which were recent cases. The unilateral
decision concerning Jerusalem also sent another
absolutely clear signal of the lack of respect for
international law. Who are the ones selling weapons to
those who are bombing civilians in Yemen? Who are
the ones who rejected the Paris Agreement on climate
change? Who are the ones who stepped away from the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration?
Who are the ones who build walls?
We nevertheless believe that it is also important
to talk about history over the long term. Above all,
we have been experiencing the consequences of the
havoc wreaked by some of the colonialist Powers and
of their disdain for international law in the Middle
East that dates back over 100 years. We are currently
reliving the same scenario in Syria, characterized by
total disregard for international law. To a certain extent,
we relived it, for example, when the United Kingdom
refused to return the sovereignty of the Malvinas
islands to Argentina or when the Chagos Archipelago
issue was not resolved. I hope that the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice concerning that
matter will be respected. In other words, we are talking
about a whole range of policies that are detrimental to
international peace and security.
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

The Permanent Representative of the United States
said that the United States, her country, has its finger
on the trigger — “locked and loaded”. Of course, we
clearly heard her words with a great deal of concern and
sadness. We know that the United States has aircraft
carriers, satellites, smart bombs and an arsenal of
nuclear weapons, and we also know that it has nothing
but scorn for international law. But we have this — we
have the purposes and principles of the Charter, and
ultimately, as history has shown time and again, those
principles will prevail.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his briefing at the beginning of this meeting.
The State of Kuwait believes in and is committed
to the Charter and principles of the United Nations,
respect for the sovereignty of States, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations confers upon the Security Council the
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, whereby it can act on behalf of Member
States to carry out that mandate. Article 25 stipulates
that the Members of the United Nations agree to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council.
What we have witnessed in the Syrian crisis is
an impasse concerning the international community’s
efforts and the flagrant violation of its resolutions. We
have followed very closely and with great concern the
dangerous developments in Syria relating to recent
military operations in response to the use by the
Syrian authorities of chemical weapons prohibited
by international law. We underscore that those
developments are the result of the impasse in the
international community’s efforts embodied by the
Security Council to reach a political settlement to the
bloody conflict in Syria, which has gone on for more
than seven years. It has led to hundreds of thousands of
casualties and millions of displaced Syrians and resulted
in the major destruction of civilian infrastructure in
several cities.
The chemical weapons issue long enjoyed a unified
approach in the Council, which condemned the use
of all chemical weapons in Syria regardless of who
uses such weapons. Moreover, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013) unanimously, imposing
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter in case of the
non-compliance of various parties with its provisions

S/PV. 8233

or the continued use in Syria of chemical weapons,
which, as we have said, are internationally banned
weapons. In order to ensure the implementation of that
resolution, in August 2015 the Security Council adopted
resolution 2235 (2015), established the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism to determine those
responsible for any crime involving the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. In fact, the Mechanism identified the
perpetrators of such crimes on several incidents.
The unfortunate divide in the positions of the
Council encouraged the parties to the crisis to continue
their violations of resolutions of international legitimacy,
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as relevant Security Council
resolutions. The most recent resolution 2401 (2018),
adopted unanimously, is another example of resolutions
being violated. It calls for the immediate cessation of
hostilities in order to allow for humanitarian access to
the besieged areas. Unfortunately, that humanitarian
resolution was not implemented, as we know. The State
of Kuwait regrets this escalation and calls on members
to overcome their differences within the Security
Council and to restore the unity of the Council so that
it can shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
We also call on members to bridge the existing
gap by establishing a new, independent, impartial
and professional mechanism to investigate the use of
any chemical weapons in Syria and to determine who
is accountable for such crimes. We reiterate our full
readiness to participate in any effort aimed at achieving
a compromise among the positions of members of the
Council so as to ensure that those who are responsible
for these crimes will be held accountable and punished,
and to preserve the non-proliferation regime.
It is certain that there is no military solution to
the Syrian crisis. Intensive efforts must be made to
spare the Syrian people further suffering. We reiterate
our principled and firm position regarding the Syrian
crisis, which is in line with the position of the League
of Arab States calling for the preservation of the unity,
sovereignty and independence of Syria; putting an end
to acts of violence and the killing; avoiding bloodshed;
saving Syrian lives; and reaching a peaceful settlement
under the auspices of the United Nations on the basis
of the 2012 Geneva First Communique, and resolution
2254 (2015), through a process of political transition

18-1089115/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

with the involvement of all Syrian parties so that the
Syrian people can achieve their legitimate aspirations.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank the
Peruvian presidency for responding quickly to the
request for the holding of this meeting, and we would
like to express our appreciation to Russia for making
the request. It would have been a serious dereliction of
duty on the part of the Council if it had failed to meet in
the light of what transpired yesterday.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and his presence today. For those of us who are elected
members of the Security Council, the responsibility is
indeed extremely heavy, to the point of being unbearable.
Let us not forget that we are here representing 193
countries, to which, like permanent members, we have
made solemn promises that are generally encapsulated
in the Charter of the United Nations. For those of us who
are members of the African Union, an organization that
for obvious historical reasons attaches huge importance
to scrupulous adherence to the principles of the
Charter, the obligation that we have to tell the truth and
to stand up and be counted for peace is also enormously
heavy — all the more so when the parties involved,
from our own national perspective, are friends.
It was only yesterday that the Secretary-General
urged Member States to act responsibility in these
dangerous circumstances and stressed the need to
avoid the serious situation from spiralling out of
control (see S/PV.8231); indeed, he repeated the
same sentiment today. We have also been repeatedly
expressing our concern that the dynamic in Syria could
lead to devastating consequences not only nationally,
but regionally and internationally. No doubt, the strike
undertaken by the three countries yesterday appears
not to have led to the situation spiralling out of control.
We do not take that lightly, even though it might be
difficult to be consoled by that fact in the light of the
potential danger we still face.
That is why we call for maximum restraint, the
exercise of wisdom and a quick return to dialogue among
the major powers that have enormous influence on the
current situation in Syria. As we stressed yesterday
and previously, it is absolutely vital to resume the
path of diplomacy. The alternative is without a doubt
catastrophic beyond our imagination. We hope that no
one wants to see that happen, but it could if we do not
act together with a huge sense of urgency to defuse the
current tension and reduce further military escalation.
16/26

14/04/2018

By no means do we overlook the genesis of this
tragedy we are facing. It has to do with the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Douma. At least, that is
what ratcheted up the tension, leading to what took
place yesterday, which is difficult to defend as being
consistent with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. But there is also one point that makes it
difficult for us to understand what took place yesterday.
The Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is arriving,
or, as just said by the Secretary-General, has already
arrived in Syria to investigate the alleged use of
chemical weapons, which is the cause of all this tension.
In the light of that, you must excuse us, Mr. President,
if we were a little perplexed. While the priority of
the time is clearly to avert the further escalation of
the latest development, we are not underestimating
the importance of ensuring accountability for any
confirmed use of chemical weapons in Syria. In that
regard, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission should be
allowed to conduct a thorough investigation to establish
the facts related to the alleged chemical weapons attack
in Douma. The sustainable way to end impunity, which
we believe is extremely important, to deter and stop
the use of chemicals as weapons is through united
and concerted action, including through an attribution
mechanism that the Council could and must set up.
That has become all the more critical now, when,
as we all know, truth is becoming very difficult to
establish. An opportunity has been created for parties
and even individuals to claim the veracity of their own
facts. We know that we are all disappointed by the
current deadlock, but that should not justify overlooking
the obligation to adhere to the principles of the Charter.
Let me conclude by referring to what the
Secretary-General said yesterday. I wanted to refer to
it again because it reflects the truth and is, therefore,
worth repeating:
“[T]he Cold War is back with a vengeance — but with
a difference. The mechanisms and the safeguards
to manage the risks of escalation that existed in the
past no longer seem to be present.” (S/PV.8231, p. 2)
That is why we must appeal to the members of the
Security Council, especially the Permanent Five, to
help create a situation where diplomacy would have the
upper hand and the primacy of politics will be our guide
for coming out of what is a troubled moment in our
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

recent history. The Geneva process and Special Envoy
de Mistura need the unqualified support of the Council.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
statement, which clearly illustrates the perspective
of the United Nations on this issue. What took place
last night was clearly not a surprise to any member of
the Security Council. It remained to establish only the
day and the time. In fact, as we said in our statement
yesterday (see S/PV.8232), we are concerned about the
rhetoric that we are hearing and where it will lead us.
It has now led us to where we feared and did not want
to go — military attacks against Syria. Yesterday in
this Chamber, Secretary-General António Guterres
spoke about the memory of the Cold War, which in
fact returned with a vengeance in the early hours of
the morning, reminding the peoples of the world of the
conflict of interests that still exists between two blocs.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has followed
with great concern the reports on the attacks carried
out by the United States, with the support of the
armed forces of France and the United Kingdom.
According to estimates, the coalition fired more than
100 cruise missiles and air-to-ground missiles from
two United States naval ships stationed in the Red Sea,
as well as from tactical warplanes that overflew the
Mediterranean and B-1B bombers from another area.
The coalition launched a coordinated attack on three
targets, which included a scientific research centre in
an area of Damascus, a facility to the west of Homs and
a command post near that facility.
While surgical and very selective, last night’s strikes
are a violation of Chapter V of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the principles and norms of international
law. It is important to recall that, according to Article
24 of the Charter, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Members of the Council must
therefore refrain from creating situations of insecurity
and instability.
The Security Council should not highlight
or disregard the fact that those strikes may have
unpredictable and potentially tragic consequences
for the Middle East by encouraging or justifying the
development of nuclear programmes in order to prevent
any further aggression. Experts of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) are
already in Douma to carry out investigations. Until

S/PV. 8233

we have reliable and irrefutable proof of the alleged
chemical attack in Douma last week, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is of the view that no aggression
can be justified. Our delegation also reiterates that, in
accordance with Article 33 of the Charter, in the case of
any dispute that is likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security, it is imperative to
seek a solution first and foremost through negotiation,
mediation or other peaceful means.
History continues to show us that military
interventions never resolves conflicts but, instead, cause
them to proliferate and to continue, causing devastation
and destruction. We must ensure that that does not
happen again in the case of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We again point out that the military intervention in
Libya in 2011 and its consequences today should be
a clear lesson to the international community. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea opposes the use of force
in international relations. We accept its use only when
it is in line with the principles of international law and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
As we have already said, in the case of Syria, it would
not bring about any substantial change in the overall
situation in the country.
We reiterate that political agreement is the only
viable way to find a lasting solution to the Syrian
problem. All the parties involved must resolve
their differences through dialogue, agreement and
consultation. That process requires the support of the
international community. The failure of diplomacy only
exacerbates the suffering of the Syrian people and is
the highest expression of the Security Council’s failure.
Equatorial Guinea continues to believe that, in
order to fully clarify the 7 April events in Douma, a
thorough, impartial and objective investigation must
be carried out in order to reach a reliable conclusion.
We urge the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic to promptly carry out an investigation
and to report to the Security Council on its conclusions
as soon as possible. We also again reiterate the urgent
need to establish, under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral, a professional, independent and transparent
investigative body to attribute responsibility for and
identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons
so that those responsible, whoever they are, are brought
to international justice. Only in that way can that thorny
issue achieve consensus and unity among the members
of the Security Council.

18-1089117/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

I conclude my statement by reiterating the
unequivocal position of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, which is that we wholeheartedly condemned
the use of chemical weapons by whomever.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): The delegation of Cote d’Ivoire would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and for his
briefing on the latest developments in Syria following
the air strikes carried out by certain members of the
Security Council during the night of Friday, 13 April.
Côte d’Ivoire requests all the actors involved in the
Syrian conflict at the various levels to show restraint
and not to further complicate the disastrous situation in
which the Syrian people find themselves. Weapons and
bombs have struck Syria too often in disregard for our
collective action towards peace.
Is it necessary to recall that, by signing the
Charter of the United Nations in 1945, the founding
Members sought to establish a new world order based
on multilateralism and its resolve to make peace a
universal common good, the maintenance of which
was entrusted to the United Nations and the Security
Council as its primary responsibility? The SecretaryGeneral has just reminded us of that. In every situation
in which the Charter of the United Nations has guided
the action of the international community, respect for
its principles has always enabled us to overcome the
most inextricable challenges, thereby preventing many
disasters for humanity.
Based on its strong conviction in the virtues of
multilateralism, my country therefore believes that
resorting to force in order to maintain international
peace and security must be authorized by the Security
Council in order to preserve its essential legal authority
and to thereby prevent any deviation or abuse. Only a
Security Council that is strong and representative of our
time will be able to mobilize all Member States of the
United Nations in support of its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security.
Côte d’Ivoire would therefore like to express its deep
concern over the inability of the Council to relaunch
the dialogue in Syria and to sideline the supporters of a
military solution.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate its unequivocal condemnation of the use
of chemical weapons, no matter who is responsible,
and we call for the establishment of a multilateral
mechanism to attribute responsibility and to bring those
18/26

14/04/2018

responsible for the use of chemical weapons to justice in
the appropriate international tribunals. In that context,
my delegation reiterates its support for the investigation
to be conducted by the Fact-finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
in order to shed light on the allegations of the use of
chemical weapons in Douma in eastern Ghouta. Côte
d’Ivoire once again urges the members of the Security
Council to unite with a view to putting an end to their
differences and to effect the establishment of this
mechanism to establish responsibility, which all the
members of the Council would like to see set up.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to reassert its conviction
and its position of principle that the response to the
crisis in Syria cannot be a military response. Quite
to the contrary; it must be sought in the framework
of dialogue and an inclusive political process, as
envisioned in the road map set out in resolution 2254
(2015). The time has come to decisively give every
opportunity for dialogue a chance and to make sure that
the Council is in step with history.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
Peru notes with great concern the developments in
Syria. In the face of military action, as a response to
information on the use of chemical weapons against the
civilian population in the country, we reiterate the need
to keep the situation from spiralling out of control and
causing a greater threat to stability in the region and to
international peace and security.
Peru condemns any use of chemical weapons as an
atrocity crime. For that reason, we have supported the
urgent deployment to Syria of an Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission,
as well as the establishment of a dedicated, independent,
objective and impartial attribution mechanism. We
regret the stalemate in the Security Council and our
inability to take a decision on the issue. In that regard,
Peru encourages the Secretary-General to redouble his
efforts in accordance with the prerogatives entrusted to
him in the Charter of the United Nations with a view to
helping to resolve the stalemate in the Council and to
establish the attribution mechanism. Peru believes that
any response to the crimes committed in Syria, as well
as a solution to the conflict in Syria overall, must be
consistent with the Charter, with international law and
with the Council’s resolutions.
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

As the Secretary-General has reminded us, the
Council is the organ with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and it is up to its members to act in unity and to uphold
that responsibility. Peru joins the Secretary-General’s
urgent appeal to all Member States to act with restraint
in these dangerous circumstances and to avoid any
act that could escalate the situation and worsen the
suffering of the Syrian people. My delegation reaffirms
its commitment to continue working in order to achieve
sustainable peace in Syria, to guarantee protection
for the civilian population, to ensure that there is no
impunity for atrocious crimes, as well as to help defuse
the situation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
respond to the remarks made by the Ambassador of
Bolivia about the United Kingdom.
We have no doubt about the sovereignty of the
United Kingdom over the Falkland Islands, South
Georgia, South Sandwich Islands and surrounding
maritime areas. Successive British Governments have
made clear that sovereignty will not be transferred
against the wishes of the Falkland Islands. The
Falkland Islanders voted overwhelmingly to maintain
their current constitutional arrangements with the
United Kingdom.
Turning to the Chagos archipelago, the United
Kingdom is participating in the proceedings before the
International Court of Justice, even as we disagree with
jurisdiction in that case.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I will be very brief and limit myself
to reading out what it says in the special declaration on
the question of the Malvinas Islands, signed by all the
Heads of State and Government of Latin America and
the Caribbean. The Heads of State and Government:
“Reiterate their strongest support for the
legitimate rights of the Argentine Republic in
the sovereignty dispute over the Malvinas, South

S/PV. 8233

Georgias and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas and the permanent
interest of the countries of the region in the
Governments of the Argentine Republic and of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland resuming negotiations in order to find — as
soon as possible — a peaceful and definitive solution
to such dispute, pursuant to the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations ...”.
That would include in particular General Assembly
resolution 2065 (XX).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral at this very important moment in the history
and the work of the Security Council. In his important
statement yesterday, the Secretary-General warned
that the Cold War had returned (see S/PV.8231). That
is exactly right. We all agree with the relevance of
this remark.
I take this opportunity to recall those who
relaunched the logic of the Cold War. Of course, we
all remember, following the collapse of the former
Soviet Union, that a number of philosophical books
were published here in this country, including The End
of History and the Last Man, by Francis Fukuyama.
Another author, American thinker Samuel Huntington,
wrote an essay entitled The Clash of Civilizations.
Those two works marked the return of the Cold War
logic. Indeed, the message of those two books was as
follows: To the people of the world, you must take the
American approach and surrender to the American will
or we will attack you. “My way or the highway”, as the
American saying goes. That marked the return of the
Cold War philosophy.
Lies serve no purpose. They serve the person who
lies once and only once. Lies deceive only once. When
a lie is repeated it becomes exposed and exposes the
person who is lying.
My colleague the Ambassador of France announced
that the aggression of his country, along with the
United States and the United Kingdom, was carried
out on behalf of the international community. If that
is the case, I wonder which international community
my colleague the French Ambassador is speaking of.
Is he speaking of a real international community that

18-1089119/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

actually exists? Has the international community that
he represents authorized this tripartite aggression
against my country? Did their Governments obtain a
mandate from this international community to attack
my country?
My American, French and British colleagues
claimed that they have bombarded centres for the
production of chemical weapons in Syria. If the
Governments of these three countries knew the
actual location of these production centres that they
claim to have bombarded, why did they not share that
information with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)? Why did they not
share this information with the Fact-finding Mission
in Damascus before attacking my country? It is just a
question I am putting to the Security Council.
Furthermore, I would like to assure Council
members that the OPCW investigation team arrived
today at noon. Obviously, the team was delayed for a
full day getting from Beirut to Damascus before the
attack, for reasons that we do not know, as though the
team was asked not to go to Damascus until after the
bombing took place. But the team did reach Damascus
today at noon and will hold a meeting in two hours, at
7 p.m., Damascus time, with the local authorities. My
Government will, of course, provide every support to
the team so that it may carry out its mission successfully.
The facility of the Barzah Research and
Development Centre, the building that was targeted by
the tripartite aggression, was visited twice last year by
experts from the OPCW. They inspected it, after which
they gave us an official document stating that Syria had
complied with its obligations under the OPCW and that
no chemical activities had taken place in the inspected
building. If the OPCW experts gave us an official
document confirming that the Barzah Centre was not
used for any type of chemical activity in contravention
to our obligations with respect to the OPCW, how do
Council members reconcile that with what we have
heard this morning? How do they reconcile that with all
the accusations and claims that the aggression targeted
a chemical-weapons production centre?
My American colleague said that the time for
discussion is over — that it was over yesterday (see
S/PV.8231). If that is so, then what are we doing today
as diplomats an ambassadors at the Security Council?
Our mission here is to speak, to explain what happened,
to shed light on all the issues. We are not here in the
20/26

14/04/2018

Security Council simply to justify an aggression.
How can we state that the discussion is over? No, the
discussion is continuing in this Chamber, if the idea
is to put an end to aggressions or to implement the
provisions of the Charter and international law. That is
why we are here.
My British and French colleagues spoke of a
plan of action and have invited the Secretary-General
to implement it before the Council and the Syrian
Government have agreed to it. Their plan of action is
in fact a very strange one. But I would like to present
on behalf of my Government a counter plan of action,
which, I assume, should have been presented today.
First, we should read the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and define and recall
the responsibilities of the three States in maintaining
international peace and security, rather than threatening
it. I happen to have three versions of the Charter, two
in English and one in French. Perhaps these three
States should read what the Charter actually states.
Secondly, these three States must immediately stop
supporting the armed terrorist groups that are active in
my country. Thirdly, they should put an end to the lies
and fabrications being used to justify their aggression
against my country. Fourthly, these three States should
realize that, after seven years of a terrorist war that
was imposed on my country, Syria, a war carried out
by these three countries and their agents in the region,
their missiles, airplanes and bombs will not weaken
our determination to defeat and destroy their terrorists.
This will not prevent the Syrian people from deciding
their own political future without foreign intervention.
I will repeat this for the thousandth time — the
Syrian people will not allow any foreign intervention
to define our future. I promised yesterday that we will
not remain inactive in the face of any aggression, and
we have kept our promise. I will explain how we have
kept our promise.
Allow me now to address those States that remain
committed to international law. I would tell them that
the Syrian Arab Republic and its many friends and
allies are perfectly capable of dealing with the brutal
aggression that my country has had to face. But what
we are asking the diplomats and ambassadors today
who are committed to international legitimacy and
the Charter to call on the United States, Britain and
France to read the provisions of the United Nations
Charter, in particular those pertaining to respect for
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

the sovereignty of States and to the non-use of force
in international relations. Perhaps the Governments of
these three countries will realize, if only once, that their
role in the Security Council is to maintain international
peace and security rather than to undermine it. As I just
said, I have three copies of the Charter, and I would ask
the Council’s secretariat to distribute them to the three
delegations so that they might enlighten or awaken
themselves from their ignorance and their tyranny.
In flagrant violation of the principles of international
law and the United Nations Charter, the United States,
Britain and France, at 3:55 a.m. on Saturday, 14 April,
Damascus time, attacked the Syrian Arab Republic by
launching some 110 missiles against Damascus and
other Syrian cities and areas. In response to this terrible
aggression, the Syrian Arab Republic has exercised its
legitimate right in line with Article 51 of the Charter to
defend itself, and we have defended ourselves against
this evil attack. Syrian air defences were able to
intercept a number of rockets launched by the tripartite
aggression, while some of them reached the Barzah
Centre in — not outside — the capital Damascus. The
Centre in that location that includes laboratories and
classrooms. Fortunately, the damage was only material.
Some of those modern, charming and smart rockets
were intercepted, while others targeted a military site
near Homs, wounding three civilians.
The Governments of these three States prepared
for this evil attack by issuing aggressive statements
through their senior officials, saying that their only
excuse for preventing the advance of the Syrian Arab
Army against armed groups was these allegations of
the use of chemical weapons. Indeed, in a race against
time, the armed terrorist groups did receive instructions
from those aggressors to fabricate this charade of the
use of chemical weapons in Douma. They found false
witnesses and manipulated the alleged crime scene as
they did before, which served as the pretext for this
scandalous aggression. This can only be explained by
the fact that the original aggressors — the United States
of America, Britain and France — decided to interfere
directly in order to avenge the defeat of their proxies in
Ghouta. In fact, those who fabricated the charade of the
chemical attack in Ghouta were arrested and admitted
on television that it was a fabricated attack. We have a
video of that if the presidency wishes to see it.
I would like to draw the attention of those who
align themselves with the Charter of the United Nations
and international legitimacy to the fact that this evil

S/PV. 8233

aggression sends another message from those three
aggressors to the terrorist groups that they can continue
using chemical weapons in the future and committing
their terrorist crimes, not against Syrian civilians only
but in other countries. There is no doubt about that.
In 146 letters we have drawn the Council’s attention
to the plans of the terrorist groups to use chemical
weapons in Syria. There are 146 letters that have been
sent to the Council and the Secretariat. Today, some
Council members are suddenly reinventing the wheel.
The Council knows that this aggression took place just
as a fact-finding team from the OPCW was supposed to
arrive in Syria at the request of the Syrian Government to
examine the allegations of a chemical attack in Douma.
Obviously, the main message that these aggressors are
sending to the Council and to the world is that they are
not actually interested in the Council’s mandate and
that they do not want a transparent and independent
investigation. They are trying to undermine the work
of the investigative mission and anticipating the results.
They are trying to put pressure on that mission to
conceal their lies and fabrications, just as happened six
years ago, in 2013, when Mr. Sellström went to Khan
Al-Assal from Damascus, as I have explained in a
previous statement to the Council.
This morning’s attack was not just an attack on
Syria, as my dear friend, the representative of Bolivia
said; rather, it was an attack against the Charter, the
Council, international law and 193 members of this
Organization. The attempt by Washington, D.C.,
London and Paris to ensure the failure of the United
Nations working groups and fact-finding missions
is systematic. While those three States boast of their
support for these bodies, behind the closed doors of the
Organization they pressure and blackmail them not to
carry out the mandates for which they were established.
We recall what took place with the investigative
missions in Iraq, Libya, Yugoslavia and Africa. No
investigative mission can be successful if it is subjected
to political blackmailing. It cannot succeed.
Of the three aggressors, I say they are liars. They
are compulsive liars. They are hypocrites. They are
attempting to ensure the failure of any action of the
Organization that does not serve their interests. Ever
since the Organization was established, they have tried
to undermine the efforts of international investigative
bodies. They have tried to exploit them. I need only
mention Iraq, Yugoslavia, Libya, Syria, and Africa. The
aggressors exhausted the Council agendas for decades

18-1089121/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

with their attempts to divert its attention from its role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
They used the Council to pursue their aggressive policy
of interference and colonialism.
Yesterday, in the press of the United States and
of the West, the main theme was lying in the context
of a campaign that was claiming success, but they
know it was a lie. While these three Governments
were launching their evil aggression against my
country, Syria, and while my country’s air defence
system was countering the attacks with a great deal of
bravery — one hundred missiles were destroyed and
did not reach their target — the American Secretary
of Defense and the Army Chief of Staff were before
the American and international press in an outrageous
surrealist scenario. They were not actually able to
answer objective questions. Millions of television
viewers must have pitied those two men because
they were like dunces, repeating phrases without any
meaning, and were unable to respond to the legitimate
questions of a journalist about their attempts to target
chemical weapons facilities and the danger that posed
to civilians if the alleged chemical weapons were to
spread. They did not respond. They were also unable
to respond to a journalist who asked the Secretary of
Defense, “You said yesterday that you had no proof that
the Syrian Government was responsible for the attack
in Douma. What happened in the past few hours? What
made you change your mind?” His answer was that he
received confirmation from intelligence services.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the
strongest terms this tripartite attack, which once
again shows undeniably that those three countries
pay no heed to international legitimacy, even though
they repeatedly say they do. Those countries have
revealed their belief in the law of the jungle and the
law of the most powerful even as they are permanent
members of the Security Council, an organ entrusted
with maintaining international peace and security and
with stopping any aggression, in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter.
The Syrian Arab Republic is disgusted by the
scandalous position of the rulers in Sheikhdom of
Qatar, who supported this Western colonial tripartite
aggression by allowing planes to take off from the
American Al Udeid air base in Qatar. It is not surprising
that the little boys of the Sheikhdom of Qatar took that
position. They have supported terrorist gangs, such as
22/26

14/04/2018

the Muslim Brotherhood and others, in a variety of ways
in order to destabilize Arab countries, including Syria.
The Syrian Arab Republic is asking the
international community, if it exists — we have heard
a new definition of the international community
today — and the Security Council to firmly condemn
this aggression, which will exacerbate the tensions in
the region and which is a threat to international peace
and security throughout the world.
I call upon those who are committed to international
legitimacy to imagine with me the meeting in which
the United States National Security Council decided
to carry out this attack. I cannot help wondering what
was said.
“We have no legal basis for attacking Syria. We
have no proof that a toxic chemical weapons attack
took place in Douma, but let us set that aside. We
did not need international legitimacy or any legal
argument to conduct military interventions in
the past.”
I am just imagining the discussion that might have
taken place among them yesterday.
“This military action is necessary for us and
for our allies in order to distract public attention in
our countries from the scandals involving our own
political elite and ensure that the corrupt system in
some Gulf States pays the price of such aggression.
Most important is how to protect the terrorism that
we have sponsored in Syria for years.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members of the
Council have before them document S/2018/355, which
contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by the
delegation of the Russian Federation.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Russian
Federation
Against:
Côte d’Ivoire, France, Kuwait, Netherlands, Poland,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

Abstaining:
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Peru
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 3 votes in favour, 8 against and 4
abstentions. The draft resolution has not been adopted,
having failed to obtain the required number of votes.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We voted against the draft
resolution submitted by the Russian Federation
(S/2018/355) because we believe that its language was
unbalanced. It was not comprehensive and failed to
address all of our concerns about the current situation.
At the same time, we agree with the Secretary-General
that actions must be consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and with international law in general.
In our national statement delivered earlier today,
we explained our view on the current situation in
Syria and condemned the use of chemical weapons
and the many other flagrant violations of international
law in Syria. We also underscore the importance of
a sustainable political solution. As members of the
Security Council, we reiterate that we must unite and
exercise our responsibility with regard to the situation
in Syria.
If there is any encouragement today, it is that it
appears that everyone around the table insists on a
sustainable political solution as the only way to end
the suffering of the Syrian population. We therefore
reiterate our full support for the United Nations political
process, which must now be urgently reinvigorated,
including through strong support for the efforts of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to explain
why we abstained in the voting on the draft resolution
proposed by Russia (S/2018/355). We abstained not
because the text does not contain a great deal of
truth — indeed it does — or because it does not adhere
to principles to which we should all adhere; it does. We
abstained on the grounds of pragmatism. We know that
even if it had received nine votes, it would have been
vetoed. Therefore it would have had only symbolic
value. Nonetheless, that is not unimportant. However,
for us, it is critical to defuse tensions and prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control. We would like
to play a constructive role in that regard.

S/PV. 8233

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan abstained
in the voting today on draft resolution S/2018/355
because we believe that all disputes among States should
be resolved through peaceful dialogue and constructive
negotiations on the basis of equal responsibility for
peace and security. As I mentioned in my statement
earlier today, we call for all parties to refrain from
actions that could aggravate tensions and cause the
situation to spiral out of control.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Our abstention reflects the frustration of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea with regard to the failure
to adopt a resolution to establish an attribution and
accountability mechanism to identify those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons. We reiterate our call
for a consensus-based resolution that would establish
that mechanism and prevent a repeat of the action we
witnessed yesterday.
In that regard, we recall that the Swedish initiative
was endorsed by the 10 elected members of the Council.
We could introduce the required changes into the draft
resolution to enable its adoption by consensus, which
would allow the mechanism to be established under the
auspices of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
draft resolution submitted by Russia (S/2018/355)
has just been categorically rejected. The result of the
voting sends a clear message that the members of the
Council understand the circumstances, reason for
and objectives of the military action taken yesterday.
The Council understands why such action, which has
been acknowledged as proportional and targeted, was
required. No one has refuted the fact that the use of
chemical weapons cannot be tolerated and must be
deterred. That is the key point.
It is important that we now look towards the future.
As I have just said, the air strikes were necessary and
served to uphold international law and our political
strategy to end the tragic situation in Syria. It is for
that reason that, together with our American and
British partners, France will work with all members
of the Security Council to submit a draft resolution
on the political, chemical and humanitarian aspects of
the Syrian conflict with a view to devising a lasting
political solution to the conflict.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands):
The Kingdom of the Netherlands voted against the
draft resolution proposed by the Russian Federation

18-1089123/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

(S/2018/355) because the text does not provide for
the urgent action that the Security Council must take
in response to the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
It ignores the very essence of the action that must be
taken by the Council. It should condemn the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, protect its people and hold
accountable those responsible. Today’s draft resolution
does none of the above.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Kuwait
voted against draft resolution S/2018/355. At the time
when the State of Kuwait reiterates its adherence
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which prohibits the threat or use of
force as a means to settle disputes and requires them
to be settled by peaceful means, yesterday’s use of
force was the result of efforts to disrupt the will of the
international community, specifically by hindering the
Security Council in its determination to take measures
at its disposal to end the ongoing use of internationally
prohibited chemical weapons in Syria. That is a flagrant
violation of resolution 2118 (2013), which unequivocally
expresses the Security Council’s intention to act under
Chapter VII of the Charter when one party or several
parties fail to comply with its provisions or in the case
of the continued use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Council must once again show its unity and
bear its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter.
It must agree on a new independent, impartial and
professional mechanism for investigating any use of
chemical weapons, bring those responsible for such
crimes to account, and ensure that they do not enjoy
impunity. We call for intensified efforts and a return
to the political track, under the auspices of the United
Nations, with the aim of reaching a peaceful settlement
to the crisis based on the first Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has always opposed the use of force in the context of
international relations. We advocate for respecting the
sovereignty, independence, unity, and the territorial
integrity of all countries. Any unilateral military action
bypassing the Security Council runs counter to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, violates the principles of international law
and the basic norms governing international relations
and, in the present case, will further complicate the
Syrian issue.
24/26

14/04/2018

Based on that principled position, China voted in
favour of draft resolution S/2018/355, proposed by the
Russian Federation. I would like to emphasize here
that a political settlement is the only viable pathway
to solving the Syrian issue. China urges the parties
involved to remain calm, exercise restraint, return
to the framework of international law and resolve
issues through dialogue and negotiations We support
the role of the United Nations as the main channel
for mediation, and we will spare no effort to reach a
political settlement of the situation in Syria together
with the international community.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today is the day when the Security Council
and the world community should raise their voices
in the defence of peace, security, the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Every delegation
in this Chamber is a sovereign country, and no one
should attempt to pressure or dictate to any of us how
to interpret international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, or how to consult our own consciences.
We have never hesitated to vote in accordance
with the dictates of international law, the Charter, our
conscience and truth. Today’s meeting confirms that
the United States, Britain and France, all permanent
members of the Security Council, continue to plunge
world politics and diplomacy into a realm of myths,
myths that have been created in Washington, London
and Paris. That is dangerous work, representing a
kind of diplomacy that traffics in myths, hypocrisy,
deceit and counterfeit ideas. Soon we will arrive at the
diplomacy of the absurd. These three countries create
these myths and try to force everyone to believe in them.
We counter their myths with facts and a true picture of
what is going on. But they do not want to see or hear.
They simply ignore what they are told. They have come
up with a legend about Russia as a constant wielder of
the Security Council veto whom they purposely provoke
into using the veto so as to then present themselves in a
favourable light, especially right now.
They are distorting international law and replacing
its concepts with counterfeits. They are unabashedly
hypocritical. They demand an investigation, and before
the investigation has even started they name and punish
the guilty parties. Why did they not wait for the result
of the investigation that they themselves all called for?
The Security Council is paralysed because of
these countries’ persistent deceptions both of us
18-10891

14/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

and the international community. They are not only
putting themselves above international law, they are
trying to rewrite it. They violate international law and
try to convince everyone that their actions are legal.
The representative of the United Kingdom gave three
reasons justifying the missile strikes based on the
concept of humanitarian intervention. They are trying
to substitute them for the Charter. That is why we
and other countries did not support it then and do not
support it now, because we do not want it to become the
justification for their crimes. We demand once again
that that they halt this aggression immediately and
refrain from the illegal use of force in the future.
Today we once again showed the whole world how
we play our underhanded games. In Soviet times there
was a pamphlet entitled Where Does the Threat to Peace
Come From? that described Washington and the NATO
countries’ military preparations. Nothing has changed.
The threat to peace comes from exactly the same place.
Look at what they say and listen to the war drums that
they are beating in Washington today in the guise of
hypocritical concern for democracy, human rights and
people in general. The five-minute rule in the latest
presidential note’s rules of procedure (S/2017/507) will
not allow me to list them, because the list is too long.
I could cite other examples, as for example how the
President of France showed interest in a conversation
with President Putin in an investigation in Douma and
was ready to send French experts there when that idea
suddenly disappeared. Because a different algorithm
was put forward. That is obvious.
Today is a sad day. It is a sad day for the world,
the United Nations and its Charter, which has been
blatantly violated, and the Security Council, which has
shirked its responsibilities. I should like to believe that
will not see another day as bad as today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
another statement in my national capacity.
Peru abstained in the voting because we believe that
the draft resolution did not adequately reflect the need
to guarantee due accountability for the use of chemical
weapons throughout Syrian terrority and because its
language is imbalanced and would not help to restore
the Council’s unity, which is critical to addressing the
events in Syria in a comprehensive manner.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

S/PV. 8233

The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked to make another statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I think it is obvious
why we voted against the draft resolution. We support
completely what the French representative laid out
about next steps and we will work tirelessly to that
objective, along with partners on the Council.
The Russian Ambassador referred to myths. These
are not our myths. The way forward in the Council has
been blocked. The second of our own criteria for taking
this action on an exceptional basis must be objectively
clear. There is no practicable alternative to the use of
force if lives are to be saved. In the 113 meetings of the
Council on Syria, I think that has been demonstrated
absolutely crystally clear. The United Kingdom believes
that it cannot be illegal to prevent the use of force to
save lives in such numbers as we have seen in Syria.
The reason we took this action — our legal basis — was
that of humanitarian intervention. We believe that that
is wholly within the principles and purposes of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has ask for the floor to
make a new statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for requesting the floor once again.
The scene that we have just witnessed is quite sad.
There are those in the Council who prefer to overlook an
enormous elephant that we have spoken of before. The
elephant is the direct American military occupation of
one-third of my country’s territory — a direct American
military occupation of one-third of the Syrian Arab
Republic territory. However, there are those who speak
of minor details which they believe to be pivotal. No,
the political scene is far more dangerous than that.
We are a State whose sovereignty has been facing a
direct military violation by a permanent member of the
Council. That is the true scene, and not the allegations
and the film prepared by the terrorist organization
known as the White Helmets established by British
intelligence. We need to focus on the main scene here.
Some would claim that they are fighting Da’esh in Syria
and Iraq. However they have given air cover to Da’esh.
Whenever the Syrian Arab Army makes advances
against Da’esh, United States, British and French war
planes bombard our military sites. Why? To prevent our
decisive victory against that entity. However, they failed

18-1089125/26

S/PV.8233

Threats to international peace and security

and we were able to achieve victory against Da’esh with
our brothers in Iraq in three years and not in thirty, as
former President Obama predicted.
We understand that the capitals of the three
countries that launched the aggression against my
country are frustrated. Some colleagues who voted
against the Russian draft resolution (S/2018/355) claim
to support a political settlement. We tell them now,
after their shameful vote against the draft resolution,
that those who voted against it are no longer partners of
the Syrian Government in any political process.
The British Ambassador explained things about
the Malvinas Islands. That testimony reveals the
facts about the imperialistic policies of Britain. I am
actually the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on
Decolonization (C-24) and I work under the agenda
of the United Nations and the Secretary-General. My
task and that of my colleagues in the C-24 is to end
colonialism throught the world. The Malvinas are on
the list of territories that do not enjoy self-governance.

26/26

14/04/2018

We are working in accordance with the United Nations
agenda to end the British occupation of the Malvinas.
As for my colleague the Ambassador of Kuwait, I
remind him — although he and his Government are well
aware of it — that when my country participated in the
liberation of Kuwait, we did not justify our principled
position to the people of Kuwait. Our position was a
principled one. We did not need draft resolutions,
meetings or any tripartite aggression. We did not look
into the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
or undermine our national obligations to our brothers
in Kuwait, nor did we join any bloc that was hostile
to Kuwait. We fulfilled our national duty towards
our brothers in Kuwait. The Ambassador of Kuwait
will also recall that my country could have played a
different role at the time and could have negatively
impacted the peace, safety and security of Kuwait, but
we chose not to do so. We acted pursuant to a national
principled position that was not subject to negotiation
or discussion.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

18-10891
