A/RES/67/74

United Nations

Distr.: General
11 December 2012

General Assembly
Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 98

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2012
[on the report of the First Committee (A/67/413)]

67/74. Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/62 of 2 December 2011,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and the entry into force of the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects 1 and its amended article 1, 2 the Protocol on Non-Detectable
Fragments (Protocol I),1 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)1 and its amended version, 3 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons
(Protocol III),1 the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV) 4 and the
Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V), 5
Noting the results of the Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects, held in Geneva from 14 to 25 November 2011,
Welcoming the results of the Thirteenth Annual Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, held in Geneva on 11 November 2011,
Welcoming also the results of the Fifth Conference of the High Contracting
Parties to Protocol V, held in Geneva on 9 and 10 November 2011,
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
3
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
4
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
5
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
2

12-48304

*1248304*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/74

Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in
the elaboration of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the
particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other organizations
in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of explosive remnants of
war,
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to
1.
become parties, as soon as possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects1 and the Protocols
thereto, as amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these
instruments at an early date and so as to ultimately achieve their universality;
2.
Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so
to express their consent to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the
amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the Protocols thereto to
include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on
3.
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V);5
4.
Welcomes the additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to
the Convention, as well as the consents to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
5.
Acknowledges the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as depositary
of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, the Chair of the Meeting of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention, the President of the Fifth Conference of the
High Contracting Parties to Protocol V and the President of the Thirteenth Annual
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the
High Contracting Parties, to achieve the goal of universality;
Welcomes the following decisions by the Fourth Review Conference of
6.
the High Contracting Parties to the Convention:
(a) The adoption of an accelerated plan of action to promote universality of
the Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(b) The adoption of actions to enhance the implementation of the compliance
mechanism for the Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(c) The continuation of the Sponsorship Programme within the framework of
the Convention; and encourage States to contribute to the Sponsorship Programme;
7.
Recalls the decision by the Fourth Review Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention to continue the Sponsorship Programme
within the framework of the Convention, and, with recognition of the value and
importance of the Programme, encourages States to contribute to it;
Notes that the issue of the humanitarian impact of cluster munitions was
8.
examined extensively by the Fourth Review Conference in November 2011, on the
basis of the mandate agreed upon at the Meeting of High Contracting Parties to the
Convention in November 2010;
Also notes that the implementation of international humanitarian law
9.
with regard to mines other than anti-personnel mines was discussed further at an
open-ended Meeting of Experts in April 2012, on the basis of a decision by the
Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention;

2

A/RES/67/74

10. Welcomes the commitment by States parties to continue to contribute to
the further development of international humanitarian law and in this context to
keep under review both the development of new weapons and uses of weapons,
which may have indiscriminate effects or cause unnecessary suffering;
11. Also welcomes the commitment of States parties to the Protocol on
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V) to the effective and efficient
implementation of the Protocol and the implementation of the decisions of the First
and Second Conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the Protocol establishing
a comprehensive framework for the exchange of information and cooperation;
12. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences
may be convened to examine amendments to the Convention or to any of the
Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other categories of
conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and
application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any
proposed amendments or additional protocols;
13. Acknowledges the work of the Implementation Support Unit within the
Geneva Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, which was
established following a decision by the 2009 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to render the assistance necessary and to
provide such services, including summary records, as may be required for annual
conferences and expert meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention
and of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as well
as for any continuation of the work after the meetings;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly
periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions
to the Convention, its amended article 1 and the Protocols;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-eighth session
the item entitled “Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
48th plenary meeting
3 December 2012

3
