S/2005/226

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 4 April 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
With reference to Security Council resolution 1575 (2004) of 22 November
2004, I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 17 March 2005, which I
received from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common
Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, transmitting the report on the
activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR), covering the period from 2 December 2004 to the end of February 2005
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-29690 (E) 070405

*0529690*

S/2005/226

Annex
Letter dated 17 March 2005 from the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 1575 (2004),
I attach the first three-monthly report on the activities of the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period
from the launch of the mission on 2 December 2004 to the end of February. I should
be grateful if you would transmit this report to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

S/2005/226

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Introduction
1.

This report covers the period from 2 December 2004 to 28 February 2005.

2.
The Security Council, by its resolution 1551 (2004) of 9 July 2004, welcomed
the European Union’s intention to launch a European Union mission to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including a military component, from December 2004, following the
NATO announcement, at Istanbul in June 2004, of its intention to terminate its
SFOR operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Union consequently
decided, also in July 2004, to launch a successor military operation, and the Security
Council, by resolution 1575 (2004) of 22 November 2004, therefore authorized the
Member States, acting through or in cooperation with the European Union, to
establish for an initial planned period of 12 months a multinational stabilization
force (EUFOR) as a legal successor to SFOR.
3.
The European Union launched Operation Althea on December 2004. Under the
political control and strategic direction of the Political and Security Committee
acting under the authority of the Council of the European Union, EUFOR conducts
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to provide deterrence, continue
compliance with the responsibility to fulfil the role specified in annexes 1-A and 2
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
contribute to the safe and secure environment, in line with its mandate, required to
achieve core tasks in the Office of the High Representative’s mission
implementation plan and the stabilization and association process.
4.
This new European Union military operation reinforces the European Union’s
comprehensive approach towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and supports that
country’s progress towards European Union integration by its own efforts, with the
objective of the signing of a stabilization and association agreement as a mediumterm objective.
5.
The force currently comprises some 6,500 troops from 22 European Union
member States and 11 third countries,a which are deployed throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina in three regional multinational task forces and EUFOR headquarters.
Cyprus and Malta also contribute to the common costs of the operation.
Political background
6.
During the reporting period the political scene in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been dominated by the decisions taken on 16 December by Lord Ashdown, in his
capacity as High Representative, outlining eight measures to address the continued
__________________
a Countries contributing to EUFOR: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,

Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland,
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland; and Albania, Argentina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Morocco, Norway, New Zealand,
Romania, Switzerland and Turkey.

3

S/2005/226

failure of Republika Srpska to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Those measures consisted of individual sanctions, including the
removal from office of nine officials and the blocking of bank accounts, as well as
demands for specific systemic reforms to Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement
and security institutions. National measures were taken simultaneously by other
members of the international community.
7.
Those measures were followed, inter alia, by the resignation of the Prime
Minister of Republika Srpska, Dragan Mikerevic, and the Foreign Minister of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mladen Ivanic. The National Assembly of Republika
Srpska accepted Mikerevic’s resignation and on 8 January the President of
Republika Srpska, Dragan Cavic, named Pero Bukejlovic as Prime Minister
designate.
8.
On 15 February, the new Prime Minister and his government were confirmed
by the National Assembly of Republika Srpska. This outcome should pave the way
for a solution at the State level, although at the time of writing the situation at the
State level had not been definitively resolved.
9.
On 15 January, Republika Srpska authorities transferred indictee Savo Todovic
to The Hague. The first such transfer of a Tribunal indictee in nine years by the
Republika Srpska authorities, this is a significant step forward and comes as a result
of sustained pressure by the international community. In response to Tribunal
indictments unsealed on 24 February, a former Bosnia and Herzegovina Army
Commander, General Rasim Delic, and two former Republic Srpska Army
Commanders, Generals Milan Gvero and Radivoje Miletic, agreed to surrender to
The Hague. Cooperation with the Tribunal however remains the main difficulty
preventing Bosnia and Herzegovina from moving forward within the European
Union stabilization and association process.
10. The Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Adnan Terzic, has established
a monitoring group for cooperation with the Tribunal. Established on the basis of a
recommendation of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council, the
Monitoring Group will seek to strengthen coordination between all agencies and
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina responsible for ensuring full cooperation
with The Hague. It is not, however, a forum for sharing operational or intelligence
information. The Group holds weekly meetings in Sarajevo. The first meeting was
held on 11 February and was chaired by the Prime Minister and the High
Representative and European Union Special Representative, Lord Ashdown. Other
participants include officials from State and entity authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with specific responsibilities vis-à-vis the Tribunal, as well as
representatives of EUFOR and the European Union Police Mission. EUFOR remains
committed to assisting the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities and the Tribunal in
the apprehension of persons indicted for war crimes. The force will continue to
support the Monitoring Group as part of its coordination with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities and the international community.
11. The Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities made considerable progress during
2004 towards fulfilling the legislative requirements of the European Community
feasibility study. Although the majority of legislative steps had been completed by
the end of 2004, the European Community was not yet ready to declare “significant
progress” across the 16 priority areas listed in the feasibility study. The main focus
for the coming months will be on the implementation of the adopted legislation,

4

S/2005/226

required by the feasibility study; on the adoption of police restructuring
arrangements — itself a feasibility study requirement — in line with three key
principles enumerated by the European Commission; and on ensuring the full
cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the Republika Srpska entity,
with the Tribunal.
EUFOR activities
12. The launch of EUFOR has strengthened the existing substantial engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina of the European Union. Although it has been operational
for only a short time, the synergies between EUFOR and other European Union
actors on the ground have started to take effect. EUFOR is contributing to the
Union’s political engagement, its assistance programmes and its ongoing police and
monitoring missions. A strong emphasis on a smooth and seamless military
transition between SFOR and EUFOR, together with a robust and energetic
approach to the start of its mandate, have established EUFOR as a credible force.
13. Key components of the mission profile are deterrence and reassurance, which
are achieved by projecting an overt and visible presence, robustness and, above all,
authority and impartiality. The concept of the operation is intelligence driven,
achieving military tasks by maintaining a robust situational awareness.
14. An important early demonstration of EUFOR support to local authorities was
the conduct of a EUFOR operation to inspect all underground military facilities,
closing and sealing those not required for official civil or military use. This was
undertaken across Bosnia and Herzegovina, in consultation with the European
Union Special Representative. In particular, in mid-December 2004, the Han Pijesak
military installation, 40 km north-east of Sarajevo, was inspected. This area is
suspected of having been used by persons indicted for war crimes to escape
apprehension. This assertive and high-profile operation immediately established the
visibility and authority of EUFOR and made a positive early impact both nationally
and internationally.
15. A further aspect of EUFOR activities is to help support the fight against
organized crime; this contributes to a safe and secure environment and supports the
objectives of both the High Representative and the local law enforcement agencies.
European Union agencies, particularly the Police Mission and the Customs
Financial Assistance Office, are closely associated with this aspect of the EUFOR
mission. The EUFOR integrated police unit capability is also active in contributing
to the fight against organized crime, in cooperation with local law enforcement
agencies, particularly the State Border Service. In support of these activities as well
as in general, EUFOR maintains a close relationship with the Police Mission; this
includes having Police Mission liaison officers attached to the force at the various
command levels.
16. Weapons collection activities continue to yield large numbers of arms and
ammunition: from 2 December 2004 to 31 January 2005, over 1,300 small arms,
over 200,000 rounds of ammunition, over 2,000 hand grenades and mines and over
400 kg of explosives have been collected or turned in.
17. EUFOR continues to monitor Bosnia and Herzegovina entity armed forces
activities and also provides assistance to joint training initiatives aimed at achieving
improved internal inter-operability. Proposed joint training activities for 2005 have

5

S/2005/226

not yet been approved by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence.
Inspections of military sites and defence industry facilities are carried out daily;
there remain 130 military sites that require inspection on a 90-day rotation and 19
defence industry facilities that are inspected on a 180-day rotation. A reduction in
the number of military sites is expected this year. Related to compliance is
movement control and the import/export of weapons; EUFOR receives and
processes approximately 200 movement requests per month.
18. Work also continues towards establishing a demining coordination section for
the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their Ministry of Defence. EUFOR
is providing support to the Bosnia and Herzegovina demining activities in the south
and east of the country; a total of eight supervisory teams are deployed. Owing to
the severe winter conditions in the Balkans, however, actual mine clearance has
been minimal during the reporting period.
19. EUFOR has developed a close and effective working relationship with the
remaining NATO presence in Sarajevo. The clear delineation of responsibilities and
tasks between both headquarters has greatly assisted understanding and mutual
cooperation, especially with regard to activities relating to the reform and
restructuring of the defence infrastructure of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Outlook
20. The transition process has gone well and there is wide understanding of the
EUFOR mission. Broadly speaking, the force has experienced a positive reaction
from the main political parties, local authorities and the population as a whole.
Coordination and cooperation with the European Union Special Representative,
other European Union actors, and the rest of the international community is well
developed. The previously cited operation concerning underground facilities,
associated with the High Representative’s measures of 16 December, is one example
of this synchronized use of military and political means to achieve coherent results.
Obstructionism and organized crime are likely, however, to continue to require
strong and concerted action on the part of the European Union, including EUFOR,
the European Union Police Mission and the local authorities.
21. EUFOR plans to continue its existing pattern of activities and approach to its
mission as described, carrying out operations in accordance with its mandate, while
maintaining a visible and robust profile. EUFOR will continue to help the local
authorities to improve their indigenous ability and capacity, including to counter
organized crime, in the framework of operations which will be carried out in the
coming months. In addition, elements of the assigned reserve for EUFOR will be
exercised in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the near future.

6
