General As11embly-Twenty-fir11t Seasion

76

plete information about the scholarships offered and the
need to provide, whenever possible, travel funds for
prospective students ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the dissemination of information about the scholarships offered
by Member States;
6. Invites the administering Powers concerned and
the specialized agencies to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the dissemination of that information;
7. Invites th" administering Powers concerned to
take all measures necessary to ensure that all scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States
are utilized by the inhabitants of the N on-Self-Governing Territories and to render effective assistance to those
persons who have applied for, or have been granted,
scholarships or fellowships, particularly by facilitating
their travel formalities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution ;
9. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with ·regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2235 (XXI). Question of the consolidation and
integration of the special educational and
training programmes for South W est Africa,
the special training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and
the educational and training programme for
South Africana
The General Assembly,
Considering that special educational and training programmes for South W est Africa and for Territories
under Portuguese administration and an educational and
training programme for South Africans have been established by the United N ations in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 1705 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 and 1808 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, and Security Council resolution 191 (1964) of 18 June 1964,
Recalling the reports submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session regarding the said programmes for South W est
Africa811 and for Territories under Portuguese administration,89 and to the Security Council on 9 N ovember
1965 regarding the programme for South Africans,87
N oting that these programmes, although serving similar needs and purposes, are administered separately and
differ with regard to financing,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the way in which he has administered the programmes,
Holding the view that the question of a consolidation
and an integration of these programmes should be considered in order to ensure increased efficiency and to
promote further development and expansion of the
educational and training assistance thereunder,
811 !bid.,

agenda items 66 and 68, document A/6463.

311 !bid., document A/6464.

37 Official

Records of the Security Council, Twentieth Year,
Supplement f or October, N ovember and December 1965,
document S/6891.

Taking into account the establishment of a refugee
education account by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with the decision of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner' s Programme of 7 November 1966,88
Further taking into account the roles of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies and organs of the
United Nations in matters of training and education,
N oting the interest and activities of the Organization
of African Unity in the field of educational assistance,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to study, in consultation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Director-General of the Unite_d :t-:Jations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzatton
and the heads of other appropriate agencies and organs,
and the Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, the question of a consolidation and an integration of the special educational and
training programmes for South West Africa, the special
training programme for Territories under Portuguese
administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans, and to report on the results
of this study to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session ;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish, if
he deems it desirable, a committee selected from among
host countries of refugees and from among States which
have made contributions to the United Nations educational and training programmes mentioned above, to
advise him on means to develop and expand those programmes.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2236 (XXI). Special educational and training
programmes for South W est Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1705 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, by which it established a United Nations Special
Training Programme for South W est Africans,
Having considered the report submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 7 of General
Assembly resolution 2076 (XX) of 17 December 1965,39
N oting with satisfaction that several Member States
have offered scholarships to students from South W est
Africa,
Further noting that a number of States have included.
in their offers opportunities for education at the secondary and vocational levels in response to the invitation contained in General Assembly resolutions 1901
(XVIII) of 13 November 1963 and 2076 (XX),
Taking note of the difficulties encountered by persons
residing in the Territory in taking advantage of the
½nefits available under the Prob -amme, particularly in
securing the necessary travel documents,
Taking note of the measures adopted by the Secretary-General with a view to making the benefits of the
Programme available to as many South W est Africans
as possible,
38 Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty-/irsl
Session, SuppJement No. llA (A/6311/Rev.lÍAdd.l), part
two, para. 117.
89 !bid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda items 66 and
68, document A/6463.
