General Assembly-Forty-first Session

158

16. Reiterates its invitation to the Secretary-General to
proceed with the implementation of the activities outlined
in his report on the plan of activities for the period
1985-1989 14 and requests him to submit to the General
Assembly at its forty-second session a report on the outstanding activities;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council, at its first regular session of
1987, a report on the implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination outlining a proposed plan of activities
for the period 1990-1993;
18. Considers that voluntary contributions to the Trust
Fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination are indispensable for the implementation of the above-mentioned
plans;
19. Strongly appeals to ali Governments, organizations
and individuals in a position to do so to contribute generously to the Trust Fund and, to this end, requests the Secretary-General to undertake appropriate contacts and
initiatives to encourage contributions;
20. Requests the Economic and Social Council, during
the period of the Second Decade, to submit annual reports
to the General Assembly, containing, inter afia:
(a) An enumeration of the activities undertaken or
contemplated to achieve the objectives of the Second
Decade, including the activities of Governments, United
Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other international and regional organizations, as well as nongovernmental organizations;
(b) A review and appraisal of those activities;
(e) lts suggestions and recommendations;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution;
22. Decides that the item entitled "lmplementation of
the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination" should be on its
agenda throughout the Second Decade and should be considered as a matter of the highest priority at its fortysecond session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/95.

Adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of political, military, economic and
other forms of assistance given to the racist and
colonialist régime of South Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3382 (XXX) and 3383 (XXX)
of 10 November 1975, 33/23 of 29 November 1978, 35/32
of 14 November 1980, 37/39 of 3 December 1982 and
39/15 of 23 November 1984,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Mindful of its resolution 3171 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 relating to permanent sovereignty over natural

resources of both developing countries and territories under colonial and foreign domination or subjected to the
apartheid régime,
Recalling its resolutions on military collaboration with
South Africa, as well as Security Council resolutions
418 (1977) of 4 November 1977, 421 (1977) of 9 Deccmber 1977, 558 (1984) of 13 December 1984 and 569 (1985)
of 26 July 1985,
Taking into account, in particular, the relevant decisions
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twentysecond ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 28 to
30 July 1986, 15 and by the Council ofMinisters ofthat organization at its forty-fourth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 21 to 26 July 1986, 16
Taking note of the updated report prepared by the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities on the adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of
political, military, economic and other forms of assistance
given to the racist and colonialist régime of South
Africa, 17
Reaffirming that any collaboration with the racist
régime ofSouth Africa constitutes a hostile act against the
oppressed peoples of southern Africa in their struggle for
freedom and independence and a contemptuous defiance
of the United Nations and of the international community,
Considering that such collaboration enables South
Africa to acquire the means necessary to carry out acts of
aggression and blackmail against independent African
States,
Deeply concerned that the major Western and other
trading partners of South Africa continue to collaborate
with that racist régime and that their collaboration constitutes the main obstacle to the Iiquidation of that racist
régime and the elimination of the inhuman and criminal
system of apartheid,
Alarmed at the continued collaboration of certain Western States and Israel with the racist régime ofSouth Africa
in the nuclear field,
Regretting that the Security Council has not been in a
position to take binding decisions to prevent any collaboration in the nuclear field with South Africa,
Affirming that the highest priority must be accorded to
international action to secure the full implementation of
the resolutions of the United Nations for the eradication
of apartheid and the liberation of the peoples of southern
Africa,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world pubtic opinion against the political, military, economic and
other forms of assistance given to the racist and colonialist
régime of South Africa,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the oppressed peoples of southern Africa to self-determination, independence and the enjoyment of the natural resources of their
territories;
2. Again reaffirms the right of those same peoples to
dispose of those resources for their greater well-being and
to obtain just reparation for the exploitation, depletion,
loss or depreciation of those natural resources, including
reparation for the exploitation and abuse of their human
resources;
\j

See A/41/65-+. ,rnne>. 11.
annex J.

10 lbid.,

14 A/J9/Ió7-E/1984/ll and Add.1

and 2.

17 United Nations publication. Sales No

F.Rt, XIV 4

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Vigorously condemns the collaboration of certain
Western States, Israel and other States, as well as the transnational corporations and other organizations which
maintain or continue to increase their collaboration with
the racist régime of South Africa, especially in the political, economic, military and nuclear fields, thus encouraging that régime to persist in its inhuman and criminal
policy of brutal oppression of the peoples of southern
Africa and denial of their human rights;
4. Reaffirms once again that States and organizations
that give assistance to the racist régime of South Africa
become accomplices in the inhuman practices of racial discrimination, colonialism and apartheid perpetrated by
that régime, as well as in the acts of aggression against the
!iberation movements and neighbouring States;
5. Requests the Security Council urgently to consider
the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
against the racist régime of South Africa, in particular:
(a) The prohibition of ali technological assistance or
collaboration in the manufacture of arms and military
supplies in South Africa;
(b) The cessation of all collaboration with South
Africa in the nuclear field;
(c) The prohibition of all loans to, and all investments
in, South Africa and the cessation of any trade with South
Africa;
(d) An embargo on the supply of petroleum, petroleum products and other strategic goods to South
Africa;
6. Appeals to all States, specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations to extend all possible cooperation to the liberation movements of southern Africa
recognized by the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur
of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities for bis updated report;I 7
8. Reaffirms that the updating ofthe report on the adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of
political, military, economic and other forms ofassistance
given to the racist and colonialist régime ofSouth Africa is
of the greatest importance to the cause of fighting apartheid and other violations of human rights in South Africa
and Namibia;
9. Invites the Special Rapporteur:
(a) To continue to update, subject to annual review,
the list of banks, transnational corporations and other organizations assisting the racist and colonialist régime of
South Africa, giving such details regarding enterprises
listed as the Rapporteur may consider necessary and appropriate, including explanations of responses, if any, and
to submit the updated report to the General Assembly at
its forty-third session;
(b) To use all available material from other United Nations organs, Member States, national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, as well as other relevant
sources, in order to indicate the volume, nature and adverse human consequences of the assistance given to the
racist régime of South Africa;
(c) To intensify direct contacts with the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and the Centre against Apartheid ofthe Secretariat, with a view to consolidating mutual co-operation in updating his report;

159

10. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Special
Rapporteur all the assistance, including adequate travel
funds, that he may require in the exercise of bis mandate,
with a view in particular to intensifying direct contacts
with the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and the Centre against Apartheid, to expanding bis
work on the annotation of certain selected cases as reflected in the list contained in his report and to continuing
the computerization of future updated lists;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General, in accordance
with Economic and Social Council decision 1986/145 of
23 May 1986, to make available to the Special Rapporteur
two economists to help him to develop bis work of analysis
and documentation of sorne special cases mentioned in his
report;
12. Takes note with satisfaction of the disinvestment
measures, trade restrictions and other positive measures
taken by sorne countries and transnational corporations
and encourages them to continue in this direction;
13. Calls upon the Governments of the countries
where the banks, transnational corporations and other organizations named and listed in the updated report are
based to take effective action to put a stop to their trading,
manufacturing and investing activities in the territory of
South Africa as well as in the Territory of Namibia illegally occupied by the racist Pretoria régime;
14. Urgently requests ali specialized agencies, particularly the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank, to refrain from granting loans or financia! assistance
of any type to the racist régime of South Africa;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the updated report to the Special Committee against Apartheid,
the United Nations Council for Namibia, other bodies
concerned within the United Nations system and regional
international organizations;
16. Invites the Secretary-General to give the updated
report the widest dissemination, to issue itas a United Nations publication and to make it available to learned societies, research centres, universities, political and
humanitarian organizations and other interested groups;
17. Calls upon ali States, specialized agencies and regional, intergovernmental and other organizations concerned to give wide publicity to the updated report;
18. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to give
high priority at its forty-third session to the consideration
of the updated report;
19. Decides to consider at its forty-third session, as a
matter of high priority, the ítem entitled "Adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of política!,
military, economic and other forms of assistance given to
the racist and colonialist régime of South Africa", in the
light of any recommendations which the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities, the Commission on Human Rights, the Economic and Social Council and the Special Committee
against Apartheid may wish to submit to it.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/96.

Question of aging

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the International Plan of Action on
Aging, 18 which was endorsed by the General Assembly in
18 See Reporl of the World Auembly 011 Aging. Vienna, 26
July-6 Augu,1 1982 (United Nations puhlicatton, Sales No. E.82.1.16),
chap. VI, sect. A
