S/PV.6993

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6993rd meeting

Monday, 8 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Kadiri
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki
Mr. Parham

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2013/366)

13-38520 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1338520*

S/PV.6993

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council for the month of July 2013, I should like to take
this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Ambassador Sir Mark Lyall Grant,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of June
2013. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Lyall
Grant and his team for the great diplomatic skill with
which they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2013/366)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of South Sudan to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Hilde Johnson, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of the
Council, I welcome Ms. Johnson, who is joining today’s
meeting via video teleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/366, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson: I welcome this timely opportunity
to provide members of the Council with an update
on developments in South Sudan as the country
turns two years old tomorrow. Many of us witnessed
the outpouring of euphoria that greeted the dawn of
independence of South Sudan. The mood of that day
now seems like a fading memory. We have since seen
many setbacks and problems.

2

It is still important to acknowledge the progress
that has been made. Since its independence, with the
support of the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS), South Sudan has made strides
towards becoming a more stable and democratically
accountable country. Progress has been made in key
areas. In the area of consolidation of peace, on 25 April
the Government renewed its offer of amnesty to six
armed group leaders and their forces through the
issuance of a presidential decree. The amnesty has been
accepted by the South Sudan Liberation Army, the socalled South Sudan Democratic Army and the South
Sudan Defence Forces. Talks with the Government
have resulted in thousands of militia coming forward
for reintegration. That is a very positive development
for stability in the country, and in particular for Unity
and Upper Nile states.
Progress has also been made in the reform of the
South Sudan National Police Service (SSNPS) towards
a more professional and effective police service. The
Government and the SSNPS, with the support of
UNMISS, have completed the registration of now over
47,000 police officers, which is higher than the figure
reflected in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/366)
and the benchmarks. Ghost officers will be weeded
out, establishing new standards of professionalism and
openness. At the same time, United Nations police are
providing training at all levels, improving the conduct
and capacity of the SSNPS and helping reform the whole
police service. Tangible results are being achieved.
Another area where progress is being achieved
is the rule of law and security sector reform. The
Government, with the support of UNMISS and other
United Nations partners, has addressed more than 1,000
cases of prolonged and arbitrary detention. Also, with
the support of UNMISS and its international partners,
consultations for the development of a draft national
security policy have taken place in all 10 states,
and the drafting committee is now preparing for the
next level of consultations at the national level. The
legislative framework for the national security agencies
has been adopted in the Cabinet and will be submitted
for parliamentary approval. That is critical to ensure
democratic control.
The implementation of the Peacebuilding Support
Plan continues with preliminary but encouraging
results. Some important highlights include a joint
road map on integrated United Nations support to the
2015 elections and preparation for the national census,

13-38520

S/PV.6993

the successful organization of peace conferences in
different states, technical assistance to the national
reconciliation process, and progress towards a compact
under the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.
Also, concrete dividends of peace are being delivered in
several areas with the help of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes.

National and state authorities are struggling to
translate their commitments to improving respect for
human rights into action. Cases of arbitrary arrest,
detention, abuse and incidences of killings by security
forces, as well as the inability of the authorities to hold
those responsible to account on a timely basis, are cause
for deep concern.

Despite such achievements since independence,
progress in South Sudan has been hampered in other
areas. Although most parts of the country remain
stable, the security situation in Jonglei, particularly in
the south-east of the state, has dominated developments
since January. Fighting between the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the David Yau Yau armed
group, and threats from both, have resulted in the
displacement of thousands of civilians. The population
centres in Pibor county, where between 35,000 and
40,000 people used to live, including Boma, Manyabol
and Pibor, are largely emptied of civilians, while
the conditions of the remaining Murle population in
inaccessible rural areas remain largely unknown. That
is of deep concern.

To strengthen awareness and accountability,
UNMISS will increase its public reporting, issuing
thematic reports and incident-related reports on human
rights, while the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights will brief the Council directly on the
human rights situation in South Sudan.

Clashes in Boma in May also resulted in considerable
looting and damage to property, including that of
humanitarian organizations, reportedly perpetrated
by both armed groups and state security forces. The
same happened in Pibor town. Restrictions have been
reported on the movement of hundreds of civilians who
remain in Pibor town and the harassment of civilians
reportedly continues.
The violence in south-east Jonglei also had
tragic consequences for UNMISS, when, on 9 April,
a military convoy was ambushed approximately 12
kilometres outside Gumuruk, resulting in the death of
five peacekeepers, two national civilian staff members
and five private contractors. Accountability must be
ensured, both in relation to this incident, as well as in
relation to the shoot-down of the UNMISS helicopter
in 2012.
The deterioration in the security situation in parts
of South Sudan has been accompanied by human rights
violations by armed groups and national security
institutions. At the same time, we are concerned
that violations of the status-of-forces agreement
are continuing, and constraints in the operating
environment for the Mission and humanitarian agencies
remain a challenge.

In an encouraging sign of growing Government
concern for accountability, on 17 May President Salva
Kiir Mayardit issued a statement condemning the
violence by armed groups in Jonglei, as well as the
abuses perpetrated by ill-disciplined elements of the
Government security forces, and committed to bringing
those responsible to justice. SPLA investigations have
been conducted into incidents in Pibor and Manyabol
of reported abuses against civilians involving members
of the security forces. Much more needs to be done,
however, to enforce discipline and command and
control in order to build trust among the communities
and ensure respect for international humanitarian and
human rights law within the security forces.
The Government has also attempted to pursue
dialogue with David Yau Yau. While amnesty was
previously spurned by the armed group, the President
of South Sudan renewed his call to David Yau Yau to
take up the offer of amnesty in a statement on 28 June,
and he reiterated the Government’s commitment to
coming to an understanding with the armed group. In
the same statement, the President referred to the SPLA
investigations into the violations perpetrated against
civilians and he committed to bringing the perpetrators
to justice.
For its part, in response to the crisis in Jonglei,
UNMISS increased its military presence to a height
of nine infantry companies in late March, distributed
equally between the areas inhabited by all three of
the main communities of the state. In recent months,
UNMISS has conducted hundreds of patrols, of both
long and short duration, to reach out to and protect
all communities, and has provided protection at its
Pibor and Gumuruk bases to civilians seeking refuge.
However, severe operational and logistical constraints

13-385203

S/PV.6993

in the rainy season are now making it extremely difficult
to sustain more than five companies in Jonglei.
Beyond the escalation of violence in Jonglei,
inter-communal violence continues in the tri-state
area of Warrap, Lakes and Unity. In the face of
such violence, it is apparent more than ever that the
provision of physical protection alone will not bring
long-term peace and stability to South Sudan. The
Government needs to establish effective long-term
strategies through a political framework to address
the underlying causes of violence. The establishment
of the National Reconciliation Committee is one such
welcome indication of the political will needed to foster
necessary inclusive national dialogue.
UNMISS continues to support the Government’s
efforts to seek political solutions to inter-communal
conflict and peace initiatives aimed at bringing durable
solutions to disputes over scarce natural resources. The
Mission is encouraging local authorities, community
leaders and national figures to reinforce their efforts to
foster reconciliation. It is also essential that national and
state authorities, and the communities themselves, take
the lead and assume full ownership of such processes.
Burdened by the austerity climate, preoccupied
with efforts to address the security situation, and
challenged by divergences that have emerged within
the top echelons of the ruling Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM), the Government has also faced
difficulties in implementing political reforms and
strengthening public institutions. Bodies crucial to
a successful political transition, such as the National
Constitutional Review Commission and the National
Elections Commission, require adequate budgetary
support from the Government to advance their work
according to the schedule laid out in South Sudan’s
Transitional Constitution, while the Political Parties
Council has yet to be sworn in.
The key determinant for developments in South
Sudan continues to be its relations with the Sudan.
While the visit to Juba on 12 April of President Omer
Al-Bashir — the first such visit since South Sudan’s
independence — was promising, counter-accusations
by both sides of military support to rebel groups in
each other’s territories, and the threat by the Sudan to
shut down the oil pipeline, were a new setback. With
the recent visit by South Sudan’s Vice-President, Riek
Machar Teny Dhurgon, and a ministerial delegation
to Khartoum, as well as the expected arrival of First
Vice-President Ali Osman Taha in Juba today, it is
4

hoped that progress can be made. It is incumbent on
both parties, with the support of the international
community, to strengthen their cooperative efforts for
peaceful coexistence.
Since UNMISS was established, and through
its decentralized presence and continued expansion
through the county support bases, it has achieved
concrete results in a number of areas. In implementing
its mandate, however, it is facing enormous operational
challenges, both with regard to engineering assets and
mobility. Critical resource and capability gaps have
resulted in a mobility crisis, which particularly affects
our operations in high-risk areas such as Jonglei. That is
having an especially detrimental effect on the Mission’s
ability to protect civilians, by which its success will
ultimately be judged. Effective protection is only
possible through a presence in those communities most
at risk.
The ability of UNMISS to deploy its troops in
insecure areas is seriously constrained by aviation safety
procedures and a lack of military aviation capabilities.
Since one of its civilian helicopters was shot down on
21 December 2012, the Mission has had to introduce
new flight risk-assessment procedures, which does
slow down its responsiveness. The total of only three
military helicopters available to supply troops in Jonglei
is woefully inadequate and has had a major impact on
early warning and response capacity. Force multipliers
are therefore urgently required to rectify the problem.
Based on the recently completed military capability
study, options outlined by the Secretary-General in his
report include aerial surveillance capability, deterrence
and supplementary heavy-lift and riverine capabilities.
I urge the Council to take urgent action to support the
Mission in filling those critical resource and capability
gaps.
UNMISS is also developing options for
reconfiguring its military component and assets so that
they are more effectively located to address emerging
threats, security concerns and military deterrence
needs within the country. The focus will be on the
most unstable areas and where civilians are facing
the greatest threats of physical violence. For such a
deployment to be effective, however, force multipliers
will be essential.
As outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
before the Council, I, along with the rest of the Mission,
remain committed to helping the Government make
progress in pursuing further political reforms, creating
13-38520

S/PV.6993

a Constitution, improving the human rights situation
and conducting a population census and democratic
elections. Those goals will help to ensure that South
Sudan remains on the path to stability and prosperity.
The President: I thank Ms. Johnson for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Since this is the first
time that my delegation is addressing the Security
Council during your presidency, Madam, let me begin
by congratulating you on your assumption of this
important role and assuring you of the full support and
cooperation of our delegation and Government.
As we approach the second anniversary of our
independence, we remain deeply grateful for the
support we have received from the United Nations and
the international community for the overwhelming vote
of our people in our self-determination referendum, the
warmth with which our new State was welcomed to
the United Nations, and the generous support for our
new nation, as reflected in the creation of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the
report of the Secretary-General before us (S/2013/366).
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and UNMISS, through the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative in South
Sudan, Ms. Hilde Johnson, for the extensive work
undertaken, which is well reflected in the important
report on the situation in South Sudan.
As the Council is aware, tomorrow, 9 July, marks
our second anniversary as an independent nation. The
past two years have been very difficult for our young
nation, particularly with intra-communal violence in
the states of Jonglei, Lakes, Warrap, Unity, Upper Nile
and Western Bar El Ghazal, and, of course, the ongoing
tensions between ourselves and the Sudan. These
situations have severely constrained our ability as a
Government to improve our capacity for the delivery of
much-needed basic services, respect for human rights,
the protection of civilians, the general consolidation of
peace, and the provision of peace dividends.
The Secretary-General’s report draws necessary
attention to the challenges facing the Government
of South Sudan. These challenges include the
constitutional review and the drafting of the new
constitution, preparations for the 2015 elections, and

the work of the National Bureau of Statistics towards
the pre-election census. These are indications that the
leadership of South Sudan is determined to develop the
necessary tools for democratic transformation in the
young nation. We are aware, however, that there is a gap
between our aspirations and our performances, largely
due to a lack of capacity. We are thankful to UNMISS,
the United Nations agencies and our international
development partners for their efforts in mobilizing
material and human resources to address these pressing
challenges.
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
is genuinely concerned for the security and general
welfare of its citizens and of all those who live in
South Sudan. We take note of the deep concerns of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations in general and
the international community regarding the Security
of individuals, human rights protection, and respect
for the rule of law in general. We do not deny these
realities. However, we also realize that they are part
of the militarized legacy of the prolonged war that
devastated our society for over half a century. Without
taking this as an excuse, it is important that they not be
viewed as representing Government policy. The Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) fought against
injustice and the marginalization of identity groups. An
SPLM-led Government could not, therefore, advance
a strategy against the safety and the rights of the
population for which it fought. We are determined to
address these challenges, even though we acknowledge
that it will not be easy, and that we need the support of
our friends and international partners to enhance our
capacity to achieve our desired objective.
The Government of South Sudan places great value
on the support of UNMISS, particularly in the states
of Jonglei, Upper Nile and the tri-state area of Lakes,
Warrap and Western Bahr El Ghazal. Inter-communal
violence and cattle-rustling pose a major challenge to
the limited capacity of our nascent State. We believe
that dialogue and reconciliation represent the only way
to promote peace, security and stability in our country.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes are essential, but we must continue to
foster a culture of peace, mutual understanding and
cooperation. We need to develop the capacity of our
people to silence the guns and promote socioeconomic
development and prosperity for all.
South Sudan continues to express its heartfelt
condolences for the UNMISS staff and other

13-385205

S/PV.6993

humanitarian workers who lost their lives in South
Sudan on 21 December 2012 and 12 March and 9 April
2013, respectively. We regret that the investigations into
these incidences have been prolonged, but there should
be no doubt that the Government of South Sudan wants a
transparent and accountable allocation of responsibility.
I am pleased to report that these incidents will be the
subject of consideration by our Cabinet this week to
determine the appropriate response. It is certainly not
our intention to disappoint our partners and friends
in the international community, who provide us with
the support we need to ensure peacebuilding and
consolidation in our young nation. We therefore plead
for patience and understanding for the delays, which
are due not to our lack of the will to cooperate, but to
our capacity constraints.
As South Sudan enters its second year of
independence under very difficult political and
economic conditions, the issue of Abyei remains
unresolved, resulting in tragic suffering for the people
of the area. The recent assassination of the Ngok Dinka
Paramount Chief was a manifestation of that tragic

6

situation. We remain optimistic, however, that given
the recent efforts of the Governments of South Sudan
and the Sudan, respectively, especially reflected in the
consultations between their Vice-Presidents, positive
results towards the goal of two viable, prosperous and
peaceful States, living peacefully and cooperatively
side by side, are indeed achievable. We look to the
international community and to this Council to maintain
the necessary support to the parties to implement their
agreements in good faith.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to the Council for its continued attention
to the challenges facing South Sudan and its unfailing
support in addressing them through UNMISS. We
assure the Council of our Government’s readiness
to work with all international partners towards the
promotion of peace in our country and in the region.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

13-38520
