United Nations

A/RES/66/253

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 February 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 34

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 February 2012
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/66/L.36 and Add.1)]

66/253. The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/176 of 19 December 2011, as well as Human Rights
Council resolutions S-16/1 of 29 April 2011, 1 S-17/1 of 23 August 20111 and S-18/1
of 2 December 2011, 2
Expressing grave concern at the deterioration of the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, in particular the ongoing human rights violations and use of
violence by the Syrian authorities against its population,
Reaffirming the role of regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security as set out in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and to the principles of
the Charter,
Reaffirming further that all States Members of the United Nations should
refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Welcoming the engagement of the Secretary-General and all diplomatic efforts
aimed at ending the crisis,
1.
Reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, and stresses the need to resolve
the current political crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic peacefully;
Strongly condemns the continued widespread and systematic violations of
2.
human rights and fundamental freedoms by the Syrian authorities, such as the use of
force against civilians, arbitrary executions, the killing and persecution of

_______________
1
2

11-47400

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. I.
Ibid., Supplement No. 53B (A/66/53/Add.2 and Corr.1), chap. II.

*1147400*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/253

protestors, human rights defenders and journalists, arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearances, interference with access to medical treatment, torture, sexual
violence, and ill-treatment, including against children;
Calls upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to immediately
3.
put an end to all human rights violations and attacks against civilians, protect its
population, fully comply with its obligations under applicable international law and
fully implement Human Rights Council resolutions S-16/1,1 S-17/11 and S-18/1,2 as
well as General Assembly resolution 66/176, including by cooperating fully with the
independent international commission of inquiry;
Condemns all violence, irrespective of where it comes from, and calls
4.
upon all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic, including armed groups, to stop all
violence or reprisals immediately, in accordance with the League of Arab States
initiative;
Stresses again the importance of ensuring accountability and the need to
5.
end impunity and hold to account those responsible for human rights violations,
including those violations that may amount to crimes against humanity;
Demands that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in
6.
accordance with the Plan of Action of the League of Arab States of 2 November
2011 and the decisions of the League of Arab States of 22 January and 12 February
2012, without delay:
(a)

Cease all violence and protect its population;

(b)

Release all persons detained arbitrarily owing to the recent incidents;

(c) Withdraw all Syrian military and armed forces from cities and towns and
return them to their original home barracks;
(d)

Guarantee the freedom of peaceful demonstration;

(e) Allow full and unhindered access and movement for all relevant League
of Arab States institutions and Arab and international media in all parts of the Syrian
Arab Republic to determine the truth about the situation on the ground and monitor
the incidents taking place;
Calls for an inclusive Syrian-led political process, conducted in an
7.
environment free from violence, fear, intimidation and extremism and aimed at
effectively addressing the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the people of the
Syrian Arab Republic, without prejudging the outcome;
Fully supports the League of Arab States decision of 22 January 2012 to
8.
facilitate a Syrian-led political transition to a democratic, pluralistic political
system, in which citizens are equal regardless of their affiliations or ethnicities or
beliefs, including through the commencement of a serious political dialogue
between the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the whole spectrum of the
Syrian opposition, under the auspices of the League of Arab States and in
accordance with the timetable set out by the League of Arab States;
Calls upon all Member States to provide support to the League of Arab
9.
States initiative, as requested;
10. Calls upon the Syrian authorities to allow safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance in order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid to
persons in need of assistance;

2

A/RES/66/253

11. Requests, in this context, the Secretary-General and all relevant United
Nations bodies to provide support to the efforts of the League of Arab States, both
through good offices aimed at promoting a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis,
including through the appointment of a special envoy, and through technical and
material assistance, in consultation with the League of Arab States;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the
present resolution, in consultation with the League of Arab States, within fifteen
days of its adoption.
97th plenary meeting
16 February 2012

3
