117

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

based on gross annual salaries as a result of decisions
taken by the General Assembly,
l. Decides that, with effect from 1 December 1971,
the salary of the Secretary-General shall be $62,500
gross ($37,850 net) per annum;
2. Decides further that the provisions relating to
the retirement allowance of the Secretary-General shall
henceforth be as follows:
(a) On retirement on the completion of a full term
of office, the annual retirement allowance of the Secretary-General shall be one half of the gross salary;
( b) In the event of the Secretary-General' s retirement before the completion of the full term of his
appointment, he shall be provided with a retirement
allowance equal to one half of the full allowance if he
has served at least one year, but less than two years;
for longer periods, the retirement allowance shall increase by one eighth of the full allowance for each
completed year of service beyond one year until reacbing its full level on the completion of five years of
service;
(e) (i) lf the Secretary-General should die in office,
bis widow shall receive a pension equal to one half of
the retirement allowance to whicb the Secretary-General would have been entitled bad he retired on the
date of bis death; in no case sball the widow's pension
be less tban one half of the retirement allowance wbich
would have been payable to the Secretary-General after
one year of service;
(ii) If the Secretary-General should die wbile he
is in receipt of a retirement allowance, bis widow shall
receive a pension equal to one half of that retirement
allowance;
(iii) If the Secretary-General should die wbile in
office or while he is in receipt of a retirement allowance,
benefits equal to those provided for in the Regulations
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund sball
be paid to bis surviving children or secondary dependants;
(iv) The conditions under wbicb tbe benefits listed
in (i), (ii) and (iii) above will be payable shall be
consistent with those app!icable to sucb benefits wben
they are paid by tbe United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund;
(d) The provisions contained in appendix D of the
Stafl Rules of tbe United Nations sball be applicable
mutatis mutandis in the event of death, injury or illness
of the Secretary-General attributable to the performance of official duties on behalf of the United Nations.

B
The General Assembly
Appoints the following persons as members of the
Committee on Contributions for a three-year term
beginning on 1 January 1972:
Mr. Joseph Quao Cleland,
Mr. Adbulrahim Abby Farah,
Mr. Angus J. Matheson,
Mr. David Silveira da Mota,
Miss Kathleen Whalley.
2015th p·lenary meeting,
13 December 1971.
•

A

The General Assembly
Appoints the following person as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a period beginning
on 1 January 1972 and ending on 31 December 1973:
Mr. David L. Stottlemyer.
2015th plenary meeting,
13 December 1971.

*

As a resu/t of tlw above appointments, the Committee on
Contributions will be composed as follows: Mr. Amjad ALI
( Pakistan), Mr. Joseph Qua o CLELAND (Ghana), Mr. Abdulrahim Abby FARAH (Somalia), Mr. Angus J. MATHESON
(Canada), Mr. Santiago MEYER PICÓN (Mexico), Mr. Takeshi
NAITO (Japan), Mr. Stanislaw RACZKOWSKI (Poland), Mr.
David SJLVEIRA DA MoTA (Brazil), Mr. David L. STOTTLEMYER (United States of America), Mr. Maurice VIAUD
(France), Miss Kathleen WHALLEY ( United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland) and Mr. A. V. ZAKHAROV
( Un ion of Soviet Socialist Rcpublics).

2798 (XXVI). Enlargement of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions: amendment to rule 157 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2758 (XXVI) of 25 October 1971 on the restoration of tbe lawful rights of
the People's Republic of China in the United Nations,
1. Decides to increase the membership of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions from twelve to thirteen members;
2. Decides to amend, with effect from 1 January
1972, rule 157 of its rules of procedure to rcad as
follows:
"Rule 15713
"The General Assembly shall appoint an Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (hereinafter called tbe 'Advisory Committee'),
with a membership of thirteen, including at Ieast
tbree financia! experts of recognized standing."
2015th plenary meeting,
13 December 1971.

1997th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.
2797 (XXVI). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the Committee on Contributions

*

2834 (XXVI).

Pattern of conferences

The General Assembly,
Aware that the increasing number of conferences
and meetings is one of tbe causes of the growth in
the budget and in documentation,
1. Takes note of tbe Secretary-General's report on
thc pattern of conferences; 14
2. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session the
1 3 Formerly rule 156

(see resolution 2837 (XXVI), annex I,

para. 9).
11 A/8448

and Add. l.
