A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/12 B
30 May 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 44
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/49/48/Add.1)]
49/12 B. Organization of the list of speakers for the
Special Commemorative Meeting of the General
Assembly on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/215 B of 26 May 1994, in which it decided to
convene a special commemorative meeting on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Charter of the United Nations, to
be held at United Nations Headquarters from 22 to 24 October 1995,
Recalling also paragraph 8 of the report of the Preparatory Committee
for the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations, 1/ in which the
modalities for inviting Palestine and, if they so request, other observers to
attend the Special Commemorative Meeting were agreed upon,
1.
Decides that the Special Commemorative Meeting shall consist of a
total of six meetings, on the basis of two meetings a day;

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 48 (A/49/48).

95-77299

/...

A/RES/49/12 B
Page 2

2.
Also decides that the list of speakers for the Special
Commemorative Meeting shall be organized in accordance with the procedure set
forth in the annex to the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
24 May 1995
ANNEX
Organization of the list of speakers for the Special Commemorative
Meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations
1.
The list of speakers for the Special Commemorative Meeting will be
established on the basis of six meetings, each meeting having 25 speaking
slots, with the exception of the meeting on Tuesday, 24 October 1995, in the
afternoon, which will have 60 speaking slots.
2.
The first speaker in the Special Commemorative Meeting will be the head
of State of the host country of the Organization.
3.
The list of speakers for the Special Commemorative Meeting will be
initially established as follows:
The Secretary-General or his representative will draw one name
(a)
from a box containing the names of all Member States, observer States and
Palestine, in its capacity as observer, participating in the Special
Commemorative Meeting. This procedure will be repeated until all names have
been drawn from the box, thus establishing the order in which participants
will be invited to choose their meetings and select their speaking slots;
(b)
Six boxes will be prepared, each one representing a meeting and
each one containing numbers corresponding to speaking slots at that meeting;
Once the name of a Member State, observer State or Palestine, in
(c)
its capacity as observer, has been drawn by the Secretary-General or his
representative, that Member State, observer State or Palestine, in its
capacity as observer, will be invited to first choose a meeting and then draw
from the appropriate box the number indicating the speaking slot in the
meeting;
(d)
A number of speaking slots at each meeting will be reserved for
observers participating in the Special Commemorative Meeting. They will be
invited to participate in the initial establishment of the list of speakers in
the same manner as Member States, observer States and Palestine, in its
capacity as observer, but from a different set of six boxes.
4.
The establishment of the initial list of speakers for the Special
Commemorative Meeting as outlined in paragraph 3 of the present annex will
take place at a meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the Fiftieth
Anniversary of the United Nations to be held on 7 June 1995.
5.
Subsequently, the list of speakers for each meeting will be rearranged
in accordance with the established practice of the General Assembly when

/...

A/RES/49/12 B
Page 3

organizing each category of speakers, following the order resulting from the
selection process outlined in paragraph 3 of the present annex:
(a)
Heads of State will thus be accorded first priority, followed by
vice-presidents, crown princes/princesses, heads of government, the highest
ranking official of the Holy See and Switzerland, as observer States, and
Palestine, in its capacity as observer, ministers, permanent representatives
and other observers;
(b)
In the event that the level at which a statement is to be made is
subsequently changed, the speaker will be moved to the next available speaking
slot in the appropriate category at the same meeting;
Participants may arrange to exchange their speaking slots in
(c)
accordance with the established practice of the General Assembly;
(d)
Speakers who are not present when their speaking turn comes will
be automatically moved to the next available speaking slot within their
category.
6.
In order to accommodate all speakers at the Special Commemorative
Meeting, statements should be limited to five minutes, on the understanding
that this will not preclude the circulation of more extensive texts.
7.
The full text of all speeches provided to the Special Commemorative
Meeting will be subsequently published in a bound book.
