S/PV.7754

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7754th meeting

Friday, 12 August 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Toro-Carnevali

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-25681 (E)
*1625681*

S/PV.7754

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/705, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America and Uruguay
Abstaining:
China, Egypt, Russian Federation and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 11
votes in favour, none against and four abstentions. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2304
(2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Last
week, the United Nations reported that during the month
of July when fighting in Juba surged, soldiers killed
innocent civilians and raped women in broad daylight.
The United Nations documented 217 cases of sexual
violence between 8 and 25 July in Juba alone. Those
are the cases that were reported. The actual number
is undoubtedly much higher. In a single incident, on
18 July, 16 women and 12 girls were reportedly raped
2/12

12/08/2016

by soldiers at a Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) checkpoint in the capital. It is grotesque, and it
must stop. Since 7 July alone, more than 69,000 people,
the overwhelming majority of whom are women and
children, have fled South Sudan for Uganda. The status
quo in South Sudan is unbearable. The status quo for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
is unsustainable.
Today, the Security Council has taken important
action in support of calls from key regional partners to
address this. It is because of this horrific violence that
South Sudan’s regional partners and the African Union
have called upon the Security Council to authorize
urgently a regional protection force. Resolution 2304
(2016) does that. In our deliberations, some members
of the Council expressed concern that we were moving
too quickly. The opposite is true. It has been more
than one month since the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) Council of Ministers called
for urgent revisions to the UNMISS mandate with
additional troops to secure Juba — a decision that the
African Union Peace and Security Council endorsed
the same day. On 5 August, IGAD Plus Heads of
State and Government again called upon the Security
Council to urgently extend the mission of UNMISS
with a revised mandate, including the deployment of a
regional protection force. That decision was endorsed
once again by the African Union Peace and Security
Council just yesterday.
South Sudan’s neighbours have been clear about
what this moment requires, and the resolution adopted
today responds directly to those repeated and urgent
calls. Further delays would not help those in Juba
wondering if they can venture outside safely to find food.
Further delays would not have helped those waiting for
humanitarian aid that currently cannot arrive. Further
delays would not have helped protect those who face
extraordinary threats with each passing day.
We consulted extensively with fellow Security
Council members and countries in the region to shape
the resolution. While we hoped to achieve unity on
the vote, let us be clear: we have had Security Council
unity on UNMISS for some time, and one only need
look at what unity has achieved with respect to
UNMISS’s ability to operate on the ground. UNMISS
is facing daily threats, daily impediments and daily and
sometimes deadly challenges. Security Council unity
has not solved that. Additional authorities and resources
16-25681

12/08/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

might. The Council simply could not wait any longer to
give UNMISS the tools that it needs to respond.
The resolution sets out three priorities for the
4,000-strong regional protection force. First, the force
will facilitate safe and free movement in the capital.
Secondly, it will protect key facilities essential to the
well-being of the people of Juba. Thirdly, it will have
the authority to prevent attacks against civilians, the
United Nations and humanitarian actors.
Like the UNMISS troops already on the ground,
the force will operate under a United Nations Charter
Chapter VII mandate, with the authority to use all
the necessary means to carry out its responsibilities.
The regional protection force is part of UNMISS’s
broader mission, the core responsibilities of which
include protecting civilians, monitoring human rights,
facilitating conditions for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and supporting the implementation of the
peace agreement.
We are grateful to the UNMISS troop contributors
for the sacrifices that they have made during this
incredibly challenging period and to the troops who
serve in the Mission, some of whom have made the
ultimate sacrifice. The regional protection force has
been created in response to the collapse of security in
Juba, and it will remain until South Sudan’s leaders
take the steps necessary to provide that security for
their own people.
Some Council members today will speak about
the importance of obtaining the South Sudanese
Government’s consent. We recognize the importance
of Government cooperation, but the United States
would point to the actions of the Government. For
while we expect the South Sudanese Government to
treat the United Nations like the partner that it is, that
is simply not what is happening on the ground in South
Sudan today. Instead, as we all know, the Government
of South Sudan’s troops are actively blocking United
Nations personnel from carrying out their life-saving
work, which in some cases has led to the death of United
Nations peacekeepers. Those peacekeepers, including
from countries represented on the Council, who are
operating under a mandate adopted by the Council,
could not be evacuated to receive urgent medical
attention because the South Sudanese Government
would not provide flight clearances.
Consent is of course important, and the Government
of South Sudan, in dialogue with the Heads of State of

S/PV.7754

Uganda, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Kenya, the Sudan, Djibouti
and Somalia and the presidential representatives of
Algeria, Chad, Nigeria and South Africa, has offered
its consent to the deployment of the regional protection
force in principle. But we must be clear-eyed about the
challenges that UNMISS and its new regional protection
force are up against.
I appeal to all Security Council members — the
Ambassadors on the Council — to read the three-page
letter the Secretary-General sent to the Council a
few days ago setting out the severe restrictions by
the Government of South Sudan, which are crippling
the Mission’s ability to operate. Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations confers upon the Council
the responsibility to take steps necessary to restore
peace and security. That includes giving UNMISS the
mandate that it needs to protect civilians and maintain
security in Juba. To suggest otherwise would mean
negotiating a mandate with the same Government
that has consistently restricted the movement of
those very peacekeepers, organized protests against
those peacekeepers and harassed humanitarian staff
generally. The Council can deliberate only for so long
about the terms of a mandate as the situation in South
Sudan deteriorates, an increasing number of innocent
people are killed, women and girls are raped and the
country’s neighbours call for action and express a
readiness to respond.
More time will amount to only more death and
suffering. Today, the Council has taken a step forward
in its efforts to prevent that from happening. The
stakes are high, and the consequences of continued
obstruction should be clear. By adopting this resolution,
the Security Council has made very clear that if the
Government of South Sudan obstructs the deployment
of UNMISS’s regional protection force or continues to
stand in the way of UNMISS carrying out its mandate,
the Security Council is prepared to vote on the arms
embargo draft resolution that is contained in annexed to
resolution 2304 (2016). The United States is prepared to
support imposing an arms embargo on South Sudan if
the obstruction continues. If in 30 days the SecretaryGeneral reports obstruction, the Council has decided
to vote, and we are confident that consequences
will follow.
While the resolution marks a steps towards
addressing the violence in South Sudan, UNMISS
alone cannot bring an end to the persistent struggle for
power among the country’s leaders, which has caused

16-256813/12

S/PV.7754

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the suffering of so many people. Until the leaders of
South Sudan are willing to put what is good for their
people before themselves, putting peace ahead of
personal ambition and power, and until they show the
will to find a political solution to this grinding conflict,
the people of South Sudan will continue to suffer from
the bloodshed and instability that their leaders reap.
Let me conclude with the account of a young South
Sudanese woman, a 19-year-old named Betty Christian.
Betty fled her home in Juba last month during the latest
wave of violence. Betty told a reporter that as she fled
her home that she had to pass by a group of soldiers who
debated whether or not to shoot her. Eventually, they
decided to let her live, and so Betty thanked them. She
thanked them for not killing her. That is the world in
which so many of South Sudan’s people live today: they
thank people for letting them live.
Far too many people do not even get to do that.
Perhaps no other country has invested as much in South
Sudan’s future as the United States of America has.
We share the desire of the people of South Sudan for
a peaceful and prosperous future, but it is the actions
of South Sudan’s leaders — their dangerous, deadly
choices — that stand in the way of that future.
When South Sudan’s leaders recommit to the cause
of peace, they will find in the United States a steadfast
partner. In the meantime, we will continue to seek a
way to end the atrocities on the ground so that people
like Betty Christian do not have to be thankful every
time they are not killed.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2304
(2016) today. It is a vitally important decision that
needed to be taken now. Through this resolution, we
have created a protection force under the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), a protection force
called for by both the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU), a
protection force that the Government of South Sudan
agreed to in principle.
This resolution should strengthen the United
Nations ability to protect people and to save lives. It
should mean a safer and more secure Juba. It should
mean that food, supplies and support can reach people
who are so desperately in need. It should mean the road
back to the political process.
4/12

12/08/2016

But the key word is “should”. All those things
can happen only if the Government of South Sudan
makes good on its promises. The Government bears
the primary responsibility to help its people. That
means the Government supporting, not obstructing, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the United Nations troops. It means the Government
engaging quickly in addressing the practicalities of a
protection force. And it means the Government holding
to account anyone responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
abuses, including rape. We welcome the continued
support of IGAD and the AU to help the Government
fulfil those important commitments.
Many outside the Chamber today will ask whether
we have done enough, when hundreds of people have
been killed in Juba in the past month, when hundreds of
women and girls have been raped or gang-raped, when
tens of thousands have been forced to flee their homes.
Behind each and every one of these unspeakable acts
lies unspeakable violence, violence perpetrated by
those with guns against those without. Therefore,
yes, today we have agreed to strengthen the United
Nations Mission, which should save lives if the text is
implemented fully.
But today we also had a chance to stop the violence
by implementing an immediate arms embargo on South
Sudan. On that, we failed. We must and we will return
to this issue.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2304 (2016). We agree that an acute
worsening of the situation in South Sudan requires an
appropriate reaction from the Security Council. We
support the initiative of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) on strengthening security
in South Sudan, including the establishment of the
regional protection force. At the same time, in working
on the United States draft, a whole range of important
issues was not resolved, such as the agreement of the
South Sudanese authorities to the mandate of the force,
its presence outside of the capital, the force’s possible
use of force and the sanctions annex, which should have
been treated in the form of a separate draft resolution.
We consider that paragraph 10 of the resolution
will be implemented in close cooperation with Juba.
We consider the consent of the host country to be a
cornerstone, not only from the point of view of respect
16-25681

12/08/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

for the sovereignty of South Sudan and for the basic
principles of United Nations peacekeeping, but also
from a practical point of view, specifically in terms
of implementing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, including the work of the
regional protection force. The security of peacekeepers
will depend on such consent. We call on IGAD and the
Secretariat to work constructively with the Government
of South Sudan with a view to finding the modalities
for implementing resolution 2304 (2016).
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China applauds the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union and countries
of the region for their good offices in seeking to resolve
the conflict in South Sudan. China supports the people
of Africa in resolving African issues in an African way.
We also support IGAD in playing its leading role in
addressing the issue of South Sudan.
China’s position on the issue of South Sudan is
underpinned by an immediate restoration of peace
and stability in the country in order to ease the impact
of the situation on countries of the region. As the
situation in South Sudan remains serious and complex,
the international community must make collective
efforts to bring the parties concerned back to the
path of political settlement and implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, so as to immediately achieve
stability and national development and to provide the
people of South Sudan with a peace dividend at the
earliest date.

S/PV.7754

revisions that China and some of the African members
proposed are not fully incorporated in the adopted text,
China had no other option but to abstain in the voting
on resolution 2304 (2016).
As directed by the IGAD Plus Extraordinary
Summit on 5 August, the IGAD regional Chiefs of
Defence Staff will hold consultations with the military
leaders of the Transitional Government of National
Unity of South Sudan on the deployment of the regional
protection force. The African Union Peace and Security
Council will also hold a meeting on 18 August to discuss
the deployment of the force. China hopes that all the
parties concerned will reach consensus on specific
issues related to the regional protection force and is
ready to continue playing its constructive role in favour
of sustainable peace and stability in South Sudan.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2304 (2016) today, Friday, August 12, which
marks the end of the current mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). In doing so,
the Security Council is responding to the earnest pleas
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) Plus Extraordinary Summit, which, in
paragraph 11 of its communiqué, urged the Security
Council to immediately extend the UNMISS mandate
with a revised mandate that includes deployment of a
regional protection force. We therefore answered the
appeal, and the Council has done its job.

The regional protection force, in its deployment
process, must conduct full consultations with the
Transitional Government of National Unity of South
Sudan on specific issues, obtain the consent of and work
in coordination with the Government, and carry out its
work in a way that is truly useful for the process of
bringing about peace in South Sudan and is conducive to
the efforts of the Transitional Government to maintain
stability. Only by doing that will the regional protection
force truly achieve what is provided for in resolution
2304 (2016) in terms of promoting peace and stability
in South Sudan with a view to creating favourable
conditions for the implementation of the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict by all parties in the
country.

The excitement that accompanied the independence
of South Sudan gave way to tragic events, including
internally displaced persons and the loss of human
life, thereby making the civilian population the main
victims of a conflict that has overwhelmed them. That
turn of events had previously led the Security Council,
in resolution 2155 (2014), to place the protection of
civilians, in particular women and children, at the
heart of the UNMISS mandate. The same applies
to the subsequent resolutions 2223 (2015) and 2252
(2015). Therefore, the resolution we have just adopted
extends the mandate of UNMISS until 15 December by
adding a regional protection force, established for an
initial period that would conclude in December. That
is certainly a sign of our collective commitment and
sustained attention to following up the political and
security situation of that great country, South Sudan.

Due to the fact that those principles are not fully
reflected in resolution 2304 (2016), and that the

Senegal voted in favour of the resolution in order
to respond to the appeals of the Heads of State and

16-256815/12

S/PV.7754

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Government of the States members of IGAD to support
the resolution. The African Union Peace and Security
Council also endorsed IGAD’s decision, and the
penholder of the resolution, the United States delegation,
recalled the Secretary-General’s impassioned appeal
along these lines when he addressed the Council.
Through our vote, Senegal also helps the civilian
population of the sister Republic of South Sudan. The
resolution allows UNMISS to carry out its mandate
to protect civilians and commits the countries of the
region, the African Union Peace and Security Council
and IGAD to work together with the authorities of the
Republic of South Sudan to resolve this political crisis
and ensure the swift deployment of the force.
To conclude, the delegation of Senegal stresses the
key role of regional actors in achieving the objectives
of the peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions
established by the Council.
Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are deeply concerned
about the deteriorating situation in South Sudan. We
believe that it is necessary to put an immediate stop to
the violence and we are troubled by the difficult situation
faced by the South Sudanese people. We condemn the
fact that the parties are not honouring their obligations
under human rights law or their agreement to resolve
the conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
We stress that we firmly and steadfastly advocate
for the protection of the civil population. Nevertheless,
we are concerned that the resolution 2304 (2016) was
drafted without consulting South Sudan’s Transitional
Government of National Unity, which, in its letter of
9 August 2016, stated that the approval of the resolution
“would strengthen foreign forces under UNMISS,
in addition to the deployment of a regional
protection force, in preparation for an invasion of
South Sudan, and its relegation to the status of a
protectorate of the United Nations”.
The deployment of such a force without the consent
of the host State could make the situation on the ground
even more tense and violent. In these conditions, we
are not convinced that the deployment of a regional
protection force would result in the attainment of our
common goal — the immediate end of violence and the
protection of civilians. Furthermore, we do not have
clear information on the details of the implementation
of the resolution, including who will participate
6/12

12/08/2016

using what resources, and how exactly the measures
envisioned in the mandate will be implemented.
We hope that the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of South Sudan will be fully respected. We are
of the view that if we are to protect the people of South
Sudan and to ensure a lasting and sustainable solution
to the conflict, we will need more diplomacy and
dialogue and fewer of the threats and sanctions offered
by the resolution. In our view, that was the spirit of the
decisions adopted by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, with the support of the African Union,
and that is the tone that we hoped to maintain in the
resolution.
The solution to this crisis is a political one and
we will continue to insist on that approach. Our vote
today should be interpreted in no way as condoning
the behaviour of the parties in South Sudan or as
indifference to the need to protect civilians and their
rights, but rather as a call for caution so as to not repeat
past mistakes.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Spain welcomes the adoption of resolution
2304 (2016) and warmly thanks the United States for
its efforts towards its adoption. The Security Council
has reacted swiftly to the clear and unambiguous call
from the region and addressed the serious concern of
the international community over the grave situation
in South Sudan by renewing its firm commitment to
peace, stability and the protection of civilians in that
country. We have done what is expected of us. We have
fulfilled our responsibility.
The resolution is not perfect. Spain believes that
we have squandered a good opportunity to establish
an immediate and unconditional arms embargo. We
truly do not understand the reasons not to do so; in any
case, no one has explained these reasons to us. Perhaps
they cannot be mentioned in public or private, but
what is certain is that the situation on the ground and
peace and security concerns have long necessitated an
arms embargo.
Even though the resolution is not the one we would
have desired, it does meets the minimum needs and,
given the urgency of the situation, we have supported it
unequivocally. These were not the right circumstances
for approving a more ambitious resolution, as any delay
in its adoption would have been unacceptable. When
a country is plunged in violence and instability, as is
South Sudan, our responsibility is to act with a sense of
16-25681

12/08/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7754

urgency, especially when the regional actors, both the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union, are unambiguously calling on
us to do so. We cannot err on the side of omission;
inaction is simply not an option.

UNMISS personnel are on the ground in order
to restore peace and stability for the people of South
Sudan. The Security Council should closely monitor the
situation and remain committed to ensuring stability on
the ground.

Now, the Council, the African Union and IGAD must
maintain their unity of intention and action in order to
effectively and quickly deploy the regional protection
force. We trust that the Transitional Government
of National Unity will take note of the unswerving
commitment of the international community and the
region to the security of the people of South Sudan, set
aside its obstructive attitude and fully cooperate with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations, IGAD and the African Union. It is the primary
responsibility of the Government of South Sudan
to protect its own people. With this resolution, the
Security Council and the region are offering the help
and support that the people of South Sudan so urgently
need. It is an opportunity that the Government of South
Sudan cannot and must not pass up.

Secondly, the implementation of the August
2015 Agreement is vital to achieving lasting peace
and sustainable development in South Sudan. Japan
continues to urge the political leaders and uniformed
forces of South Sudan to fully abide by the ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities and to seriously work
on the implementation of the Agreement. In this
regard, Japan commends the efforts made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and hopes to see further efforts to
this end.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank the United States for showing strong leadership
in preparing resolution 2304 (2016). Japan supported
the resolution in the strong belief that action is urgently
needed after the shocking fighting in Juba last month,
and strengthening the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) is the most effective response to
address the situation.
I should like to take this opportunity to emphasize
three points.
First, the resolution establishes a regional protection
force within UNMISS. Japan, as a country contributing
troops to UNMISS, appreciates the willingness and the
preparedness expressed by countries in the region to
deploy personnel. Japan believes that this new force
will contribute significantly to South Sudan’s stability.
Needless to say, the basic principles of peacekeeping,
including consent of the parties, must be observed
and maintained.
For the smooth deployment of this force and
for the force to be effective, close coordination and
consultation among the Transitional Government of
National Unity of South Sudan, the countries of the
region and the United Nations should continue. We must
also emphasize that hostile acts, threats and harassment
towards UNMISS personnel, including obstruction of
their freedom of movement, are unacceptable.

Finally, I wish to return to the reason we are all
gathered here today: our commitment to the people of
South Sudan. Five years ago, the Council witnessed
the birth of South Sudan as the world’s newest country.
Sadly, there was no room to celebrate during this year’s
Independence Day. We must help South Sudan achieve
its promise by standing by the country when it needs
us the most. It is Japan’s sincere hope for South Sudan
that it will achieve peace and stability and make great
strides on the path towards development. Japan has
supported South Sudan since its independence and
pledges to continue to be a partner in its development
and reconciliation, as a true friend to its people. We
must all work together to ensure that by this time next
year, we are able to celebrate progress and stability in
South Sudan on the occasion of its sixth anniversary.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): My delegation voted
in favour of resolution 2304 (2016), as we believe
that the Security Council can no longer watch idly
the accelerating collapse of the security and political
situation in South Sudan. The enhancement of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force in South Sudan, as requested by the
region and consented to in principle by the Government
of South Sudan, should facilitate the establishment of
an environment conducive to the further work of the
Transitional Government of National Unity, which
is the cornerstone of the peaceful settlement of the
conflict in South Sudan.

16-256817/12

S/PV.7754

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In this regard, we look forward to the swift
deployment of and the assumption of security tasks
by the Regional Force, as mandated by the Council.
However, sustainable peace cannot be achieved
unless the South Sudanese leaders fully adhere to the
commitments they have undertaken under the peace
agreement. This includes the cessation of hostilities,
engagement and dialogue and holding accountable
those involved in gross violations and abuses of human
rights, including rape.
We urge the South Sudanese leadership to put the
well-being of their people above all other interests. As
Ukraine is one of the countries contributing troops
and police to UNMISS, it also wishes to flag its total
rejection of attacks on UNMISS personnel and premises
in South Sudan. The United Nations is there to help the
South Sudanese people. It is the people of South Sudan
who need the United Nations.
In this light, we call on the Government of South
Sudan to lift all restrictions on UNMISS operations
so as to enable the Mission effectively to carry out
its mandate.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand,
too, welcomes the adoption of resolution 2304 (2016).
It is disappointing that the Council was unable to reach
unanimity on the text, but on issues as important as
this, sometimes that is just not possible. The Council
has nonetheless adopted this resolution under Chapter
VII of the Charter, as was the case for the earlier
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
resolutions, and we must give it our full support in
its implementation.
We thank the United States for its commendable
efforts and made in the negotiations on the draft and
the significant engagement of all Council members,
including the Russian Federation, for calling the
important discussion on the text at yesterday’s
informal consultations.
New Zealand’s vote in favour of the resolution
demonstrates our strong support for the Council’s
response to the clear message we have received from
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union that the Council needs to act urgently
and decisively to mandate a Regional Protection Force
within UNMISS. Any questions as to the need for this
force are comprehensively answered in the letter from
the Secretary-General to Council members earlier
this week.
8/12

12/08/2016

In the deployment of peacekeeping forces, host
State consent is desirable and should be worked for
in every case. There is a clear practical reason why
this important. In this respect, we note and welcome
the in-principle consent given by the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan. But
consent to every aspect of a peacekeeping mission is not
a requirement in a Chapter VII operation. The Council
must ultimately be prepared to take the tough decisions
in accordance with the Charter that are required for
the maintenance of peace and security and in the best
interest of the people of South Sudan and its region.
We very much hope that the Government of
South Sudan will cooperate with UNMISS. That is
in the interest of South Sudan’s people as well as of
the United Nations. But it would be a mistake to allow
the Government of South Sudan, which was at least
partially responsible for the current situation, to dictate
the terms of the United Nations deployment.
More broadly, the ongoing obstruction of UNMISS
in the performance of its mandate, as evidenced by the
catalog of violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
is not acceptable. We welcome the clear signal in the
resolution that the Council will take action, including
through the establishment of an arms embargo, should
the obstruction of UNMISS continue.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Security Council has just
adopted resolution 2304 (2016) renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Angola voted in favour of the draft resolution, and we
would like to outline our point of view on the issue.
As a member of the African Union and Chair
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, Angola remains committed to the quest for
peace and stability in the Republic of South Sudan
and to supporting the current peace process, for which
international community support is critical. We express
our agreement in general with the mandate of UNMISS,
inter alia the high priority given to the protection of
civilians, the creation of conditions conducive to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and support for the
implementation of the peace process.
The stand by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union represents
a step forward in the direction we have been requesting
for quite some time now, that is, a greater commitment
by the region in addressing critical situations affecting
the African continent. The decisions taken by IGAD
16-25681

12/08/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

are courageous, even challenging, and we are intent
on working with the Government of South Sudan,
regional players and the United Nations in order that
they produce the desired results.
We welcome the important decision adopted by the
IGAD Plus Heads of State and Government on 16 July,
and endorsed by the African Union. It is a decision that
translates a renewed regional commitment to finding
solutions to the conflict in South Sudan. It is our
expectation that the deployment of a regional protection
force, as decided by IGAD and now by the Security
Council, while no easy matter or a magic potion for
the immense problems facing South Sudan, will make a
tangible contribution to the stabilization of the country
and to the attainment of peace.
During the negotiation of resolution 2304 (2016),
Angola conveyed a number of concerns and presented
constructive proposals addressing apprehensions
expressed by the Transitional Government of National
United of South Sudan, while trying to accommodate
the demands of IGAD and the African Union. Most of
those proposals and concerns did not receive appropriate
consideration, which we deeply regret.
Despite the fact that the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan is under a Chapter VII mandate, the basic
principles of peacekeeping call for the consent of the
parties and, as referred to in a communication from the
Secretariat to the members of the Security Council,
“the lack or support or consent from the parties
might have a negative impact on the way the
parties, particularly the national authorities and
local population, perceive the mission”.
Now that the resolution has been adopted, we urge
all efforts to be deployed in order to closely associate
the Government of South Sudan with the deployment of
the regional protection force and to guarantee its formal
consent and cooperation more than merely in principle.
We look forward to the discussions to take place
between the East African Chiefs of Staff and their South
Sudanese counterparts, as requested by IGAD Plus, on
the deployment of the regional protection force, which
must guarantee peace and stability in South Sudan,
in strict respect for its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In that regard, we would like to
assure the Transitional Government of South Sudan
that Angola will adopt an active stance in order to
ensure that the provisions of the resolution are correctly

S/PV.7754

implemented and that the Government is an integral
part at all stages of the resolution’s implementation.
Finally, the resolution contains an annex imposing
a new sanctions regime. Our view is that the imposition
of sanctions by the Security Council on a Member State
should be preceded by serious consultations on the
issue, which in fact did not happen. In due course, when
appropriate, we shall revisit the issue.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay
voted in favour of resolution 2304 (2016), aware of
the grave humanitarian, human rights and security
situation resulting from the profound political crisis in
South Sudan, for which the country’s main political and
military leaders are responsible. Violations of human
rights in South Sudan are of major concern to Uruguay,
due not only to their gravity but also to the systematic
way in which they are being committed by members
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and the
SPLA in Opposition.
In the provisions of the resolution adopted today,
the Council has taken into account the views of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union, as well as their request for
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) to be adapted to the current situation
in South Sudan. Uruguay stresses the importance of
ongoing consultations with the Government of South
Sudan and the countries of the region to ensure the
timely and full implementation of the resolution. To
that end, we hope to count on the cooperation of the
Government of South Sudan and the States members
of IGAD.
We reiterate once again that the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians lies with the
authorities of the State in question. That having been
said, it is important in this critical situation for the
Government of South Sudan to end its obstructionist
activities and those that violate the status-of-forces
agreement, and to enable UNMISS to fulfil its principal
mandate to protect civilians.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
abstained in the voting on resolution 2304 (2016),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), in view of our reservations
concerning the growing tendency of the Council to
overstep the established principles governing United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A few weeks ago,
the Council adopted resolution 2303 (2016), on the

16-256819/12

S/PV.7754

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

deployment of a police component to Burundi, without
the consent of the Government of the host country.
Following that adoption, the Government of Burundi
issued a statement rejecting the resolution.
The consent of any Government to deployment is a
practical and logistical necessity, as well as a legal one,
and yet, in the context of the conflict in South Sudan,
the Council has adopted a resolution that disregards the
position of the Transitional Government of National
Unity on the issue of deploying a regional protection
force. It also ignores the statement issued by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
on 5 August with regard to coordination with the
Government on issues relating to the size, weaponry,
mandate and timing for the deployment of the force.
The drafters of the resolution took the agreement
in principle of the Government of South Sudan as
a justification to define the detailed of the work of
the protection force on the territory of South Sudan
without direct consultations with that Government. It
even contains the threat of imposing further measures
should the Government fail to comply with its
provisions, amounting to a virtual act of extortion. The
resolution also prejudges the decisions of the regional
Chiefs of Staff in their upcoming consultations, which
embody the agreement in principle of the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan. It is
inconceivable that this Government should not be party
to a detailed agreement on the deployment of a force
that is to operate on its territory.
We stress here today, as we have done repeatedly
in the past, our full support for the work of UNMISS
and our utmost appreciation for its tireless efforts to
protect civilians, which require the Mission to be able
to perform its duties. Will the Security Council bear
the responsibility for the safety and security of those
forces? Do troop-contributing countries agree to
dispatch their forces to a country before agreement has
been reached and consultations have been conducted
with its Government?
We highly value the actions of IGAD and the African
Union to bring peace to South Sudan. We support
their keen interest in putting an end to the suffering
of the people of South Sudan. IGAD members have
courageously upheld their responsibilities with regard
to the suffering of their brothers and sisters there. We
would have liked to see an agreement on the detailed
operational steps adopted by the Security Council in
10/12

12/08/2016

close consultation with the Government of South Sudan
before the Council approved the deployment of the
regional protection force. Our delegation participated
in the consultations on the resolution constructively and
in good faith. We attempted until the very last moment
to reach a compromise on the text that could ensure
the agreement of all parties and unite the Council
with a view to a unanimous adoption of the resolution.
However, and regrettably, our last-ditch attempts were
not fruitful.
Egypt will not take a superior position with regard
to its brothers in South Sudan. However, in view of
our geographical proximity and common history,
we fully grasp the untold suffering of all citizens
there — women, children, the elderly and everyone
else — and the absolute necessity of putting an end to
such suffering immediately. We are making bilateral,
regional and international efforts to give our brothers
in South Sudan a fair opportunity to enjoy a dignified
life and a future of peace and stability. The civilians
in South Sudan have suffered immeasurably, but the
question remains: How can we achieve that common
objective? We continue to believe that the Council must
exercise further care and wisdom in dealing with the
situation in South Sudan. Utmost caution is needed
to avoid adopting approaches that may undermine the
political process or throw the country and the entire
region into an uncontrollable cycle of violence.
The suffering of our brothers in South Sudan can be
ended only through the common efforts of the Security
Council and the African Union to give momentum
to the political efforts, support the monitoring and
assessment efforts, and assist all parties in complying
with the provisions of the peace agreement with a view
to building confidence, realizing sustainable national
reconciliation and dealing with the root causes of the
conflict. Any other measures will be only temporary in
nature and will soon fall short.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): The
Council has just adopted resolution 2304 (2016), which
renews and modifies the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
The situation in South Sudan is one of the most
serious that we are aware of at the present time. Violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
are being committed on an almost unparalleled scale.
Breaches of basic protection of civilians at imminent
risk of a resumption of hostilities leave no choice
16-25681

12/08/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

but to react immediately. The resolution just adopted
takes up the recommendations of the countries of
the region, represented by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and endorsed by
the African Union. That is a critical point for France
and an example of cooperation between the competent
regional organization, the African Union and the
Security Council. The ongoing commitment and unity
of the region will be decisive in settling the crisis.
However, the resolution that has just been adopted,
while necessary, is only an immediate response to
controlling the situation. In that respect, France has two
comments to make.
First, the regional protection force and its 4,000
troops, who have just joined the 12,000 troops already
deployed, can only help to create the conditions for a
cessation of hostilities and a resumption of the political
dialogue. We pay tribute to the troop-contributing
countries and their Blue Helmets. They will need the
support of each and every one of us. However, this force
is not a lasting response to the crisis and that is why
France expects the authorities of South Sudan to fully
cooperate with UNMISS and all the parties in finding a
peaceful path to the crisis.
My second comment is that the resolution, as
decisive as it may be, should have gone all the way by
imposing an immediate arms embargo. That was what
France wanted, given the gravity of the abuses. Had the
embargo been imposed earlier, South Sudan would not
have undergone this deterioration. The embargo could
have been imposed immediately, as was pointed out,
with a view to a cessation of hostilities and also to
better preserve the security of the peacekeepers whom
we are deploying. France will continue to call for the
swift imposition of the embargo.
The Council’s unity and the inclusiveness of our
discussion are crucial to the success of our action,
given the seriousness of the crisis. The resolution is
now ours. Although France regrets the absence of the
embargo, France will provide all its support to the full
implementation of this text, which is now ours.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
I wish to first thank the United States and all
Council members for their constructive engagement
throughout the difficult negotiations on resolution 2304
(2016), which was just adopted. While Council members

S/PV.7754

may have divergent views and shades of opinions, the
adoption of this important resolution demonstrates the
Council’s resolve to address the multifaceted challenges
faced by South Sudan.
We were gratified by the early and promising
successes, such as the conclusions of the agreement for
conflict resolution in South Sudan and the subsequent
establishment of the Transitional Government of
National Unity of South Sudan. It is however unfortunate
and troubling that the recent progress was not sustained
and has been rolled back, which further imperils South
Sudan’s path to peace, security and prosperity.
In that respect, we call on the leaders of South
Sudan to urgently prioritize the welfare, safety and
security of all the people of South Sudan, regardless of
their ethnicity or political affiliations. The population
has suffered too long and too much from violence and
conflict. It is with that in mind that Malaysia associates
itself with resolution 2304 (2016), as it believes that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
working in close cooperation and coordination with the
Transitional Government of National Unity of South
Sudan, will henceforth be better equipped to continue
playing a pivotal and effective role in ensuring the
safety and security of the people of South Sudan. We
believe that it is in the interest of all that the necessary
enabling environment conducive to the resumption of
dialogue be established.
Therefore, Malaysia’s support for resolution 2304
(2016) is grounded in our principled position on the
need to resolve conflicts through peaceful means, as
well as our firm commitment and support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations as a tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
supporting the resolution, we have paid considerable
attention to the views and requests from the regional
partners, including those of the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
commend their leadership role and the solidarity shown
by these regional partners to immediate dialogue and
to work together with the Transitional Government to
restore peace in South Sudan.
Five years ago, South Sudan made history by
becoming the youngest member of the United Nations.
It was a remarkable achievement made possible by
the unwavering belief of the South Sudanese people
in peaceful negotiations over conflict and adversity.
Our interest and desire are to see that the same spirit

16-2568111/12

S/PV.7754

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

will again prevail among the South Sudanese leaders
and that they will master the courage and will to reject
violence and conflict and recommit themselves to
peaceful negotiations.
Finally, while we recognize that serious attempts
have been made to address the concerns of Council
members, we should not lose sight of the fact that
the adoption of this resolution marks an important
step forward in our collective endeavour to adopt a
more proactive approach to addressing the worsening
situation that the Secretary-General has described in
his letter of 10 August.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Since this is the
first time I am speaking to the Council under your
presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on your
leadership of the Council this month and pledge our full
cooperation. I would also like to acknowledge the role
of your predecessor in leading the Council last month.
The Government of South Sudan has officially
expressed its position and given its response in writing
on the mandate adopted today, and therefore there
is not much more to be said other than yo reiterate
some important points. I would particularly like to
express my Government’s rejection of the just adopted
resolution 2304 (2016), as it does not take into account
or even consider the points of view of South Sudan. It
is unfortunate that the Council chose to take this route.
The Government of South Sudan accepted in good
faith, in principal, the deployment of the protection
force, as stated at the second Intergovernmental

12/12

12/08/2016

Authority on Development (IGAD) Plus Summit on
5 August in an IGAD communiqué. It is important
to underline that South Sudan does not object to the
entire resolution on the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, but only to the new elements of the
protection force and the pre-empting of the meeting
between the Government of South Sudan and the
Regional Chief of Defence Staff, as stated in the IGAD
communiqué, is meant to give room for discussions on
the modalities of the implementation of the protection
force. The communiqué clearly outlines the fact that
the modalities of the force, including its composition,
mandate, armament, deployment, timing and funding,
shall be agreed upon by the Transitional Government
of National Unity and the troop-contributing countries.
It is also unfortunate that the resolution contains
an annex on an arms embargo, given that it is a
peacekeeping resolution.
The adoption of the resolution goes against a basic
principle of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which is the consent of the main parties to the conflict,
and against the Charter of the United Nations, which
urges Members to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of other States.
The consent of South Sudan to the mandate and
operational modalities of the protection force outlined
in the resolution would have been important, as it would
have given the force all the necessary freedoms to carry
out the outlined mandated tasks.
Finally, I would like to thank all the Council
members that respected the concerns of South Sudan
and engaged with South Sudan with the aim of
reaching a text that would have been acceptable to
my Government.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

16-25681
