S/PV.7561

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7561

st meeting
Tuesday, 17 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Greening/Mr. Wilson. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security, development and the root causes of conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations and conflict prevention:
a collective recommitment (S/2015/730)
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2015/845)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-37046 (E)
*1537046*

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security, development and the root causes
of conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations and conflict prevention: a
collective recommitment (S/2015/730)
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2015/845)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Cambodia, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zimbabwe to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, President of the Tunisian
Confederation of Industry, Trade and Handicrafts
and Nobel Peace Prize laureate 2015 for the Tunisian
National Dialogue Quartet.

2/86

17/11/2015

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Christian
Leffler, Deputy Secretary-General for Global and
Economic Issues of the European External Action
Service of the European Union, and His Excellency
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Head of Delegation and Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/730, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations and conflict
prevention.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/845, which contains
a letter dated 5 November 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom for convening this discussion. I would like
to start by offering my condolences to the Government
and people of France for the losses of life and injuries
in the atrocious terrorist attack of last Friday. In the
aftermath of other terrorist bombings in recent days
in Beirut and Baghdad, and the apparent bombing of
a Russian aeroplane, we see the continuing peril of
terrorism and, indeed, the mounting threat from Daesh.
No grievance or cause can justify such acts.
I have just returned from the Group of 20 leaders
meeting, which was held in Antalya, Turkey, where I was
encouraged by the shared resolve to combine securitybased counter-terrorism measures with preventive steps
that address governance failures, injustice, exclusion
and other drivers of extremist violence. There was also
consensus on the need for our response to uphold the rule

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of law and to avoid being ruled by fear and inflaming
tensions further still. I am especially concerned about
reprisals or further discrimination against Muslims, in
particular Muslim refugees and migrants. That would
just exacerbate the alienation on which terrorists feed.
The world must come together to defeat terrorist groups,
to bring perpetrators to justice and to break the vicious
cycle of radicalization. Today’s discussion here in the
Security Council is therefore especially timely.
I again thank the United Kingdom for focusing
the attention of the Security Council on security,
development and the root causes of conflicts. Members
will all recall that in the 2005 Summit Outcome,
world leaders declared that “development, peace and
security and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing” (General Assembly resolution 60/1,
para. 9). The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) builds on that
understanding by taking an integrated approach, and by
including Goal 16 on achieving peaceful and inclusive
societies, providing access to justice and building
accountable institutions.
Today’s violent conflicts and violent extremism
are often rooted in a mix of exclusion, inequality,
mismanagement of natural resources, corruption,
oppression, governance failures, and the frustration
and alienation that accompany a lack of jobs and
opportunities. Yet our responses have not caught up
to these realities. We are not yet properly integrating
United Nations action across the interdependent pillars
of our work: peace, development and human rights.
Today, I should like to make four main points.
First, we must focus greater energy on prevention.
We have long known this. Now the message is coming
through again from the recent major reviews of peace
operations, peacebuilding and the women and peace
and security agenda. Prevention demands the concerted
use of preventive diplomacy and good offices, but
it also means that the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable
Development Goals must become a bigger part of our
strategies. Development that leaves people behind sows
the seeds of instability and violence. Well-targeted
development assistance can help to address risk factors
such as inequality and marginalization. Well-timed
development measures can help at critical moments
when societies are emerging from conflict and risk
lapsing back into it. Prevention is not something to
be turned on and turned off; it should instead be an
integral part of United Nations action in all contexts.

S/PV.7561

Secondly, a heightened focus on prevention means
a sharper focus on human rights. Violations of human
rights are often our best early warning signs of trouble,
yet too often Member States and the United Nations
system itself have been reluctant to recognize the
centrality of human rights. Human Rights Up Front
calls for three types of change within the United Nations
system: cultural change to ensure that staff recognize
prevention and protection as a core responsibility;
operational change to streamline our analysis and
deploy teams with small footprints to assist national
authorities before crises emerge; and earlier and more
transparent engagement with national authorities and
other Member States on deteriorating situations.
The initiative is being rolled out. A system for early
warning and quick response is in place. Staff have a better
understanding of how their work reinforces pillars other
than their own. And in a number of instances, Human
Rights Up Front has enabled the United Nations system
to react to warning signs more quickly and effectively
than in the past. We are grateful that the Council has
received briefings by the Secretariat on situations of
concern on a systematic basis. Now we should strive for
the day when Member States take early and effective
action on such situations. We look to Member States to
more fully embrace Human Rights Up Front as a means
to protect their people and strengthen their sovereignty.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen coherence among all
actors. The 2030 Agenda calls on us to move from silos
to synergy; to move from fragmentation to partnership.
The United Nations system must pool its strengths
to bring strong analysis to the Security Council and
Peacebuilding Commission.
Fourthly, we need adequate, predictable financing
for our good offices and mediation work; for our country
teams and for the Peacebuilding Fund. We also need
to be bold when necessary, for example in rebuilding
Syria and supporting the countries that are generously
hosting large numbers of refugees, including Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey. There is a growing global call
for a recovery plan for the region, perhaps akin to the
Marshall Plan in scale. I urge the Security Council to
give this idea due consideration when the day arrives,
as I know we hope it will soon.
The human costs of our failures can be seen in all
too many places. The suffering and setbacks weigh
heavily on my conscience, as they should on us all.

15-370463/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the same time, we have the tools with which to do
better. Let us use them.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I wish to thank you, Madam, for
organizing this debate and inviting me to brief the
Security Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
This debate on security, development and the root
causes of conflict is both important and timely. The
Peacebuilding Commission, which I represent here
today, was set up 10 years ago to address challenges
around bridging the gap between security and
development. This debate offers an opportunity to
reflect on our common successes and shortcomings so
far. Of course, it is only by addressing the root causes
of conflict that we can contribute to building lasting
peace.
In 2015, the international community has confirmed
that sustainable development cannot be realized without
peace and security, and that peace and security will
be at risk without sustainable development. Less than
two months ago, Heads of State confirmed, inter alia,
the intention to promote peaceful, just and inclusive
societies that are free from fear and violence.
Two weeks ago, the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross issued an unprecedented joint warning about the
impact of today’s conflicts on civilians and appealed for
urgent and concrete action to address human suffering
and insecurity. They referred to the fact that the world
is at a turning point and called upon States to redouble
their efforts to find sustainable solutions to conflicts
and take concrete steps to that effect. I want to pay
a tribute to the mission statement that the SecretaryGeneral put forward this morning to that respect. I
think it is up to all the rest of us to heed that call, too.
The issue, of course, is how we go about it.
The United Nations and the international
community at large must become better at supporting
efforts to build and sustain peace. As part of this, we
must do more to avoid relapse into conflict and step up
efforts to prevent conflict from occurring in the first
place. There needs to be a renewed determination that
includes seizing the opportunity of the three reviews
related to peace operations currently under way. The

4/86

17/11/2015

challenge is to turn normative developments and
political momentum into concrete reforms for better
operational response.
I should like to highlight three shifts that I believe
will be necessary in order to better support efforts to
sustain peace: more emphasis on prevention, increased
inclusivity and strengthened coherence. I will describe
what each of these shifts entails, and also touch upon
where and how the Peacebuilding Commission can add
value.
First of all, preventing lapse and relapse into
conflict should move to the fore of United Nations
engagement and build on the realization that building
peace is a primarily political process that requires
sustained and long-term engagement. One of the most
effective ways to sustain peace and prevent conflicts is
by building national capacity, strengthening domestic
institutions and supporting good governance.
Furthermore, countries that are prone to conflict
need support from international partners that are
willing and able to stay for the long haul. We need
to consider adjusting our horizons from the standard
three-to-five-year programme cycles to frameworks
that rather span 15 to 30 years. As the report (see
S/2015/490) on the peacebuilding review points out,
creating legitimate institutions that can help prevent
relapse takes a generation. The PBC provides a forum
for countries that are not in situations of immediate
conflict but where sustained attention is needed and
where root causes of conflict need to be addressed.
Successful peacebuilding and preventive work also
requires sound political analysis as the foundation of
international support, both in conflict and post-conflict
settings. For that, increased conflict-assessment
capacity is needed. United Nations efforts should be
systematically underpinned by an analysis of conflict
and fragility. In addition, the United Nations should
better utilize all the tools at its disposal for preventing
conflicts, including the peacebuilding architecture.
I would like to recognize the important work done
by the Peacebuilding Fund in supporting integrated,
time-sensitive and risk-taking work across the United
Nations system. As recommended by the reports of
the reviews, it is crucial that sufficient and predictable
resources be provided to that important tool.
To better respond to the needs of conflict-prone
countries, we should do much more to strengthen

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7561

the capacity of regional actors, who are often first
responders.

country contexts, as well as contribute to donor
coherence.

Peace can emerge only from within societies, and
build on inclusive national ownership. Transparent and
accessible institutions that are accountable for, and
responsive to, the needs of the entirety of its population
are crucial for building trust and strengthening the
relationship between States and citizens.

The importance of increased coherence across the
United Nations spectrum is perhaps never more evident
than during transitions. Getting transitions right
requires genuine integration of peace and development.
It also requires an understanding of inherently complex
interrelationships and a shift away from a linear
understanding of conflicts.

Inclusivity is at the core of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. As part of its convening
role, the PBC is uniquely placed to listen and consult
with a broad range of stakeholders at the local, national
and regional levels. Furthermore, it is set up to support
national and local ownership. The countries with which
the PBC engages are always in the lead. Our role is to
support their processes.
We cannot address inclusivity without mentioning
the importance of including women as actors in all
aspects of our work. The Peacebuilding Commission
is currently developing a gender strategy to ensure
more systematic and strategic engagement on the topic.
Furthermore, in a few weeks’ time, we will discuss the
issue of youth and peacebuilding, an agenda that has
not yet received as much attention as it should. It is
important that youth not be seen as primarily victims
of violence in conflict. And our focus not be on youth
as a potential risk group or perpetrators, but as actors.
The last shift I would like to call for concerns
the way we collaborate with one another. Responding
to challenges of conflict and post-conflict countries
demands of all of us that we do more and better within
our respective mandates. International actors need to
start acting more coherently. That applies across the
United Nations system, the international financial
institutions and regional and national actors. By
overcoming short-sighted turf wars, we would not only
increase the efficacy of the Organization but, even
more important, provide more effective support for the
societies that it was set up to help.
I believe the Peacebuilding Commission can help
break down some of the silos and address fragmentation
and duplication of effort. Through its convening role
of a wide array of critical regional and international
actors, we can help bring a peacebuilding perspective
to deliberations of the principal organs of the United
Nations. Furthermore, the Commission can provide
strategic assessments of United Nations efforts on the
ground and actionable recommendations in specific

We can learn from successful examples such as the
transition in Sierra Leone. In the years ahead, we will
have a chance to demonstrate in Liberia that we are able
to work through joined-up approaches across areas of
security, development and human rights.
As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission this
year, I have worked very closely with the six country
configurations. I know we all strive to diversify our
working methods and adopt more flexible tools of
engagement. That work that has already begun, but
I think we can do more, and better, to assist more
countries in need of peacebuilding efforts.
In conclusion, I look forward to forging a closer
relationship with the Council to bring to bear the
complementary advice that the PBC can offer. There is
scope for enhanced collaboration, drawing upon both
bodies’ respective mandates.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bouchamaoui.
Ms. Bouchamaoui (spoke in French): It is an
honour and a privilege for me to participate in this
debate for the first time, in the great forum of the
United Nations that watches over peace and security
in the world. I would like to warmly thank the Council
presidency for inviting me to contribute to this debate
on a complex theme of obvious timeliness, namely,
“Security, development and the root causes of conflict”.
My thoughts go out to all those who perished in the
recent attacks in the Sinai, Beirut and Paris.
As members are aware, I come from Tunisia, a
country that in 2010 initiated what came to be known
as the Arab Spring. Five years later, unfortunately, it
is clear that Arab States live in dread of the increased
radicalism plaguing the region and threatening
peace and security in thе world. Мy contribution to
this debate will be informed by my country’s past
and current experience, as well as by a tragic and

15-370465/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

marked environment of the outbreak of violent armed
conflicts in our region. I will try to emphasize what the
international community can do to help alleviate the
situation.
In recent years, we have experienced situations of
transition characterized by profound crises in society
and a challenge to existing models of development.
While the scenario has improved with regard to
freedoms, in particular of expression and association,
people have also experienced a deterioration in their
purchasing power, while unemployment among young
graduates is higher than ever. The countries of our
region are undergoing an unprecedented social and
economic crisis. The decades-long marginalization
of the peoples of our region and the humiliation they
experience because of the inconsistency of policies,
particularly with regard to the Palestinian cause, have
produced in our youth a sense of mistrust vis-à-vis the
West. Hence a segment of society turns its back on
universal values and
​​
attempts to draw our countries
into identity controversies, leading to perverse effects
such as extremism and terrorism.
The reasons for the emergence of terrorism and
the growing insecurity in Tunisia do not lie strictly
in Tunisian-Tunisian considerations; they are, among
others, the result of a disastrous management of the
Libyan conflict. Today, recent developments on the
south-east border of our country and the collapse of any
form of State institution in neighbouring Libya pose an
increasing risk of destabilization in Tunisia. Should
that happen, the consequences would not be limited just
to small Tunisia. Immediately, Europe and the rest of
the world would be affected.
Security threats are more interconnected than ever.
In our region, terrorism, wars, intra-State and crossborder trafficking of all kinds, and mass migrations
make our security indivisible. Therefore, a proactive
and coordinated commitment and the implementation
of enhanced security strategies are needed to
implement quick and effective actions and to provide
common solutions to threats that endanger life, peace
and development.
If we want to move things along in order to
establish democracy, we have to develop substantial
programmes in support of affected countries and help
them throughout the entire process of putting in place
the rule of law, development, institution-building and
raising awareness among the people so that they act as

6/86

17/11/2015

responsible citizens. To do that, a culture of democracy
and citizenship must first be further strengthened. And
there must be a process to establish a new social contract,
through which the challenges of democracy and civic
duties are clearly spelled out to avoid backsliding.
Although it is impacted by the same ills that affect
neighbouring countries, Tunisia is considered as an
exception because we have been able to avoid conflict
through dialogue and compromise before it was too
late. What we have achieved is so exceptional that the
Nobel Committee qualified our action as exemplary
and awarded us the Nobel Peace Prize this year.
With globalization occurring at breakneck
speed and changes now occurring on the planetary
level, the deep-seated crises in the countries of our
region increasingly push people to the margins of the
development process brought about by globalization.
The longer that situation persists, the longer solutions
to the crises will be compromised in the short- and
medium-terms. The risks that could loom on the security
and stability of those countries and their impacts on the
region will be increasingly significant.
At a time where instability and insecurity in our
region can rapidly deteriorate further and have negative
repercussions on the whole region, Tunisia nevertheless
still holds a specific position, which can give hope that
a democratic transition, a successful and enduring one,
is possible. The stakes are high because that could be an
example for other Arab societies in turmoil and change
and seeking to make their transition to modernity.
It behooves the entire free world sharing universal
values, with its commitment to democracy and respect
for human rights, to see the Tunisian model succeed.
That would demonstrate that Islam and democracy are
indeed compatible, and that the troubles afflicting our
societies are not inevitable.
Tunisia is a small country. Its problems are
commensurate. It would suffice for the world to commit
to that vision so that we could save the last hope of the
Arab Spring. Alone, we might not succeed. We have
limited resources, but have chosen to share the values
of freedom, dignity, openness and global citizenship,
and we certainly shall not renounce such values.
To all our friends, we launch this appeal for
solidarity and joint mobilization. Together, we will
reinstate peace and security, stem the sources of
despair and give our peoples, our youth, a strong signal
that the world of tomorrow could be more fair, act with

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7561

more solidarity and respectful of such values. Let us
therefore rise to the occasion of history.

exists for them to be heard. And so grievances fester
and build.

The President: I thank Ms. Bouchamaoui for her
briefing.

Stability means rights for girls and women. We
know that girls and women are those most vulnerable
when crises hit, and they must be an integral part of any
peacebuilding and conflict solution. The ongoing highlevel review on women and peace and security will be
critical to that. Women’s economic empowerment is
essential to sustainable development. Recent research
suggests that if women in every country had the chance
to play the same role in economic markets as men,
as much as $28 trillion would be added to the global
economy by 2025.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State for International Development of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Bouchamaoui
and Ambassador Skoog for their statements. I am
very pleased to be presiding over the Security Council
again today, the first Development Minister to be
doing so. That is because development and security are
intrinsically linked.
The United Kingdom sends its heartfelt condolences
to those tragically caught up in terrorism. From Paris
to Syria, from South Sudan to Yemen, from Beirut to
Sharm el-Sheikh, we see more clearly than ever the
pain, suffering and cost of conflict — the human cost.
The Council heard yesterday about the bloodshed
in Syria (see S/PV.7560), which has shattered so many
lives. But let us also look at the social and the economic
cost to the whole country and to future generations. It is
estimated that the Syrian conflict has turned the clock
back on that country’s development by 30 years, and it
is conflict-affected States that are the most off-track
for achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
The reality is that, if we are to achieve the new global
goals for ending poverty and to live up to our promise
to leave no one behind, then preventing conflict and
building peaceful societies is absolutely vital.
The past 15 years have shown us that trying to build
development in any country without a solid foundation
of peace and stability is like trying to build a house on
sand: it will simply be washed away when crisis hits.
How can we make sure that solid foundations are in
place? Stability is not only about addressing war and
conflict, it is about countries having strong economies
and healthy and educated populations. Critically, it
is about the strength of their institutions. Our Prime
Minister has called it the golden thread of development.
Stability means the rule of law, property rights and an
independent judiciary, because the poorest people in
the world are not just going hungry. They lack justice.
They want jobs. They want the right to own their own
land and to build their own businesses. If individuals
do not have a voice in society, it does not mean that
their grievances are not there, only that no fair forum

Stability means a society and institutions free of
corruption. Corruption is bad for development. It is
bad for the poorest. It is bad for business. It corrodes
the fabric of society and public institutions, acting as a
perverse welfare system that transfers resources from
the poor to the rich. Therefore, addressing those issues
can build the backbone of a stable State. Without them,
individuals cannot fulfil their potential. Communities
cannot thrive. Businesses will not invest. The whole
country stagnates.
It is not only national institutions that matter.
The strength of international institutions is critical as
well. We know that the Security Council has a vital
role in peacekeeping decisions and swift humanitarian
actions — a vital role in ensuring that international
humanitarian law is adhered to when conflict erupts
and in helping to find political solutions. But as the
Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations and
conflict prevention (S/2015/730), the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) and the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490) set out, increasingly our international
institutions need to take on a greater role in addressing
the underlying causes of fragility and conflict. That
means prioritizing conflict-prevention as much as its
resolution by taking early action when faced with the
signs of a deteriorating situation. It means moving
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding by investing in
basic services in fragile and conflict-affected States;
by helping to build a stronger economy and jobs; by
supporting strong and accountable institutions, the rule
of law, respect for human rights, free and fair access
to markets, the rights of girls and women; and by
tackling corruption. That progress should be achieved

15-370467/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

through the United Nations, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund.
The United Kingdom believes that that is strongly
in our national interest and that of every country.
Investment in prosperity and stability overseas is
critical, if we do not want global problems to end
up on our own doorsteps. Exclusion and the lack of
development provide fertile ground for extremism,
terrorism, organized crime and conflict to thrive, and
they also drive migration. The United Kingdom has
made a historic commitment to spending 0.7 per cent
of its national income on development, with much of
that already spent in fragile States and conflict-ridden
countries. We support development and peacebuilding
through the United Nations and have committed United
Kingdom troops to United Nations operations in
Somalia and South Sudan.

17/11/2015

partner, through thick and thin, as they move forward.
We know how difficult that is, and it is important not
only for Tunisia but also for the entire region and the
world as a whole.
Before I begin, I also want to offer my deepest
condolences to Ambassador Delattre and the people of
France. His great nation is America’s oldest ally. We
share history, values and ideals. We have stood together
time and again, and today we do so with a heavy
heart but with more determination than ever. We are
ready to help in any way we can. We also extend our
condolences to the families of those lost in the apparent
bomb attack on the Russian plane, as well as to the
victims and the families of those victims of the horrific
attacks in Lebanon and Iraq. We are dealing with a
brutal movement, and it must be stopped in its tracks.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

Every week we meet in this Chamber and debate
how best to respond to an ever-evolving set of threats
to international peace and security. Last week we
convened on Somalia (see S/PV.7554), a country where
we are supporting both security operations against
violent terrorists and parallel efforts to assist a political
transition. We met on Syria, where a revolution that
began against a repressive regime has mutated into
that regime’s indiscriminate killing of masses of
civilians on a daily basis. That, of course, is a war with
ramifications that touch all of us and that has enabled
the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We
also adopted a resolution on Burundi (resolution 2248
(2015)), where at least 280,000 people have fled their
homes, with many seeking shelter in neighbouring
countries.

Ms. Power (United States of America): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his reports. Madam
President, you are voting with your feet by being here and
presiding over today’s meeting. The United Kingdom’s
leadership on this issue and continued emphasis on the
link between security and development is extremely
important. I would also like to thank Mr. Skoog for
his briefing, and to welcome Ms. Bouchamaoui to
the Council and congratulate her on her Nobel Prize,
which we do not often get to do in the Security Council.
Much more important than the Prize, however, is her
resilience and stubborn determination, and that of
the Tunisian people, to build a stable and prosperous
democracy. The one thing they do not have to worry
about is the possibility of the world turning its back on
them. We are completely with them and in awe of what
they have done so far, and we will be their enduring

In 1941, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt
introduced the idea of the four freedoms — freedom
of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want
and freedom from fear. All of them are intertwined,
and to pretend otherwise is perilous. We — all the
States Members of the United Nations — must dedicate
ourselves to tackling the causes of fear and want in our
societies. We must build strong institutions that respect
human rights and are accountable to our peoples and
their needs. As the crises in the headlines remind
us — and, indeed, as last week’s horrific events in
Paris, Beirut and Baghdad underscore — today the
threats to international peace and security are diverse.
Our approach to countering them must be similarly
multifaceted. That requires not just the effective use of
every tool in our toolbox but also a complete picture of
the threats and the factors driving them.

We believe that such investments and steps
are the right thing to do, and right for our national
interest, too. This is about saving the next generation
from the scourge of war and allowing all individuals
the opportunity to live the life and build the future
that they want, free from violence or the threat of it.
It is also about global prosperity, peace and security,
because conflict is costly in every sense. If we act now
and together, we can build a better, more prosperous
and more secure planet for us all.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

8/86

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today the Council has a welcome opportunity
to discuss one root cause that is too often
overlooked — underdevelopment. As President Obama
has said,
“[I]t is the lack of development, when people have
no education and no jobs and no hope, when they
feel that their basic human dignity is being violated,
that helps to fuel so much of the tension, the conflict
and the instability in our world.” (A/70/PV.11, p. 2)
That causal connection is recognized in the Sustainable
Development Goals adopted by the General Assembly
in September (resolution 70/1), in which Goal 16
explicitly notes that an absence of development
endangers peace and security. Of course, the reverse
is also true. Development is not a panacea that will
eliminate all threats. We all know that there are certain
people who become terrorists despite being very well
off and coming from lives of privilege. But in many
contexts, and particularly in the places where we
deploy peacekeepers and political teams, development
challenges, including a lack of economic opportunity,
poor governance and human-rights abuses, are
themselves the kerosene that fuels instability. It is the
job of development agencies to directly address many
of those drivers, but I would like to briefly describe
three ways in which the Council can also help.
First, the Council must encourage and enable
the recognition of development concerns and their
integration into security assessments, peacekeeping
strategies and peacebuilding programmes. That will
enable us to have a more nuanced understanding of
the dynamics shaping the conditions on the ground
and thereby improve the design of our interventions.
We cannot just play “whack-a-mole” once a conflict is
already brewing. To that end, the United States supports
the Secretariat’s efforts to break down “stovepipes”
across the United Nations system in order to enable us
to make more holistic and nuanced assessments and
responses. And, as proposed through the Human Rights
Up Front initiative, we should also seek operational
changes within the United Nations system that promote
system-wide analysis and early warning in situations of
concern. Such early warnings will enable more timely
action aimed at preventing or responding to large-scale
violations of human rights. I believe that that is what we
are now seeking to do in Burundi and have been over
the course of the past year.

S/PV.7561

Secondly, we must ensure that peacekeeping
is accompanied by peacebuilding. The success of
peacebuilding programmes is of direct interest to the
Council, because it will help determine whether or
not a country lapses back into conflict and right back
onto the Council’s agenda. Recent events in Burundi
have underscored just how conflict-affected countries
can progress with peacebuilding and development but
then slip back into crisis, causing such heartbreak
for so many. The 2015 peacebuilding architecture
review (S/2015/490) offers a valuable opportunity for
strengthening the peacebuilding architecture of the
United Nations and ensuring that it integrates political,
security, development, human rights and rule-of-law
activities. We all know that we need to work through
how to make the relationship between the Security
Council and the peacebuilding architecture more
effective.
Thirdly and lastly, we must be realistic in our
planning. As we design peacekeeping missions, we must
ensure that they not only address all facets of whatever
conflict is currently before us, but also that they are
equipped to maintain security while critical progress
is being made in development. Consider Sierra Leone,
where the United Nations maintained a presence whose
form evolved alongside the country’s transition from
civil war to immediate post-conflict peacebuilding
to development. That transition continues, but it has
already produced a stronger Government and a more
resilient community that was able to withstand and
eventually defeat Ebola. The case of Sierra Leone
reminds us that not long ago there would have been
those who questioned the relevance of a disease, an
epidemic such as Ebola, to the Council’s work. We
have since seen how directly something like that can
threaten regional and international security. In this
new era, we cannot choose the drivers of conflict and
insecurity that we wish to address. We must instead
seek to identify and better understand all of them, in
order to more effectively fulfil our mandate. Today’s
debate represents an important step in this direction.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing and
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Skoog,
and Ms. Bouchamaoui, for their insightful remarks. We
welcome this timely debate organized by the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union later today.

15-370469/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Peaceful societies based on the rule of law,
respect for human rights and accountable and
inclusive institutions are both essential conditions for
development and the outcomes of development. The
Security Council has a clear role to play within its
Charter responsibilities in conflict prevention, leading
countries out of conflict, and supporting the creation of
peaceful societies. Better, more coherent cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission, as discussed by
the Council on other occasions, is highly conducive to
this end.
While today’s subject is vast and the issues are
many, let me focus on rule-of-law and prevention issues.
All conflicts, whatever their nature, have a very clear
pattern — the breakdown of governance, impunity
and lawlessness, exclusion and marginalization,
abuse of power and corruption, and a total disregard
for human rights. The final report of the African
Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan points,
inter alia, to the limited attention paid to democracy
and structural transformation, the failure to address
issues of marginalization and exclusion, long-standing
intra-South grievances, and the the failure to address
accountability issues.
In the Central African Republic, the weakness of
State institutions has been a boon for armed groups,
which extort, racketeer, impose illegal taxes, keep
a tight hold on the exploitation of natural resources,
and siphon off millions of much-needed funds, while
the State struggles to provide even the most basic of
services. In conflict after conflict, the continued
failure to address lingering grievances and redress the
exclusion and marginalization of certain groups within
a society has led to explosive consequences.
These are all sobering examples, reminders that
building accountable governance and rule-of-law
institutions and extending governmental authority to
conflict-affected areas are critical, as are targeting and
combating terrorism, which is increasingly setting its
sights on each and every one of us. Targeted efforts to
address key rule-of-law gaps that underpin a conflict
must begin early. Ensuring national ownership of these
efforts increases the likelihood that the initiatives will
be sustained long after peacekeepers are gone.
For rule-of law-mandates to have an impact,
identifying and sequencing the most appropriate
activities is key. United Nations missions need to be
given adequate and predictable resources, in terms

10/86

17/11/2015

of both expertise and programmatic support, to fulfil
their rule-of-law mandates. Effective coordination of
all actors on the ground — peacekeeping operations,
regional organizations, bilateral actors and United
Nations entities — is required. We regret to note that,
while the rule of law has increasingly become part and
parcel of peacekeeping mandates, the subject itself
as a cross-cutting issue only rarely finds its way into
the Security Council agenda. Given its importance in
State-building, post-conflict recovery and sustaining
peace, this is hardly the right approach, in our view.
We need to bring the rule of law back into the Council’s
focus.
With respect to prevention, while affirmations of its
importance are many, more often than not, the Council
tends to do too little too late in terms of action. In a
world of ever-more complex and protracted conflicts
and the worst humanitarian crisis since the end of the
Second World War, we should do a lot more to prevent
the breakdown of peace, rather than trying to fix it when
it is broken. As the Secretary-General noted earlier
today, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) should be part and
parcel of the preventive effort.
We have to be much better at reading the warning
signs. Among them, violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms are often the first early-warning
signs of a conflict. Persistent, unaddressed humanrights violations are also an obstacle to reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes and therefore to inclusive
development. Implementation of the Human Rights Up
Front initiative is of utmost importance in strengthening
preventive, peacebuilding and development efforts.
To strengthen its preventive capacity, the Council
needs to revisit the instruments it has for the purpose.
Horizon-scanning, informal Department of Political
Affairs briefings, better use of interactive dialogues
with regional partners, more coherent analytical
capacity within the Secretariat can all contribute to an
earlier recognition of the warning signs and prompter
acting upon them before they degrade into conflict.
A key element of prevention is inclusivity — on
which the briefers have already spoken earlier this
morning —, with particular reference to the minorities
and vulnerable groups of a society, including young
people, women and girls. Peace and development
will not hold without meaningful and active women’s
participation. Since the adoption of landmark resolution

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

1325 (2000), considerable progress has been achieved,
but even today, this progress remains far too uneven
and not irreversible. We need but look at the lists of the
participants and mediators in peace talks, from which,
with a few positive exceptions, women are largely
missing. But without their voices and participation,
peace and development, be it in Syria, Yemen, South
Sudan or anywhere else, is much harder to achieve.
While not diminishing our focus on women as victims
of conflict, a lot more needs to be done to reinforce the
role of women as protagonists, leaders of peacemaking,
development and counter-terrorism efforts.
Finally, I would like to make reference to the
implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT),
which we see as an important preventive measure
and a facilitator of development efforts. The all-tooeasy access to weapons makes conflict situations even
more entrenched. In some cases, even a small number
of illicit weapons can have a disproportionate impact
on a country’s development, as in the case of small
island developing States. Implementation of the ATT
facilitates sustainable development as it reduces the
risk of arms getting into the wrong hands and allowing
peace and development efforts to be undermined.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to reiterate
today our solidarity with and our condolences to France
for the terrorist attacks on French soil, as well as to
Lebanon, the Russian Federation, Iraq, Syria and the
many countries that are being assaulted on a daily basis
by the terrible phenomenon of terrorism. We welcome
the presence of the Secretary of State for International
Development of the United Kingdom, and express
our gratitude for the words of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, President
of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and
Handicrafts, together with those of the other ministers
and representatives participating in this debate.
The
interrelationship
between
sustainable
development, international peace and security and
human rights is reflected in the many statements
issued by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council, based on their
respective perspectives and mandates. Socioeconomic
imbalances are often one of the main root causes of
conflicts. Venezuela considers it extremely important
to give people the necessary means for creating
foundations for inclusive, sustainable, fair and equitable

S/PV.7561

development. Development rooted in social justice must
be part of any process or model that guarantees peace.
During the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, all countries, many of them represented by
Heads of State and Government, engaged in a broad
inclusive participatory process and discussed issues of
an economic and social nature. They agreed on important
development principles and objectives and established
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), including a follow-up and
review mechanism, with a view to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals. A broad
consensus was reached on giving differential treatment
to countries with different levels of development, on
the ground that there is no one-size-fits-all model of
development, and on the need to create and implement
various financial support and cooperation approaches
to help achieve sustainable development.
For us, it is solely up to the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council to address these
economic and social issues, including the process
of following up and monitoring the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We again wish to draw
attention to the fact that it is the intention of the
Security Council to encroach upon areas that are within
the exclusive competence of other organs of the United
Nations, in particular the General Assembly.
The President’s concept note (S/2015/845, annex)
insists that the Security Council has a role to play when
addressing what it believes to be other root causes of
conflicts. In particular, it maintains that the Council
can contribute to peacebuilding by promoting and
supporting electoral processes, constitution-making and
the building of inclusive and transparent institutions.
On that point, we should note that the Security Council
cannot establish just one type of political institutional
model to support development processes without
violating one of the basic principles of the Charter of
the United Nations — the principle of sovereignty. The
sovereignty of every country lies with its people. Each
people develops its own political, economic and social
systems and its own legal and institutional frameworks,
which are most suited to its own interests, culture and
history. It is incumbent upon the people themselves to
make the changes that they believe are necessary. It
is a process that falls only to the nationals of a given
country. It cannot be imposed or controlled by any
other country or international body.

15-3704611/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Many of the root causes of the conflicts that have
developed in the twentieth century and which are
destroying the fabric of the twenty-first century stem
from the major political and military Powers imposing
political, economic and social models and visions
of development on developing countries that find
themselves within the geopolitical sphere of influence
of developed countries. Many conflicts in South-East
Asia, Latin America, Africa and the Middle East have
been linked to that practice, which was developed by the
former colonial Powers and the new major economic and
military Powers. Furthermore, since we can all agree
that poverty, exclusion, inequality and social injustice
are the root causes of conflicts affecting international
peace and security, the Council must also identify
foreign interference as one of the root causes of the
conflicts that arise when developing countries decide
on their own economic and social models in order to be
able to resolve their major development problems. That
occurs in countries that have attempted to control and
manage their own natural resources, develop processes
of agricultural reform, democratize the distribution of
their nations’ wealth or simply diversify and extend the
sphere of their trade relations.
Countries with their own development models
have very often suffered interference, political
destabilization and even military intervention because
the major Powers, which have economic or geopolitical
interests in those nations, are opposed to the sovereign
decisions that those countries have taken. In order to
justify foreign interference, veritable media wars are
started. A country is criticized very often because of its
political model, an inappropriate understanding of its
human rights record or for violating other democratic
principles, which in most cases are not even being
adhered to by the interfering country itself or by the
regional allies supporting that country in its political
or military action. That creates an international
environment that justifies foreign interference. The
situation in North Africa and the Middle East is a sad
example of that practice, which has brought so much
pain and suffering to those countries. War, with its
burden of death and destruction, has led to their losing
every possibility of development, at least in the medium
term.
One of the root causes of conflict where the Security
Council can act decisively is linked to colonialism, that
is, in cases of foreign occupation. Western Sahara and
Palestine, with its territories occupied by Israel, are the

12/86

17/11/2015

most poignant examples in the unhappy, long-standing
record of the Council as a result of the Council’s
paralysis and inability to resolve the situations. Those
are two situations of ongoing conflict that are clearly
within the scope of the Security Council and which
should be resolved so as to prevent greater conflict. The
concept note asks what the Security Council can do to
address the root causes of conflicts? We can restate that
question and ask, can the Security Council address the
root causes of conflicts?
In that regard, it is worthwhile referring to
some of the statements in the report of the Advisory
Group of Expertson the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture. The Advisory Group highlights in its
report that the United Nations and we believe, the
Security Council in particular, has
“yet to absorb fully how their tools and actions
must adapt, and, in general, often prefer militarized
responses. The very nature of such responses,
with their emphasis on short-term security and
their correspondingly heavy resourcing needs,
can sometimes take away support and attention
from achieving sustainable peace.” (S/2015/490,
para. 121)
The recent case of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2240 (2015), which considers the use of
military force as a way of resolving the migrant crisis in
the Mediterranean, clearly reveals the tendency of some
members of the Security Council to use force and shortterm solutions. An organ that favours the use of force
and short-term solutions is not the most appropriate
body for addressing the root causes of conflicts.
We believe that one of the tools used by the Security
Council that best reflects the short-term view that it
uses to resolve problems and which does absolutely
nothing to address the root causes of conflicts is the
sanctions committees. More than 50 per cent of the
sanctions committees address situations in African
countries with protracted conflicts derived mostly from
the colonial presence and the deformations that that
presence has created to ensure its political control. The
root causes of those conflicts include ethnic, religious
and national differences, tribal organizations, poverty
and exclusion, divisions and country organizations that
were artificially created by colonialism.
However, sanctions committees are designed
to exercise punitive actions that could be military,
economic or political in nature. Regrettably, very often

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

they become extensions of the presence of former
colonial Powers in those countries. There are very
few successful examples of sanctions committees.
The Security Council should give that issue special
consideration and attention, especially because countries
under a sanctions regime face major limitations and
obstacles to achieving sustainable development. Most
of the time, those countries have already sunk into the
deepest poverty and social exclusion and are in constant
military conflict.
Finally, Latin America and the Caribbean is an area
of peace. Our region presents to the world a situation
in which, after many years of ongoing conflict caused
by foreign interference, interventionism and social
injustice, we have reached the twenty-first century as
an area of peace, free of nuclear weapons and weapons
of mass destruction. We have a new architecture of
regional organizations that have been created and
revitalized by the thrust of our regional leadership,
such as the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of
Our America, the Union of South American Nations,
Petrocaribe, Mercosur, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Latin American
Federation of Contractors’ Associations and the
Caribbean Community. That has made it possible for us
to address our own regional problems from a southern
perspective and promote our own inclusive models,
which are inspired by participatory democracy with
full respect for the sovereignty of countries and the
principle of non-interference.
Since the Government of President Hugo Chavez
Frías, our own national experience has given us a
Constitution approved by a process of referendums that
includes the most progressive human rights provisions,
accountability and broad popular participation.
The action of the Government has been directed
towards recovering our sovereign right to manage our
main natural resources in order to ensure effective
action to counter poverty, exclusion and gender
inequality and to ensure human rights for all. Today,
Venezuela is a peaceful country. In spite of constant
foreign interference, we are a young country that is
strengthening its own model of law based on our own
experiences and the situation in our country. We are a
factor for the stabilization of peace for Latin America
and the Caribbean. As I mentioned earlier, Simón
Bolivar and our liberation armies crossed our borders
only 200 years ago to free and create more than five
South American nations. We have the moral ground, the

S/PV.7561

experience and the conviction to work for development,
social justice and peace.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like at the
outset to thank you, Madam President, for having come
to New York to the Security Council to preside over
this meeting. Let me also say that this meeting is not
just timely but also important, and that the theme of the
maintenance of international peace and security, with a
focus on peaceful societies and conflict prevention, is
definitely what we need at this time.
In this landmark year of the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, important reviews of fundamental
normative and operational tools are taking place,
namely, peace operations, peacebuilding and the role
of women in peace and security. This is also the year in
which the General Assembly has adopted the Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), with the international community more than ever
aware of the need to strengthen prevention and the
nexus between peace and security, human rights and
development.
In fact, it is universally understood that without
peace and security and respect for human rights, the
Sustainable Development Goals cannot be achieved and
our collective commitment, enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, of saving succeeding generations
from the scourge of war will remain only a dream.
Our statement will focus on three issues: the root
causes of conflict; the response of the United Nations in
the context of preventing and addressing conflicts; and,
briefly, Angola’s experience in conflict prevention and
resolution. It is our conviction that with determination,
preventive action and political will, war can be avoided.
It is also our conviction that to achieve that goal, we
must act first and foremost upon its root causes, which
include, principally, political, economic and social
exclusion.
Political exclusion is expressed by the refusal to
extend political representation and the right to participate
in political life to large sectors of the population or to
specific social, racial or religious groups of people
inside a country. As political exclusion is unacceptable
by any standard, it has the potential to cause dissent,
thereby propelling those groups into conflict.
The holding of democratic elections; institutions in
which citizens recognize themselves; and the primacy
of the rule of law are fundamental prerequisites for

15-3704613/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

political inclusion and the building of peaceful societies
and a fundamental tool for conflict prevention.
Economic exclusion, emanating from the unequal
distribution of wealth and a lack of economic
opportunities for the citizens of a given country,
result, in general, in unemployment, poverty and
underdevelopment, culminating in social tension and,
frequently, in conflict and violence. When economic
exclusion is coupled with an authoritarian political
system, those elements combine to trigger conflict,
since the political authorities are in general unable to
engage in dialogue, hear grievances or engage in seeking
the peaceful resolution of conflict. The non-observance
of due respect for human rights and collective liberties
is among the main causes of the outbreak of conflicts
that we have seen in the world. Respect for the other,
despite political, social and national differences, is the
basis for social peace and a sentiment of belonging to
a community.
To build peaceful societies, the existence of a
free and responsible citizenry, aware of its duties, is
an imperative, as is a culture of peace, tolerance and
the acceptance of the differences inherent in social
plurality.
The main responsibility for addressing the root
causes of conflict lies with State authorities. The
United Nations can and should support national
efforts to sustain peace and prevent conflict. As we
have heard, in 2015 the United Nations is engaged in
a process to review its peacebuilding architecture.
Angola and Australia are honoured to co-facilitate the
intergovernmental phase of that process.
The report of the Advisory Group of Experts (see
S/2015/490), to which earlier speakers have referred,
draws certain conclusions that are relevant to our current
debate. The concept of sustaining peace outlined in the
report calls for a systemic response from the United
Nations before, during and after an armed conflict and
for an urgent bridging of the existing silos that impede
efficient delivery by our Organization.
The report also calls for change in the mindset and
perception of conflict prevention by States Members
of the United Nations. Angola shares the belief that
a new approach is needed that considers that conflict
prevention and resolution as an area of intervention
for not only the Security Council but also other United
Nations main bodies, namely, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. We further believe

14/86

17/11/2015

that it is only by creating the necessary synergies among
these organs that the United Nations will be able to act
transversally in addressing conflict prevention, taking
into consideration the three pillars: peace and security,
development and human rights.
The maintenance of international peace and
security should focus primarily on conflict prevention
and peacebuilding efforts aimed at resolving the root
causes of conflict and, in so doing, seek long-term
solutions aimed at sustaining peace.
Let me now share some of our experiences in
Angola. On 11 November, Angola commemorated
its fortieth anniversary, a day of vital significance in
our country, which was embroiled for many years in
a military conflict that deeply affected it. The loss of
an untold number of human lives and the destruction
of the social and economic infrastructure obliged the
Angolan people to find ways to stop the war and initiate
the process of rebuilding. From this it emerged that a
deep-rooted quest for peace was vitally needed to build
in Angola a peaceful society for future generations.
After the signing of a peace agreement in 2002,
Angolans had a strong resolve to address the root
causes of the conflict and start a genuine process of
fundamental reconstruction and peacebuilding. One
of the measures taken was the granting of a general
amnesty to all combatants who accepted the ceasefire
and peace agreement. In the Angolan context, this
has had major importance in ensuring the lasting
peace that has prevailed since 2002. Angola engaged
in demining; a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process; and the voluntary collection of
small arms and light weapons in order to control their
flow. It also established a democratic institution and
a legal review process, as well as institutional actors
in support of individual and collective freedoms, such
as the Ombudsman. After the end of the war, two
general elections took place, and in 2017 a new ballot
initiative will be held. Angola has a relatively fastgrowing economy, plural opinions are expressed, and
civil society is making headway. The nation is stronger
and moving towards harmonious development. A lot
remains to be done, but the results achieved so far give
us hope for a brighter future.
In the international arena, Angola has been
supporting other countries in conflict prevention and
resolution efforts, while sharing its experiences and
strengthening its participation in peacebuilding efforts,

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

particularly in the volatile Great Lakes region. The
Kimberly Process of diamond certification, of which
Angola is currently the Chair, is a concrete instance of
multilateral cooperation on the critical issue of natural
resources fuelling conflicts. It has played a crucial
role in sustaining peace in the country while it turned
diamonds from a tool of war into an instrument of peace
and sustainability.
Angola has consistently advocated dialogue as a
means to diffuse tensions, promote understanding and,
ultimately, address the root causes of conflicts. That
has been our commitment in return for the support our
country received from the United Nations and from
which it benefitted during the most difficult years of
our recent history.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I wish to thank and congratulate you,
Madam President, for presiding over this open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Bouchamaoui for
their briefings.
I will focus on four points: first, security and
sustainable development; secondly, the prevention
of conflicts and their root causes; thirdly, the
comprehensive responses and the building of resilient
societies; and fourthly, a series of comments on the role
of the Security Council.
On the first point, it is clear that the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), unlike the Millennium Development
Goals, was designed as a transformative vision for
the entire international community. For the first time,
a development agenda adopted by the international
community includes a goal — Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals — on the challenges to
peace, security, good governance and justice. We have
adopted the 17 Sustainable Development Goals that can
be reached within a generation, but what I want to point
out is that if the international commitment to meeting
those Goals were strengthened, the risk of extremist
aberrations would diminish radically. In them we are
committed to an international community with citizens
whose basic political and socioeconomic needs are
satisfied. We have no doubt about that. Long-term
sustainable security is strongly linked to inclusive,
sustainable development. Our responsibilities in that
regard are shared, not separate.

S/PV.7561

Conflict prevention one of the key elements to
achieving the goal of peaceful societies, and to prevent
conflicts it is essential first and foremost is to analyse
their root causes. I am referring not just to internal
causes, such as institutional fragility, corruption and
social exclusion, but also to external causes, such as
illegal trafficking, terrorism, violent extremism and
climate change. Let us recall that at the Arria Formula
meeting on climate change that the Security Council
held on 30 June, it was suggested that the SecretaryGeneral needed to update his 2009 report entitled
“Climate change and its possible implications for
security” (A/64/350), which for the first time defined
climate change as a threat multiplier for global security.
All such internal and external factors can sever the
relationship of trust that citizens should have with their
States.
On the third point, citizens have issued a call on the
international community and their own Governments
to offer consistent responses with a multidimensional
focus and the clear objective of building resilient
societies based on trust and accountability. Sustainable
societies must have such cross-cutting elements as
respect for human rights and the inclusion of women
as active participants in all phases of peacebuilding,
pursuant to resolution 2242 (2015) on women and peace
and security. This multidimensional focus must apply
not only to policies, but also to those who implement
them. It fundamentally calls for efforts to overcome the
fragmentation of the United Nations system, and thus
the importance of today’s debate.
I would like to conclude with four comments on the
role the Security Council should assume in that regard.
First, there is prevention. In the matter of preventing
conflict, the Council should strive to ensure that early
warning systems with analytical capacities lead to
early action. More and better use should be made of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the provisions of Article 99 on the relationship of the
Secretary-General with the Council.
Secondly, it is also important for the Council
to demonstrate flexibility in its interinstitutional
relationships. That flexibility should be seen in the
efforts of the Council through, for example, the
adaptation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, depending on the
circumstances and individual needs of the moment and,
when appropriate, incorporating the multidimensional

15-3704615/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

approach to which I referred earlier. In that regard,
quick-impact projects would make it possible to bridge
the gap between stabilization and development.
Thirdly, it is essential to improve the relationship
between the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Let us not forget that this instrument encompasses three
key elements for preventing conflicts: peace, security
and development.
Finally, we must keep in mind that in certain
contexts, neither the United Nations nor the Council are
the only actors, much less the most suitable ones. That is
particularly relevant to Africa, a continent where peace,
security and development are closely interlinked, and
that has an organization — the African Union — that
is resolved to assume those responsibilities. Spain
believes it essential to take concrete measures to enable
a more effective, operative relationship between the
Security Council and the African Union and its Peace
and Security Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the delegation of the United Kingdom for its
initiative to convene today’s open debate. I also welcome
Ms. Greening, Secretary of State for International
Development of the United Kingdom, presiding over
the meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ambassador Skoog and Ms. Bouchamaoui
for their briefings.
China extends its sympathy and condolences to
France and other countries over the recent terrorist
attacks. China condemns these attacks, including the
downing of the Russian aircraft in the Sinai, in the
strongest terms. I offer my condolences and sympathy
to the Government and the people of France, Russia and
other countrires and to the bereaved families and the
wounded.
Peace and development are the theme of our times
and the common aspiration of all the peoples. The
United Nations, as the most universal, representative
and authoritative international Organization, is an
important platform for member States to seek peace,
development and cooperation.
The present world is far from peaceful. Regional
conflicts are spreading and the root causes have yet
to be eliminated. Violations of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations take
place from time to time. The imbalance in international
development is striking. Developing countries, African

16/86

17/11/2015

countries in particular, are deeply affected by poverty
and underdevelopment. The path to achieving lasting
peace and common prosperity is long. Establishing a
new type of international relationship centred around
win-win cooperation and building a community of
common destiny for humankind is a fundamental
guarantee for promoting peace and development and
eliminating the root causes of conflicts around the
world. The international community should make joint
efforts in that regard.
First, in order to firmly uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, all
countries must be treated equally and their sovereignty
and territorial integrity must be respected. There
should be no intervention in the internal affairs of
other countries and the rights of other countries
to independently choose their social systems and
development paths should be respected. It is important
to peacefully settle disputes through dialogue and
negotiation. Support must be given to the countries
concerned and regional organizations in their efforts to
seek peaceful settlements to disputes through dialogue,
negotiations, mediation and good offices.
Secondly, to work towards establishing a more just
and rational new international political and economic
order and to establish a mutual, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable concept of security in
international relations, a win-win for all philosophy
must be promoted. In the pursuit of national interests,
the reasonable concerns of other countries must be
addressed. International cooperation must be advocated
for properly addressing global challenges. International
affairs must be dealt with through negotiations among
all countries.
Thirdly, to fully implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and eradicate
poverty and achieve equitable, open, comprehensive
and innovative development, the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities in international
development cooperation must be upheld. The
developed countries should honour their commitments
and undertake their obligations in a timely manner and
support the developing countries, in particular African
countries, in their efforts to achieve development and
implement the sustainable development agenda.
Fourthly, to respect the diversity of civilizations
and promote dialogue and exchanges, we must recall
that there is no such thing as inferiority and superiority

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

when it comes to different civilizations, cultures and
religions. They must all be respected and treated
equally. The principle of harmony in diversity and
the coexistence of differences must be upheld, and
efforts must be made to promote dialogue, exchanges
and learning from each other among different
civilizations, cultures and religions so that dialogue
among civilizations can become a bridge for enhancing
friendship among countries and maintaining world
peace.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and it
is duty-bound to remove the root causes of conflicts.
The Security Council should closely cooperate and
coordinate with other United Nations agencies to
conduct preventive diplomacy and maintain and build
peace. Peaceful means and coercive actions must be
used comprehensively in order to settle disputes. The
Council should strongly support regional organizations
in their efforts to properly address regional conflicts.
In assuming their responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations, Council members should proceed
from an assessment of the overall situation and ensure
that the Council’s actions are unified and effective,
thereby maintaining the unity and authority of the
Security Council.
Terrorism is the most serious challenge facing the
international community. The Security Council should
greatly coordinate international counter-terrorism
efforts and promote the parties concerned to strengthen
counter-terrorism cooperation and form a unified front
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
fundamental principles of international relations. The
Council should ensure the effective implementation of
resolutions on counter-terrorism and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, including by taking action to
combat terrorist activities that use the Internet to
incite and plan terrorist activities and by cutting off
their channels of external support, recruitment and
ideological propaganda. In that regard, international
counter-terrorism efforts should address both the
symptoms and the root causes without double standards.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate on a topic of considerable contemporary
importance. We also thank you for the concept note
(S/2015/845, annex) provided to guide our discussions
today. We acknowledge the presence of participating

S/PV.7561

Ministers and welcome them to the Security Council.
Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his moral voice; the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Skoog; and Ms. Ouided
Bouchamaoui for the insightful briefings they provided
on a complex and multifaceted issue.
The interdependence between security and
development is widely acknowledged, and I have heard
every delegation speak about it this morning. One cannot
exist without the other. That point is duly recognized in
resolution 2171 (2014), which underscores the need for a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention through
the promotion of sustained economic growth and
development, poverty eradication and good governance.
That important underlying message in resolution
2171 (2014) and the principle of conflict prevention
articulated by the report of the Secretary-General on the
future of United Nations peace operations (S/2015/730)
both provide an appropriate point of departure for our
deliberations today.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a
testament to the global recognition of the interlinkages
between development and security. The reiteration of
the nexus between security and development by both the
Security Council and the General Assembly are clear
indications of the critical need for a holistic approach
by all United Nations entities for the maintenance of
peace and security. To ensure tangible outcomes, there
must be a coordinated approach on the part of United
Nations entities to the implementation of the SDGs. The
multidimensional nature of development implies that
all hands must be on deck. In our view, strengthened
engagements between United Nations entities and
national actors would provide opportunities to evaluate
the implementation of development priorities, which
could strengthen peace and prevent conflict and
instability.
The establishment of credible institutions at the
national level is a prerequisite for sustaining peace and
promoting development. The need to strengthen State
institutions has become more compelling in view of
contemporary challenges to global security. Fragile
States and those recovering from conflict must also
institute accountability mechanisms designed to ensure
good governance and the equitable distribution of peace
dividends. As a preventive measure, States should also
adopt a pragmatic and contextualized approach to
address the root causes of conflict.

15-3704617/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

In societies where young people are the victims of
poverty and exclusion and the opportunities for shortand medium-term development are diminished, the
propensity for violence and social unrest increases.
That situation is more delicate in conflict-prone
areas, where the risk of the recruitment, coercion and
indoctrination of young people into armed groups and
terrorist organizations is higher. Mitigating that risk
requires a concerted effort on the part of Governments,
communities and other stakeholders to create
opportunities for young people and give them a greater
sense of belonging.
Nigeria would like to see the Security Council adopt
a comprehensive approach that prioritizes renewed and
strengthened partnerships with other United Nations
entities, such as the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Economic and Social Council and the United Nations
Development Programme. That, we believe, would
facilitate access to economic opportunities for young
people.
At the regional level, it is noteworthy that African
economies have attained some measure of growth
over the past few years. Today, Africa should begin
translating those economic gains into social gains for
all members of society. That is why we see merit in
the Council’s support for strengthening institutions and
mobilizing resources for inclusive development. States
can be sensitized to the need for the mutual exchange
of information and support with regard to the scope,
sequencing and pace of the reform efforts required to
sustain the long-term development agenda. African
States are already incorporating the SDGs into their
development outlook as outlined by the African Union’s
Agenda 2063. We expect that to give impetus to the
objectives of maximizing the use of Africa’s resources
for the benefit of its people. Experience has shown that
promoting greater inclusion is a viable path to creating
peaceful societies.
At the national level, the Nigerian Government is
taking concrete steps to meet our security challenges
and foster peace through inclusive development. Our
soft approach to countering violent extremism has
adopted a multidimensional strategy to addressing the
root cause of radicalization and violent extremism,
and is designed to employ practical measures to halt
violent extremism in the short term and prevent future
occurrences in the long term. The programme has
been successfully employed to address some of the key
economic, social, religious, political and cultural issues

18/86

17/11/2015

that fuel the radicalization upon which the insurgency
feeds. Through that soft approach we have instituted a
wide range of reforms in our educational system. We
have also created greater economic opportunities and
provided life skills to those at risk of radicalization.
Security and development are two sides of the
same coin, in both concept and practice. One aims
to increase freedom of choice, while the other seeks
to ensure that those choices can be made in a secure
environment. The Security Council can provide the
leadership that is so essential to promoting synergy
in the United Nations partnership for peace, security
and development. The Council must accord a more
central role to preventive diplomacy in its policies and
strategies in the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Council should also work more closely
with the Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Development Programme and other key actors within
the United Nations system to promote peace, stability,
security and development in countries emerging from
conflict.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The topic that the British presidency has
chosen for today’s debate, despite its innocuous
appearance, poses, in our view, certain risks for the
Security Council. On the one hand, it does not take
much imagination to understand that there is a definite
link between security and development. The danger
lies in making that an absolute truth in a hasty attempt
to craft some sort of universal approach to resolving
problems in the context of security and development.
The Council does not have the requisite Charter-based
prerogatives for that, nor the requisite toolkit. To
go beyond its purview while the world is witnessing
heightened conflicts that demand the Council’s
practical intervention, we risk seriously degrading the
Council’s effectiveness.
Development has inherent value. To promote it, the
United Nations has the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and other bodies. For the Security
Council to encroach on those prerogatives would be
inappropriate, as well as simply counterproductive.
On the other hand, excessive focus on any one aspect
of security means that we lose sight of many others,
including territorial, ideological, historical, religious,
psychological, environmental and technological
aspects. Today, a particularly dangerous challenge is
the threat of terrorism, the theory and practice of which

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7561

involves essentially declaring war on the civilized
world.

not honour their pledges for aid to development and
technology transfer.

A separate aspect is the emergence of conflict as
the result of outside interference. Let it be recalled that
Iraq, Libya, Syria and even Yugoslavia were far from
the poorest of States, but their territories fell prey to
some of the deadliest crises of our time. Now, as the
world map is ever changing, various regions are seeing
sweeping and swift geopolitical transformations.
The world is witnessing a rise in the risk of conflict.
There is a constantly increasing eruption of crises,
which are compounded by armed clashes and difficult
socioeconomic situations. There is a hardening of
interethnic and sectarian antagonisms, which is being
exploited by terrorist and extremists of all stripes. In
that situation, the Security Council must not get bogged
down in theoretical research but must keep its finger
on the pulse of international life, speedily responding
to any harbingers of trouble that could arise in the
security sphere.

There has been a lack of progress in alleviating the
debt burden and a certain avoidance of issues that some
find uncomfortable, such as increasing the participation
of developing countries in the activities of global
governance bodies, instead of establishing transparent
and agreed rules to foster free trade, investment and
open competition, as well as ensuring developing
countries’ access to technologies. We are witnessing
the fragmentation of the international economy, the
creation of closed economic alliances and a stalemate
in efforts to reform international financial institutions.

We have constantly called for efforts to seek
collective, agreed approaches to resolving existing
issues by establishing a fairer and more sustainable
architecture for international relations. The United
Nations is, in that regard, a completely unique platform.
However, we are convinced that the development of
shared approaches with respect to issues that concern
the future and current world, namely, questions of
international law, human rights and development — in
other words, essentially peacebuilding — is a role that
should fall to the General Assembly, where, under the
Charter of the United Nations, each nation has a vote.
Every State has a vote, whether small or large, strong or
weak, rich or poor. Countries are not all the same, but
they are all part of human history.
The development of States is a process that cannot
be forced into implementation. There is no one right
answer. The process can be assisted but not imposed.
Over the past years we have seen the development
of various concepts conceived by a limited group of
States, in which development assistance is conditioned
on adherence to very strict criteria with regard to
State-building. We believe that particular care should
be taken in disseminating such concepts, especially at
the international level. On the one hand, there is the
issue of interference in the internal affairs of States.
Donors impose particular standards that they claim
ensure transparency. On the other hand, donors do

We have repeatedly heard the argument that human
rights violations are one of the root causes of crises.
However, everyone is well aware of countries that
have extremely harsh laws in that regard, but on whose
territories there are no conflicts. Indeed, in an number
of cases, no one even complains about them.
In recent years, we have frequently encountered
initiatives in the drafting of United Nations documents
aimed at promoting the idea that the existence of
national resources is allegedly a root cause of conflict.
As a primary measure to combat that so-called evil,
there have been proposals to increase the transparency
of the extractive sectors, in particular by admitting into
those countries some allegedly socially responsible
international corporations — of course from the
West. Actually, there is no direct link between those
phenomena. There is no lack of countries in the world
whose the extractive industries are totally closed to
foreign players, but there are no conflicts there. If
conflicts arise in natural resource-rich countries, then
the majority of those cases are not linked to a lack of
transparency.
With regard to the linkage between security and
development, one must acknowledge the destructive
impact on both sides of the equation of the phenomenon
of unilaterally imposed economic sanctions, which are
used by some members of the international community
to serve particular political aims. Sanctions imposed
by circumventing the Security Council at the very
beginning of the conflict in Syria had, of course, the
effect of worsening the situation of the Syrian people.
But did they help resolve the conflict? Of course not.
The very goal of such sanctions was to exacerbate the
conflict and to achieve the infamous goal espoused
by a number of capitals, namely, regime change in

15-3704619/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Damascus. We are seeing the full consequences of
that now. What do the economic sanctions imposed
at various times against the Sudan, Zimbabwe and
Myanmar have to do with peace? We believe that the
recent General Assembly resolution 70/5 on anti-Cuba
sanctions has the broader significance of representing
the growing understanding within the international
community of the unsuitability of that practice.
The Security Council naturally plays the most
important role in conflict prevention. It is one of our
primary tasks. However, there can be no one-size-fitsall approach in that regard. Each conflict situation
is unique and there is a need in every case to duly
address its specific civilizational, historical, national
and religious characteristics. Of particular importance
in that respect is the intellectual capital and the
knowledge of countries and their specificities, as well
as the historical memory of United Nations experts.
There is a need to build capacity in that regard rather
than generate new coordinating structures or bodies,
as is sometimes suggested. The Security Council needs
to be particularly careful and respectful of sovereign
States that have fallen on hard times, and offer them
help rather than a public thrashing.
In conclusion, we have unstintingly stood for
peaceful societies and successful conflict prevention.
To our mind, one sine qua non in that respect is
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and
respectful dialogue with sovereign authorities.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of Secretary of State
Greening and thank the United Kingdom presidency
for convening this open debate. We also appreciate the
briefings made by the Secretary-General, the Chairman
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and the President
of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and
Handicrafts and Nobel Peace Prize laureate for the
Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet.
In a scenario of growing and new threats, it is
essential to use multidimensional approaches to address
the root causes of destabilizing processes that lead to
conflicts. It is imperative to take such an approach in
order to neutralize various forms of violence and its
worst manifestation, terrorism. The world has recently
been disturbed by heinous actions against universal
values based on unity, multicultural coexistence and
tolerance, which all civilizations and cultures should
promote. Security and development, as recognized by

20/86

17/11/2015

the Council in its presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3
on inclusive development of 19 January, are closely
interrelated, mutually reinforcing, and essential to
achieving peace sustainable.
Therefore, it is a question not of the competence of
the various organs of the United Nations system, but
rather of how the international community as a whole,
the United Nations, other international organizations
and civil society, recognizing the interdependence
among the pillars of peace, security and development,
responds to these challenges to peace. Coordination
and complementarity are essential to the search for
sustainable solutions.
In these efforts, the substantive action of the
Council must be linked to the challenges of effective
prevention. The consequences of inaction in the face
of cycles of violence and tensions should be among the
concerns of this organ if we are to fully exercise our
responsibilities. The Human Rights Up Front initiative
is an effective way to identify the early signs and
anticipate negative developments. The availability of
better information on the ground can allow the United
Nations and the Council to act promptly when crises or
instability arise.
In that context, we reiterate the critical role and
participation of women in the processes of conflict and
post-conflict prevention. The adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) was a turning point in efforts to promote the
enhanced engagement of women in the decision-making
process and political leadership in areas linked to
peace and security. We hope that the informal group of
experts on women and peace and security, established
under resolution 2242 (2015), will contribute to that.
National ownership is critical in addressing the
cycle of prevention and crisis response, and reinforces
the interdependence of the three pillars. Respect for the
rule of law, human rights, building effective, inclusive,
accountable and transparent institutions that ensure
accountability are sine qua non for achieving inclusive
societies and facilitating the creation of conditions
conducive to lasting and stable peace. In that regard, the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, bridging the
gap between security and development, is indicative of
the need to seek interaction between the various bodies,
always from the perspective of efficient coordination.
We stress the importance of regional and
subregional organizations. Coordinated work with the
Council will contribute to a better understanding of

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the root causes that affect the proliferation of conflicts,
and will identify responses that take into account the
historical and cultural contexts that are indispensable
to enhancing the legitimacy and effectiveness of these
contexts. Its tasks in the areas of preventive diplomacy
and mediation should be strengthened, with the full
cooperation of United Nations.
In the context of all this, we suggest that additional
opportunities for relations with institutions of the
United Nations system be evaluated so as to contribute
to the political heritage that should be available to the
Council. It is essential to adopt an integrated approach
that seeks complementarity rather than logic based on
exclusive competences.
As was recognized by the President of the Republic
of Chile, Michelle Bachelet, in January, and included
in the presidential statement adopted at that time,
we reiterate the call to adopt a comprehensive and
integrated approach that incorporates and strengthens
the coherence of political and security activities,
development, human rights and the promotion of the
rule of law, and that addresses the root causes of each
conflict.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
United Kingdom for convening this meeting on security,
development and the root causes of conflict. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, President
of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and
Handicrafts and Nobel Peace Prize laureate of 2015, for
their briefings.
Clearly, the lasting maintenance of international
peace and security requires the settlement and
prevention of ongoing conflicts, particularly by way
of socioeconomic development. Chad endorses the
Secretary-General’s appeals for the entire United
Nations system, including the Security Council, to
work for conflict prevention. It is all the more important
as conflict prevention is the main topic of three
reports on the review of United Nations peacekeeping
operations — the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the report
of the Secretary-General, entitled “The future of
United Nations peace operations: implementation of
the recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations” (S/2015/682) and the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the

S/PV.7561

Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) — and the
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We welcome the General Assembly’s contribution
to building normative prevention capacity and the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys
and Special Representatives, which have contributed to
the prevention of more than one conflict worldwide.
Nonetheless, several observations attest to the fact
that we are far from a world free of war, especially given
the increasing number of conflicts. Moreover, a number
of reports and analyses attest to the limits pertaining to
prevention. In those circumstances, it is clear that the
current United Nations methods for conflict prevention
need to be reviewed. In order to do that, it is necessary to
deal with the root causes of conflicts, which include the
issue of development. In general, the causes of conflicts
can be endogenous, notably involving problems
stemming from governance and political transitions,
the inequality and exclusion of certain segments of the
population and issues of public management. There are
also exogenous factors, characterized by assaults on the
sovereignty of States and the outside destabilization of
regimes and institutions, which lead to new conflicts
that wind up becoming more costly and devastating,
although they could have been prevented.
Concerning Africa, the various reports on the root
causes of conflicts and the promotion of lasting peace
and development, the Secretary-General has continued
to stress that there should be greater emphasis on the
link among peace, security and development. That is an
extremely close relationship, which has been recognized
by various United Nations bodies, in particular by the
Security Council. For Chad, there can be no peace and
security without development. In that connection, it is
important that concrete actions be taken to bolster the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, while bringing
women and youth on-board in the process. Although
the Security Council does not treat with issues of
development, there are nonetheless questions relating
to development that have an impact international peace
and security.
The matter of migrants is a perfect example.
Approaches implemented by the Security Council that
take into account matters of security, governance and
development, such as the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, should be welcomed. The actual
implementation of the strategy, however, is still taking
some time. We would therefore call for an emphasis

15-3704621/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

to be placed on the situation of youth and women in
the implementation of the strategy. We also call on
international organizations, financial institutions
and donors to finance activities seeking to create
opportunities for that part of the population. Those
types of initiatives will serve to combat threats such as
violent extremism and terrorism.
To conclude, we call upon the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to endorse the
Secretary-General’s recommendations contained in
his most recent report (S/2015/730) on the causes of
conflict and promoting lasting peace and development
for Africa. Support for the African Union’s Agenda
2063 in particular will help shore up development for
the sake of peace of security.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome you, Madam President,
and thank you for your comprehensive and excellent
statement. I also extend my appreciation SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Olof Skoog and Nobel
Laureate Ouided Bouchamaoui. We congratulate her,
for it is truly a great honour and distinction that an
Arab woman has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
The United Nations and the international
community have been making great efforts in order
to maintain international peace and security and
promote development and human rights. Despite
ongoing regional conflicts, we have managed to make
courageous and tangible progress in those fields at all
levels, but we have not worked sufficiently to highlight
the complementarity of those fields. No one denies the
close relationship that has been reflected in the manner
the Security Council has chosen to address daily
global conflicts as well as threats to global security.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts and violence
should be the focus of the ongoing efforts made by the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, especially because the conflicts
of today are both intra- and inter-State in nature. We
call upon all parties to shoulder their responsibilities
in order to prevent conflicts and never to overlook the
primary root causes of conflicts and violence.
Given the close relationship between sustainable
development and security, there can be no national
development without a protective security system in
place, and the converse is true. The peacebuilding
architecture encompasses and links both concepts.
That is why I underscore the importance of supporting

22/86

17/11/2015

peacebuilding operations in a concerted and systematic
manner, given their role in developing security, the rule
of law and justice and the part they play in combating
poverty, unemployment and corruption. As development
and security are interdependent, how can we maintain
that complementarity in a way that achieves security,
stability and development? Let me propose a few ideas
to help us maintain that complementarity and overcome
related obstacles.
First, we need to start by facing all the challenges
that hinder the achievement of security and development
and undermine peacebuilding efforts. We need a
common and collective vision that recognizes the close
complimentary roles of security and development,
including strategies and mechanisms, while promoting
human rights and the rule of law and achieving
justice, so as to build secure societies and the required
corresponding stable environments. Those mechanisms
should not be an end in and of themselves. We should
not stop establishing them without continuing to
develop them.
Secondly, we need to utilize and invest in the potential
of all members of all our societies. Marginalizing
certain segments of our societies, especially youth, is
an extremely dangerous policy, especially because they
influence and are influenced by their economic, social
and security surroundings. In that regard, I would
like to stress that the recent terrorist attacks should
motivate us to uproot the reasons for such acts that have
depleted our resources and, most important, resulted in
the loss of numerous innocent lives of those who have
rejected terrorism. My country numbers among those
which have been beset by such barbaric attacks. That
is why we accord the utmost importance to combating
terrorism, which is threatening our population, and
in particular our youth. We have spared no effort in
that regard, the most recent example of which was
our participation in Global Forum on Youth, Peace
and Security. We should enhance the role of young
people by establishing a sustainable mechanism to
protect them and increase their engagement in political
processes and the maintenance of international peace
and security in our countries.
Coordination among United Nations bodies
is critically important because the Organization’s
decisions and their implementation should not be the
exclusive responsibility of the Security Council. We
need a diverse toolkit to enhance the complementarity
between security and development. We should not

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

prioritize the interests of particular countries. We
need the political will of all countries, especially those
that can play a significant role in such efforts, and
recourse to regional organizations and their potential
in peacebuilding efforts.
Fourthly, at the national level social responsibility
requires the engagement of Governments and the
reconsideration of national policies and goals in order
to harmonize our efforts with the needs of the current
context and with the work of the United Nations. We
stress the importance of national ownership because
reform should arise within countries and not be imposed
from outside.
In conclusion, there are three key elements
related to the issue of security and development:
complementarity, partnership and inclusiveness. As
we strengthen the integration of and complementarity
between security and development, we should work to
make every sector of our societies a positive factor in
peacebuilding and not a threat to it. We must assess our
progress in responding to contemporary needs, which
requires us to harmonize the need to address security
threats with the political priorities we are implementing
by upgrading our plans and strategies at all levels, in
which security and development are intertwined and
mutually reinforcing.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank the
United Kingdom for convening this debate and you,
Madam Secretary, for presiding over this meeting.
We want also to express our condolences to the
Government and people of France over the horrific
attacks that took place in Paris on Friday, and to the
Governments of Lebanon and Iraq over the attacks in
Beirut and Baghdad. As others have said, terrorism is a
scourge that affects all of us.
I want also to thank the Secretary-General
and Ambassador Skoog, as well as Nobel laureate
Ms. Bouchamaoui, for their briefings. I pay particular
tribute to Ms. Bouchamaoui for the inspiration that
Tunisia and her colleagues have given the rest of us.
We share the assessment of most speakers today
that this debate marks an important recognition by the
Council that security and development are intrinsically
linked and must be considered in their interconnections.
The Council does not and cannot operate in a theoreticl
vacuum. New Zealand has made no secret of its belief
that the Security Council should do more to prevent

S/PV.7561

conflict. Since joining the Council in January, we have
pushed for a greater focus on the part of the Council and
the wider United Nations system on emerging crises
and preventing countries from sliding into conflict.
This has led us to call for attention to developments
in Burundi and, earlier this year, in Guinea Bissau, and
for a credible response to the situation in Israel and
the occupied territories, which we regard as dangerous
and unsustainable. It has led us to support discrete,
informal options for Council engagement on emerging
crises that are sensitive to concerns regarding national
sovereignty. We have encouraged informal briefings by
the Secretariat where appropriate, and see potential in
making greater use of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. We have
also made efforts to explore targeted interventions,
such as statements and Council missions, and to call
for more meaningful coordination with regional actors,
who are often at the forefront of prevention efforts.
Conflict prevention will remain a primary focus for
New Zealand for the remainder of its term.
Today’s debate offers the opportunity to consider one
specific aspect of prevention. To sustain peace, we need
to get better at addressing the root causes and drivers of
conflict. There is a growing recognition — led by the
pioneering work of post-conflict countries themselves
through the g7+ initiative, under the leadership of
Timor-Leste — that security and development needs
are closely interlinked, particularly in fragile and postconflict States.
For most societies, inclusive growth and
development are critical elements in preventing the
emergence or reoccurrence of conflict. But prospects
for development are in turn contingent on maintaining
a stable environment, underpinned by institutions that
provide security, effective governance, and the rule of
law. As others have noted, this has been acknowledged in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), notably through Goal 16.
This relationship between a stable, secure environment
and sustainable development was also acknowledged in
the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Accelerated
Modalities of Action Pathway, agreed at the 2014
International Conference on SIDS, and was also a strong
theme of the open debate convened by the Council in
July on the peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States (see S/PV.7499).

15-3704623/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

As we all know and acknowledge, the Security
Council is not the primary actor in addressing many of
these challenges, but it can and must play an important
role in addressing them and in ensuring that its work
in addressing threats to peace and security is linked
up with and complements the work of the wider United
Nations system and with relevant regional actors.
The Council needs to ensure that it reflects these
understandings in its mandates. Its interventions need
to be tailored to the specific drivers of conflict in each
setting, and to be based on a clear assessment of the roles
that Council-mandated missions can most effectively
play, based on the Council’s comparative advantage.
The Council must also be proactive in seeking more
effective coordination with other international actors.
Where it mandates development-related activities,
whether they be quick impact projects or targeted
support to core institutions, the Council is invariably
reliant on other international development actors with
more specialized expertise and longer time horizons.
This means bridging the silos between different
pillars of the United Nations, including development,
security and human rights. It also means reaching out
to enhance cooperation with others beyond the United
Nations system, including the international financial
institutions, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and bilateral donors.
We have yet to fully realize the potential of the
Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate peacebuilding
actors or to achieve the kind of partnership with the
Council that was originally envisaged. We firmly
believe that there must be closer engagement with and
more systematic involvement of country configuration
Chairs in Council discussions, given the valuable
knowledge and insights they can provide. We also need
to ensure that United Nations missions are equipped
with the resources and expertise they need to identify
and address the drivers of conflict and to manage
emerging threats.
We therefore strongly support the recommendation
of the High-level Independent Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations for much greater investment in the
political component of peace operations, and in conflictprevention efforts more generally. It is for these reasons
that New Zealand has recently significantly increased
its funding to the Department of Political Affairs.
We also acknowledge the good work being done by
United Nations Development Programme on conflict
prevention.

24/86

17/11/2015

Our understanding of the requirements of conflict
prevention and the relationship between peace and
development has advanced significantly in the past
decade. It is incumbent on the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, to translate these
understandings into action. New Zealand will continue
to champion greater up-front attention, investment,
practical innovation and courage in exercising the
Security Council’s responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations for preventing conflict.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking the United Kingdom
presidency and you, Madam, for having organized this
important open debate on security, development and the
root causes of conflict. I would also like to thank the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Swedish
Ambassador, and Ms. Bouchamaoui. We extend our
heartfelt congratulations, once again, to her, and to all
our friends in Tunisia, on this outstanding achievement
of winning the Nobel Peace Prize, which honours all of
Tunisia.
This debate comes at a trying time: the despicable
and barbaric attacks in Paris have cast France, and at
least 19 other countries, into mourning and shocked
the international community as a whole. In recent days
many other countries have also been struck by terrorism.
Allow me to reiterate what President Hollande said
yesterday morning before the French Parliament, which
met in Versailles: those attacks will never change the
face of France, land of liberty; they will only strengthen
our determination to combat terrorism, always and
everywhere; and they make working together more
important than ever for the future of this planet and for
solidarity between peoples.
This debate also comes in the wake of the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) by our Heads of State and Government,
which sets forth, in a very creative manner, the road
map for the international community with regard to
sustainable development for the next 15 years. I must
say that is a noteworthy success for the United Nations,
and it is a major step, as well a wonderful message
of hope, in our common fight against poverty and
inequality.
Finally, this debate takes place two weeks before
the launch of the twenty-first session of the Conference
of the Parties (COP21) to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Paris

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

on 30 November. Everyone understands how much the
outcome of the climate conference will be critical, not
only for our environment, but also for our security and
collective well-being.
Today I would like to highlight two topics,
governance and the climate. The first topic is a key
factor in both conflict prevention and development.
When we began to discuss what would follow the
Millennium Development Goals, one thing was clear
to all: countries at war saw the poorest results with
respect to the Millennium Development Goals. Given
that simple fact, a new discussion began on including
governance in the new development framework.
France therefore welcomes the fact that the Sustainable
Development Goals include a goal on governance,
that is Goal 16, which is dedicated “to the promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, the provision of access to justice for all,
and building effective, accountable institutions at all
levels”.
That goal is key because it signifies that all the
members of the international community recognize
the interrelationship between poverty eradication
and the promotion of sustainable development, peace
and security, on the one hand, and good governance,
on the other. That interrelationship, we know, is
complicated; it requires detailed consideration; and
that is why the precise spelling out of the goal was
strenuously negotiated. But now we have an invaluable
tool which, fortunately, goes beyond a narrow, binary
concept of development, as do security matters. Among
the 12 targets of that goal, allow me to mention a
few, because I feel they are particularly relevant to
our discussion today: reducing all forms of violence;
promoting the rule of law; combating illicit financial
flows and arms trafficking; combating corruption;
strengthening public institutions; and promoting
legislation against discrimination. As we can see from
the enumeration of those few targets, the international
community, particularly the development community,
fully recognizes the interrelationship between peace
and security, governance and development. We welcome
that fact, and we attach the greatest importance to the
sound implementation of Goal 16, which concerns all
countries.
The issue of climate is the second point I would like
to emphasize in my statement. Everyone knows today
that climate is a development issue. Why? Because
the primary victims of climate change are the poorest

S/PV.7561

and most vulnerable. A few days ago, the World Bank
published an important report which highlights the
point that, in the absence of action on climate change,
100 million additional people could risk falling into
extreme poverty.
Last June, on the initiative of Spain and Malaysia and
with the participation of my German and Bangladeshi
counterparts, we held meetings on the links between
climate and security. Those meetings made us aware of
the genuine risks that climate change poses for security,
with the consequences that are becoming increasingly
clear in terms of natural disasters, the competition for
increasingly scarce resources and climate displacement.
We are 15 days away from the start of the COP21
in Paris, a major event for our planet. I myself am
returning from a pre-COP21. It was an informal
ministerial consultation. My conclusion from those
three days of meetings is very positive, although much
remains to be done collectively. As the French Foreign
Minister, Laurent Fabius, said following the event: “We
have taken an important step, but we remain mobilized
more than ever and the road ahead is long”.
It is very encouraging to see that there is a true
desire, one very widely shared, to move forward and
achieve a far-reaching, universal and legally binding
agreement in December in Paris. Genuine progress has
been made, for example, regarding the principle of a
regular upward revision of the commitments of States
or the financing of climate policies. But it is clear that
much remains to be done before a universal, legally
binding agreement that is commensurate with the
climate challenge can be reached in Paris. As Council
members know, this is a unique opportunity. We have
a collective duty to succeed together. As the SecretaryGeneral has said many times, and quite rightly so:
“There is no plan B, because there is no planet B”.
And so I would like to take advantage of the
presence of many ministers here today to thank them
for their engagement in climate matters, but also to call
on them to mobilize their efforts to ensure that the best
agreement possible is reached in Paris in the interest of
guaranteeing a future for future generations.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Madam President, I
thank you for convening and for presiding over this
debate, to which we all attach importance. We believe
that the debate today on the interlinkages between
security, development and the root causes of conflict is
apt and timely. I wish to also express my appreciation

15-3704625/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to Ambassador
Olaf Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden and
Chair of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and to Ms. Bouchamaoui, the Nobel Peace Prize
laureate 2015, for their compelling briefings. As a
member of the PBC, my delegation fully endorses the
statement delivered by Ambassador Skoog.
I wish to make additional points focusing on three
issues, namely: timing and process issues; the security
and development nexus; and, in the context of the
response by the United Nations, breaking down silos
and addressing fragmentations. My focus will be more
on the structural or systemic aspects rather than the
substantive issues, with a view to highlighting areas to
which the Council should give more attention.
If one takes an expansive view of lessons learned
from the conflicts today, it is not inconceivable that in
the medium to long term, new or increased pressures
and stresses on institutions and society at different
levels will continue to be the main drivers of conflict in
various situations and scenarios around the world. To
counter that dire prognosis, we firmly support urgent
improvements to make prevention capacities more
effective at all levels, especially at the United Nations.
In that connection, our discussion today affords a timely
opportunity to take stock and further discuss possible
measures to improve the Council’s effectiveness in
maintaining international peace and security. At the
same time, the ongoing review processes of United
Nations peace operations, peacebuilding architecture
and women and peace and security could also benefit
from the outcomes of this discussion.
This Council has an important role to play in security
and development in the context of nation-building and
the maintenance of international peace and security,
which are two sides of the same coin. A possible
opportunity to be explored would be the integration
of development considerations into peacekeeping or
political missions from the outset. That ties into the
vision of holistic missions, with clear time frames.
for stabilization activities alongside peacebuilding
activities, including to strengthen the rule of law and
security institutions, among others. However, that does
not imply that such activities should or do happen in a
linear or sequential manner. I should rather emphasize
that at the point of going in, we should be clear that the
United Nations cannot be in a country indefinitely. In
our view, the discussions initiated by Slovakia and South
Africa under the auspices of the Group of Friends of

26/86

17/11/2015

Security Sector Reform, particularly their latest round,
held on 2 October, as noted in document S/2015/868,
have yielded interesting and relevant proposals on how
considerations of the security and development nexus
could be practically integrated into current frameworks
and structures.
In terms of policy and coordination, the Council
should be at the forefront in creating conditions that
can enable the PBC to fulfil its mandated tasks,
including by working in a coherent manner alongside
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. The PBC is the bridge linking security and
development at the structural and institutional level. As
such, its role must be reinforced so that its potential
for assisting countries in transitions and in emerging
from conflict can be maximized. At the same time, the
importance of coherence and coordination with other
actors and partners cannot be overstated. In our view,
by connecting more frequently and substantively with
partners such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization
and other relevant agencies, the Council could better
examine and analyse specific scenarios and situations.
Horizon scanning could prove useful and would be
worth revisiting as soon as possible.
Among the core messages of the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the peacebuilding
architecture review (see S/2015/490) is that a focus
on sustaining peace should be a common element
throughout all activities covered under the three
pillars of the United Nations — peace and security,
development and human rights. In regard to how the
Council can play its part by further breaking down silos
and addressing fragmentation at the intergovernmental
level, we are of the view that the recommendations
of the report, especially in paragraphs 132 to 135 and
paragraphs 160, 169, 179, 187, 189 and 190, among
others, merit serious attention.
In conclusion, while we recognize that ensuring
coordinated action on the part of and between United
Nations agencies and partners has always been a key
challenge, we believe that it is critical as a first step
in ensuring coherence within currently ongoing review
processes. As members of the United Nations, we
should all seize the opportunity to address this systemic
problem so as to enable the United Nations to deliver
better and as one.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
To that end, I take this opportunity to remind speakers
that the presidency will use the flashing lights on the
collars of the microphones to prompt them to bring their
remarks to a close. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would also like to inform everybody that
we will be carrying on the open debate right through
the lunch hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Trade and Development Cooperation of the Netherlands.
Ms. Ploumen (Netherlands): I would like to start
by thanking you, Madam President, and the United
Kingdom for convening today’s important debate. The
horrors of the recent terrorist attacks on innocent people
in various parts of the world remind us that a threat to
one is a threat to all. We have a shared responsibility to
build a more secure world.
The world is winning the fight against poverty.
Never before have so many people escaped hardship in
such a short time. But we know that in the years ahead,
poverty will become more and more concentrated in
places affected by violence and injustice. Ten years
from now, four out of five poor people will have to deal
with fear and human insecurity as part of their daily
lives. The construction of roads, schools and hospitals
will not bring about development if people do not feel
safe.
Strong, inclusive institutions are often taken for
granted by people like me who come from peaceful
and prosperous societies. It is like the ground under our
feet — we do not think about it, we just walk on it.
But imagine if the ground were constantly trembling
beneath us. Imagine waking up every morning not
knowing who to turn to for protection, realizing that
one’s freedom, job or business could be taken away
just like that by someone more powerful. Remember
Mohamed Bouazizi, who triggered the Arab Spring
by setting himself on fire because he was fed up with
being exploited every day by the police.
Justice and strong, inclusive institutions are
the bridge between development and peace, and the
foundation for trust between citizens and Government.
But that works only if the law is not used to exclude the
many to the benefit of the few. The rule of law is not

S/PV.7561

the same as rule by law. Today, the Security Council is
discussing the nexus between security and development,
and some are worried that talking about peace and
conflict prevention in the context of development will
securitize the development discourse.
But I think the opposite is true. Bringing a
development perspective to issues of conflict prevention
and peace will enable us to focus better and earlier on
emerging conflicts and instability. As the Council tries
to focus more on prevention, it must pay attention to
development. Issues such as inequality, poverty and
unemployment have a tremendous impact on the risk of
conflict. We should view development indicators as the
canaries in the coal mine, while justice and legitimate
institutions act as an immune system that can help to
protect countries from violence and from development
in reverse.
Recent reports on peace operations, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention offer the Security Council a
wealth of suggestions for addressing root causes at a
much earlier stage. For the Netherlands, two issues stand
out. First, we support the view that the Security Council
should engage much earlier when a conflict starts to
develop, by adopting a more flexible and sequenced
approach on the basis of conflict analysis. Horizon
scanning and briefings from the Secretary-General
could help the Council in that task. The African-led
International Support Mission in Mali organized by
the Economic Community of West African States is
a good example. It was authorized in resolution 2085
(2012) and later became part of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali.
Secondly, creative approaches are needed to finance
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. It is
simply unsustainable to rely on a few voluntary donors
to support that very important and central function of
the United Nations. The burden should be shared more
equally among States and stakeholders.
With the adoption of the global Sustainable
Development Goals (General Assembly resolution
70/1), the world has turned the importance of peace and
development into an agenda for action. We must deliver
on the pledge we made less than two months ago that
no one would be left behind. We cannot allow fragile
and conflict-affected areas to become the ghettos of the
world.

15-3704627/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of State for Cooperation of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda would like to join
others in thanking you and your delegation, Madam
President, for organizing today’s important debate.
On behalf of my Government and the people of
Rwanda, I would like to offer our sincere condolences
to the Government and people of France, especially the
families affected, for their losses in the terrorist attacks
on Friday.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing. His presence here today once again highlights
his commitment to peace, security and development
as a core part of the work of his Office. I would also
like to thank my good friend Ambassador Skoog, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Ouided
Bouchamaoui for their briefings.
The concept note provided for today’s open debate
pertinently highlights the nexus between peace, security
and development (S/2015/845, annex). That nexus is a
fact in that, since the end of the Cold War, the pursuit
of lasting peace has become, together with sustainable
development, a global imperative. Today, it is obvious
that peace is conducive to development and vice versa.
Indeed, development, if achieved, contributes
decisively to the elimination of several of the root causes
of conflict, and if poverty is reduced, social inequities
diminish, which allows for a more optimum allocation
of scarce resources, which, in turn, can certainly help to
prevent many of the situations that exacerbate conflict.
As His Excellency President Paul Kagame recently
stated at the Peace and Democracy Prize event in
Tangiers, Morocco, which was held under the theme
“From shocks to co-emergence”,
“Peace is the starting point for growth and
development ... It is a condition produced when
citizens are taken seriously as individuals, as
stakeholders, and mobilized towards good politics
and fully included in governance”.
In many situations, however, those goals
are pursued separately, which then renders them
unsustainable. Simply put, policymakers and
practitioners do not agree on which should be the
higher priority.
We believe that current global trends necessitate
a pro-active approach to making peace, security and

28/86

17/11/2015

development a mutually reinforcing and intertwined
package, at both the national and the international
levels. At the national level, we are of the view that
advancing governance and the rule of law, combating
corruption, improving transparency and accountability,
and building confidence in our people lay a strong
foundation for sustainable development, durable peace
and security. That has been true in our case, and all the
economic and social progress that we have been able
to achieve in the past 21 years rests on our leadership’s
commitment to ultimately ensuring that all citizens
enjoy safety, security and inclusive and democratic
governance.
The international community has an important role
to play, in that it should assist in building local capacity
for peace-sensitive development in order to enable
Governments to formulate and implement policies
that take the realities of conflict into account, thereby
minimizing the risk of the need for development
interventions. Conflict sensitivity entails ways of
reducing conflict, helping communities to build peace
and enabling institutions to address the structural
causes of conflict.
In that regard, we value the Peacebuilding
Commission’s sustained efforts in post-conflict
situations since 2005, despite the considerable
challenges. We note with appreciation the
recommendations of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the 2015 Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490), which proved once again
that the architecture is inadequate, underresourced and
largely neglected by Member States, as well as by the
Security Council. It is our hope that the international
community will rise to the occasion and find ways to
effectively implement the review’s recommendations.
Lastly, with billions of people still living in poverty
around the world and with growing populations, the
depletion of natural resources, the adverse impacts
of environmental degradation and the recent crises in
public health and migration and the spread of all types
of extremism, including terrorism, there is clearly
a need for strong and effective global cooperation.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), along
with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals, builds on
the premise that an integrated approach that addresses
peace, security and development is necessary. Goal 16
specifically recognizes that sustainable development
cannot be realized without peace and security and that

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7561

peace and security will be at risk without sustainable
development.

Skoog and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, to whom I pay
tribute for her role in building democracy in Tunisia.

Improving the conditions for social justice, in
particular, is fundamental to the promotion of peace
in a variety of contexts throughout the world. The
Sustainable Development Goals should serve as
effective tools in realizing inclusive development for all
and in determining the right course of action to follow
as we strive to achieve an inclusive and widespread
economic development that gives more people a greater
stake now in avoiding violent disruption, while offering
them credible hope for a better future for themselves
and their children.

Portugal is well aware that investing in
development brings security benefits. Consequently,
our development cooperation assigns absolute priority
to strengthening the link between peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights, which
reflects the Sustainable Development Goals that were
adopted in September (General Assembly resolution
70/1). In that regard, we attach particular importance to
sectors that have a structural and multiplier effect, such
as governance, the rule of law, human rights, education,
health care and institutional capacity-building, while
promoting the participation of women and girls and
the eradication of all forms of gender-based violence.
In that context, I congratulate Spain for the debate
organized in October on women and peace and security
(see S/PV.7533) in the framework of resolution 1325
(2000).

The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Portugal.
Mr. Campos Ferreira (Portugal) (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I
would like to begin by expressing Portugal’s complete
solidarity with France. Here, in the Security Council
Chamber, I wish to reiterate, on behalf of Portugal,
our strongest condemnation of the heinous, cowardly
and utterly unjustifiable terrorist attack committed in
Paris this past 13 November. I would also like to pay a
public tribute to the victims, including two Portuguese
citizens, and send condolences to their families.
It was not just an attack on France. It was a barbaric
attack perpetrated by a group of radical individuals
against all those who uphold the principles and values
of the Charter of the United Nations, namely, the 193
States Members of the Organization. Portugal expresses
its full support to France, our European partner and
ally.
In the light of that attack and others that preceded
it, in Beirut for instance, the international community
has the legal right and the moral duty to act in a
concerted effort to put an end to Daesh, a radical and
terrorist entity. In doing so, we will not give in to fear
nor surrender our values, particularly with regard to
human rights. I would also reiterate Portugal’s support
for the actions undertaken by the United Nations and
the Security Council to prevent and combat terrorism.
That attack makes the choice of the subject for this
debate by the United Kingdom extremely timely. I would
like to underline the importance of the perspective that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon shared with us, as well
as the relevant statements made by Ambassador Olof

In addition to the already ineluctable role of
civil-society actors, I stress also the importance of
the perspective of inclusive development, given the
growing role of the private sector in the mutually
reinforcing relationship between security and
development. Indeed, there will be no eradication of
poverty without the creation of wealth. And without the
eradication of poverty and the consequent promotion
of the dignity of every human life, we will always be
subject to the threats to peace and stability that will
subsequently arise. I therefore stress the importance
of social responsibility and encourage the SecretaryGeneral to continue promoting the United Nations
Global Compact.
In this world of immediacy and media sensationalism
in which we live, the numerous successes of the
Organization and the Council in conflict prevention
sometimes go unnoticed. It is only fair that we
acknowledge these accomplishments. Undoubtedly, in
this respect no news is good news. However, given the
deterioration of crises such as those in Syria, Libya and
elsewhere, we — and the Council in particular — must
conclude that there are lessons to be learned so that in
the future we can better undertake the responsibility
to protect, as well as responsibility while protecting.
To paraphrase Kofi Annan, in dealing with any given
country we should not presume to know more about its
reality than those who live there.

15-3704629/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

We all subscribe to effective multilateralism and the
central role played by the United Nations. Whatever the
terminology in vogue — “cross-cutting”, “system-wide
coherence”, “delivering as one” and “breaking down
silos” — if we are to be effective we have to promote an
attitude of cooperation rather than duplication, sharing
rather than competition, and structural collective
responsibility instead of short-term individual interests.
When speaking of conflict prevention, early
warning mechanisms and capacity for concerted
action are particularly relevant. Much has been done
concerning cooperation between international and
regional organizations, but there remains substantial
room for improvement. The European Union, whose
statement in this debate Portugal naturally endorses,
has been strongly committed in this regard, particularly
with the United Nations and the African Union. Africa
in general, and West Africa in particular, require
special attention with respect to preventing possible
relapses into conflict. In this context, we welcome
the concerted action of the international community
in Guinea-Bissau, including the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP).
On the subject of the CPLP, I take this opportunity
to acknowledge Angola, an elected member of the
Council with an important vote that recently celebrated
40 years of independence.
In response to the invitation addressed to us,
Portugal decided to be represented here today at the
political level in order to underline the priority it
attaches to conflict prevention, particularly against
the background of the close link between security and
development. This was reflected in the constant priority
with which we promoted preventive diplomacy during
our previous mandate in the Council, in 2011 and 2012,
wither through the improvement of the working methods
that we sought to launch, aimed at a more expeditious
and effective response of the Council; or in the highlevel briefing on new challenges to international peace
and security that we organized in November 2011 (see
S/PV.6668) with a view to preventing conflicts in the
medium and long terms.
To the extent of our capacities, especially as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters and during the month of
our presidency, as well as throughout our mandate, we

30/86

17/11/2015

promoted interaction and fought ritualized inertia and
rigidity of methods. Our aim was to free up time in order
to focus on early warning, enhancing the most possible
systematic use of diplomatic means available for
conflict prevention, for example by sounding out United
Nations regional offices and responsible parties of the
Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, in this vein we
fully supported the British horizon-scanning initiative,
which allowed for informal analysis and discussion,
thereby increasing the preventive intervention capacity
of the Council. We also advocated recourse to meetings
under the Arria Formula, facilitating civil society’s
access to the Council.
In the aforementioned briefing on new challenges,
it became evident that contemporary phenomena such
as climate change and its impact on oceans — which,
in particular, threatens small island developing States
and promotes transnational organized crime, migration
and pandemics — require a collective response that,
to be effective, will need to be more integrated and
systematic. Although these issues follow under the
purview of other forums, the Council must remain
mindful of the increasing impact of these challenges
as causes of conflict. The Council should therefore not
fear the audacity of innovation and, as such, would have
every advantage in developing a more comprehensive,
systematic, coordinated and informed approach in this
regard.
In this context, we reiterate our proposal for
setting up an informal working group of the Security
Council on the new challenges to international peace
and security. Such a sustained monitoring mechanism
of these issues, by analysing the Secretary-General’s
reports as well as those of other relevant bodies and
agencies, and other institutions, would be of an asset of
great added value for the conflict-prevention capacity
of the United Nations, and of the Council in particular,
precisely in the perspective of today’s debate.
In conclusion, conflict prevention was part of
the genesis of the United Nations 70 years ago, and
sustainable development is at the heart of its future.
The Security Council is part of that dynamic. It cannot
be insulated from it and must therefore interact with
the other competent bodies in this field. Security and
development are comprehensively interlinked and they
either reinforce or undermine each other. Furthermore,
new challenges to international peace and security that
are closely related to development increasingly tend to
degenerate into instability and insecurity.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Although conflict prevention is first and foremost
the responsibility of States themselves, it is up to
the Council, as the primary body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
assume its responsibilities and, at the political level,
lead efforts to prevent conflicts that appear on the
horizon. The Council should always be mindful that
the cost of preventing a conflict is always negligible
compared to the price paid in human lives, and this
should be reflected in its action.
Portugal, which in December celebrates 60 years
since its accession to the United Nations, will continue
to be at the forefront of promoting conflict prevention
so that the culture of prevention, to which we committed
at the 2005 World Summit, can effectively materialize.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Thailand.
Mr. Chinvanno (Thailand): Peace and security
will not be sustainable without development. Likewise,
development cannot be sustainable without peace and
security. Their mutually reinforcing nature has proven
to be indisputable. I thank the United Kingdom and
Chile for their efforts earlier in the year to highlight the
development dimension, aiming at preventing conflict.
Far too often, the international community has
reacted in order to resolve conflicts rather than
proactively prevent them. The Security Council has
had to respond to crises and deal with their sorrowful
aftermath rather than tackling emerging threats early
on. Thailand believes that investing in development
is a cost-effective way to prevent conflict. Conflict
resolution often is too little, too late, following dire
humanitarian consequences.
Often, conflict stems from the absence of just or
inclusive socioeconomic development, which fosters
discontent, discord and strife. When economic fruits
are not fairly shared and distributed, and when the
gap between the haves and the have-nots becomes too
wide and when it cuts across religions, ethnicities and
ideologies, existing tensions tend to be exacerbated,
and the risk of conflict tends to increase.
In Thailand’s view, development ought to be
holistic, inclusive and beneficial to all for it to be
sustainable and conducive to peace. It must address
persisting poverty and inequality and ensure equitable
access to resources, quality education, decent work and

S/PV.7561

justice. We must leave no man, woman or child behind.
As an ardent supporter of the women and peace and
security agenda, Thailand advocates a greater role
for women at all stages of the peace process as well
as in promoting development. We must also focus our
development programmes on our youth so as to help
them realize their full potential and dissuade them from
violent extremist leanings.
Development alone, however, is not enough. We
must also create conditions conducive to a peaceful
society in which human rights, the rule of law and
good governance are promoted and upheld. Thailand
champions a comprehensive approach to peace, security
and development. This is evident in the way in which
our peacekeepers, who are actually more like early
peacebuilders, carry out their duties. They are very much
invested in their peacekeeping responsibilities and in
helping local populations improve their livelihoods and
stand on their own feet. They are strongly committed
to building peace and to preventing any further relapse
into conflict.
The United Nations system can achieve more by
working in a coordinated manner to maximize the
tools at its disposal to reinforce the work of concerned
agencies. When various bodies are acting in concert, the
Security Council in particular can lend the necessary
political weight to support preventive action.
We agree with the Secretary-General that United
Nations conflict-prevention tools must be strengthened,
used proactively and deployed rapidly. We support
the use of good offices and preventive diplomacy, as
well as early-warning systems based on informed
analyses of the dynamics on the ground. Peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and special political missions are
essential to prevent conflict from recurring. These are
tools that need adequate resources.
The United Nations also must work closely with
Member States, who have the primary responsibility
for conflict prevention, to ensure sustainability. United
Nations training and capacity-building programmes in
conflict prevention should be continued and expanded.
It is also crucial to deepen cooperation with regional
organizations, as they are normally better informed and
closely engaged with the dynamics and key players in
the region. Their conflict-prevention capabilities and
tools can complement those of the United Nations, to
the benefit of countries neighbouring the conflict areas.

15-3704631/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/11/2015

Today we are facing increasingly complex conflicts
that require a more prompt, effective and coordinated
response. Thailand stands ready to work with the United
Nations and our partners worldwide to tackle the root
causes of conflict, prevent conflict from happening,
and sustain peace through development work.

As we tackle these global challenges, the role of
security and development actors can and should be
complementary. We welcome the strong message of
the United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding
reviews that sustaining peace should be a unifying
thread running through the work of the United Nations.

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Christian
Leffler, Deputy Secretary-General for Global and
Economic Issues of the European External Action
Service of the European Union,.

Building
peace,
preventing
conflict
and
strengthening international security are core objectives
of the European Union, and we remain committed
to taking a comprehensive approach to security and
development issues.

Mr. Leffler: Following the terrible events that
took place in Paris last Friday and the carnage in
Beirut just the day before, let me start my intervention
by presenting our condolences to the Governments
and peoples of France and Lebanon. Those attacks,
as well as those on the Russian airliner, in Iraq and
elsewhere where terrorists strike, are an attack on us
all. They are an affront to humankind and a challenge
to the fundamental values that we have committed
collectively to defend.
I have the honour to speak in this debate on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to start by thanking the presidency
for having convened this timely and pertinent
debate. I would also like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, Ambassador Skoog and
Ms. Bouchamaoui for their opening remarks.
As the Council has stated in the past, security
and development are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. This is recognized very clearly in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). We know that poverty,
inequality, weak and ineffective institutions as well
as the adverse effects of climate change are drivers of
conflict. Equally, for sustainable development to be
possible, we need freedom from violence and conflict.
And neither lasting peace nor sustainable development
can be fully realized without respect for human rights
and the rule of law.

32/86

We are pleased to see that the Council is
increasingly looking beyond the immediate symptoms
of existing crises and adopting a more forward-looking
approach. We all need to invest more in prevention. It is
the EU’s conviction that sustainable development is an
important preventive element.
The Security Council has intensified its preventive
work and its focus on post-conflict peacebuilding so
as to prevent relapses into violence. The EU believes
that we should continue in that direction through, for
instance, horizon-scanning briefings, ensuring that
longer-term peacebuilding is considered in mission
mandates, and by strengthening and reforming the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission.
For the same reasons, we are pleased that
counterterrorism and fighting illicit flows, drug
trafficking, transnational organized crime and smallarms proliferation have long been on the Council’s
agenda. The Council must now step up its interaction
with other parts of the United Nations system to
maximize coherence in these areas.
The EU has always insisted on the need to prevent
or tackle conflicts and crises comprehensively. In our
interconnected world, our own security relies on human
security around the globe. That includes investing in
human rights, but also mainstreaming that priority
by embracing human rights-based approaches. In that
context, women’s empowerment is essential. Women
are crucial agents of conflict prevention, and realizing
gender equality will make a crucial contribution to
sustainable development.
The United Nations is currently engaged in a period
of strategic reflection at several levels. The result must
be comprehensive and ambitious. We should develop
synergies between the 2030 Agenda and the three peace
and security reviews.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me finally mention a few recent initiatives that
we have been working on in the European Union. First,
we are refining the sharing of conflict-analyses with
partners, which should lead to coherent approaches to
State-building and peacebuilding. Secondly, we have set
up an EU trust fund for stability and for addressing the
root causes of irregular migration and displaced persons
in Africa, which will address the causes and effects of
conflict and instability that lead to displacement and
migration. Thirdly, we are developing the EU-wide
strategic framework for supporting security-sector
reform.
Mr. Wilson took the Chair.
The primary responsibility for conflict prevention
and sustainable development lies with Member
States. But the international community has a role
to play, including the Council within its mandate. A
clear message in the 2030 Agenda is the need for a
comprehensive and integrated approach to tackling
global challenges. We must bridge peace, development
and security and work together to achieve a safer, more
prosperous and more sustainable world.
The President: I wish to remind everyone to please
stay within the four-minute time limit that we have set
out and on which the Council has agreed on numerous
occasions in the past. There are so many people who
want to participate in this debate, and I want to be fair
to all of them.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me
reiterate our heartfelt condolences to France, Lebanon
and the Russian Federation, which have been brutally
victimized by terror in the past few days.
Thank you for organizing this open debate,
Mr. President. 1 also wish to thank the Secretary-General
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for their
briefings. Let me also congratulate Ms. Bouchamaoui
for the vital contribution of the Tunisian National
Dialogue Quartet to ensuring peace and democracy in
Tunisia.
Brazil has long upheld the notion that development
and security are closely interconnected, mutually
reinforcing and central to the achievement of lasting
peace. Experience has demonstrated that achieving
development leads a country to strengthen its
commitment to peace and stability. That positive link
was the subject of an open debate promoted by Brazil’s

S/PV.7561

most recent presidency of the Security Council in
February 2011 (see S/PV.6479).
However, the relationship between security and
development cannot be understood from a simplistic
perspective. We should clearly reject any notion that
poverty itself might constitute a threat to peace. One
should not lose sight of the fact that the gravest threats
to international peace and security, including world
wars, have historically risen from tensions between
developed industrial nations. Militaristic agendas and
the unilateral use of force are far more significant
sources of instability than poverty per se.
A broad and strong consensus has emerged on
the centrality of conflict prevention to the promotion
of peace, as the Secretary-General states in his latest
report on the matter (S/2015/730). The issue was also
highlighted by all three high-level reviews conducted
this year, since preventive approaches are consistent with
more effective peace operations, more comprehensive
peacebuilding efforts and more empowering initiatives
on the women and peace and security agenda.
Adopting a multidimensional approach to conflict
prevention is therefore a wise strategy. Traditional
instruments to solve disputes and avert wars, including
mediation, good offices and conciliation measures,
remain essential. Nevertheless, preventive diplomacy
goes far beyond those tools. Understanding and
tackling the root causes of conflict are a key step in
preventing the emergence of new hostilities. While
every crisis derives from a specific context, some
challenges are particularly frequent, including
economic and social inequality, disputes regarding the
ownership of land and natural resources, human rights
violations, the insufficient participation of women
and the marginalization of minorities and vulnerable
populations.
Other structural factors, often linked to the
behaviour of developed countries, also contribute to
international instability. In order to genuinely face the
underlying causes of conflicts, the Security Council
should also consider measures to control the flow of
arms, promote nuclear disarmament, ensure respect
for the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
concerning the use of force, enforce withdrawal
from illegally occupied territories and expand the
participation of developing countries in the Council’s
deliberations.

15-3704633/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

A situation that deserves particular attention in that
regard is the extreme case of “de-development” that is
taking place in Palestine as a result of our collective
inability to translate into reality our commitment to
a two-State solution. The national report of the State
of Palestine, submitted by Palestine to the Economic
and Social Council in 2014 (E/2014/60, annex), unveils
the root causes of a protracted conflict that requires
priority attention from the Security Council.
Discerning the root causes of a particular conflict
is a complex endeavour that should not be confused
with the attainment of a development agenda. The first
silo to be broken down by this debate is the erroneous
perception that only developing countries need to build
peaceful and inclusive societies. Moreover, the various
challenges faced by all countries in areas related to
public order should not be interpreted as threats to
peace, security or stability. In that regard, it is worth
stressing the key legal and practical distinction between
conflict and violence.
The notion of conflict describes a politically
motivated situation that might represent a threat to
international peace and security. Response to conflicts
may involve instruments associated with collective
responsibility or security. The concept of violence, on
the other hand, can relate to a purely domestic challenge
within the realm of public security that is subject to
national laws. Although international cooperation, upon
request, can be a useful tool to curb violence, we are
dealing with different spheres of responsibility to which
different remedies should be applied. In other words,
the Security Council is not mandated, for instance, to
reduce high levels of homicide or criminality in a given
country.
From the point of view of international humanitarian
law, the Geneva Conventions that apply to conflict
prescribe, as a rule, that force, when resorted to, must
observe the criterion of proportionality. Conversely,
in situations of domestic violence, different criteria
apply; every casualty or injury caused by a State public
agent must be accounted for according to domestic
penal laws. Utmost care must be taken not to bring
issues of internal public order into a body that deals
with conflicts and threats to international peace and
security. Such a mistaken approach could exacerbate
the problems rather than help to solve them.
Having engraved the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes into our Constitution, Brazil

34/86

17/11/2015

will continue to contribute towards a virtuous cycle of
security and development in our region and beyond. We
are proud to belong to a zone of peace, as defined by the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the longstanding commitment of Brazil to the prevention of
conflict through dialogue, diplomacy and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Orellana Zabalza (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): First, I would like to express our gratitude
to your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate on an issue of high priority, as well as for
the concept note (S/2015/845, annex) that you have
prepared, which contains valuable guidance for our
deliberations today. We also wish to thank the other
speakers who have preceded us for their statements.
Before I continue, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our condemnation of the
multiple terrorist attacks perpetrated in recent days and
to express our solidarity with those friendly countries,
which have faced such difficult circumstances.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We wish to add some
additional thoughts.
For Guatemala, the commitment to multilateralism
and the United Nations is a cornerstone of its foreign
policy. Our strong multilateral vocation is based on
the conviction that global challenges, such as the
maintenance of peace and security, the battle against
poverty, the encouragement of sustainable development
and the promotion of the rule of law, can be addressed
effectively only within the framework of multilateralism
and the United Nations.
Less than two months ago, we adopted a new
development agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in
which Member States affirmed that, without peace
and security, we cannot achieve development. Goal 16
of the Sustainable Development Goals, for instance,
reflects the need to build peaceful, just and inclusive
societies and provide equal access to justice, based on
the respect for human rights and good governance. That
is why we believe it is necessary to ensure that all the
instruments available to the Council be proportionate to
the needs in the fight against crimes committed against

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the civilian population and contain strong elements of
deterrence, accountability and justice. It is important
that the lessons learned from the worst failures and best
practices guide our future work. The Human Rights
Council, the International Criminal Court and the
specialized criminal courts have an important role to
play in this respect.
Over the years, we have all advocated a greater
commitment to conflict prevention rather than dealing
with threats to peace after the conflict has developed. In
conflict prevention, we must deal with the underlying
causes through an open and inclusive dialogue,
involving all the parties concerned, from the State and
civil society to the grass-roots level.
We reaffirm our commitment to fostering a culture
of prevention of armed conflicts as a means of addressing
the interrelated problems of security and development
and of strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
to prevent armed conflicts. Guatemala, as a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, considers it imperative
to provide the assistance needed by countries that
are emerging from conflict, and trying to restore
democratic institutions, in order to ensure inclusive
dialogue with all the parties concerned and guarantee
the necessary national reconciliation. It is only in that
way that we can we stay on the path of peace, stability
and development without risking regression.
The Commission is in a good position to promote
greater coherence and synergy in the policies and
actions implemented in the three peacebuilding
dimensions: political, security and development.
In that respect, we express our full support for
the recommendations included in the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490).
We support the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory
role to the Security Council and the General Assembly.
That advisory role should encourage the integrated
strengthening and long-term commitment of both the
United Nations and other entities to countries emerging
from conflict. Our country shares a commitment to
the pursuit of sustainable development and peace in
countries emerging from conflict and recognizes the
value of the relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission to better address
the conflicts and situations in those countries.
In conclusion and taking into account the various
conflicts, it is important to ask ourselves if we are

S/PV.7561

keeping the founding promise of the Organization to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
As stakeholders in the international system, that should
be our goal, and it can be achieved if we improve our
efforts to build and maintain peace. My delegation is
committed to that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): It is a pleasure to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this meeting. The topic
of today’s debate is interesting. It posits the concepts of
development and security together and seeks a greater
understanding of the root causes of conflict.
Most of us would agree that development and
peace are mutually supportive. Eradicating poverty,
providing basic human development and economic
opportunity will certainly strengthen the foundation
for peace and stability. It is true that grievances driven
by a sense of deprivation, which is often linked to the
absence of development, can at times lead to conflict,
in particular within countries. People who do not have
the means to shape their own destiny are susceptible to
being caught in a vicious cycle of hopelessness, despair
and anger. The recent adoption of the transformative
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) is both an acknowledgement
and a response by the international community that
ending poverty and achieving sustainable developing is
an urgent task.
That being said, the terrible events of last week,
in Beirut and Paris, and the downing of a Russian
airliner over Egypt last month demonstrate to us that
the greatest threat to peace and security comes from
violent extremism and religious fanaticism, not from
the absence of economic and social development. It
is the purveyors of hate and those who characterize
others as infidels who are responsible for the violence
that threaten our civilizational values. We need to also
acknowledge that it is the absence of State authority, or
weak State authority, that provides the breeding ground
for extremist organizations to operate.
Terrorism is evil, as is violent extremism. The
lack of economic and social development cannot
be a justification for either. Terrorism has to be
eliminated. The events of last week have shown
so tragically that there can be no alternative. All
terrorist organizations — Daesh and Al-Shabaab,
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Al-Qaida — have an ideological

15-3704635/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

basis that contradicts the basic tenets of humankind.
Ideology alone, however, is not enough to sustain
terrorists. They need financing and space to operate.
That is, unfortunately, provided to them, and that is
what needs to be addressed collectively.
The events of last week also highlight our unfinished
business in the fight against terrorism. Leaders had,
at the 2005 World Summit, decided that expeditious
action would be taken to finalize the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. That has not
happened. The price that we pay for procrastination
is often in human lives. That should not be allowed to
continue. Terrorism takes away the foremost of human
rights — the right to life. It is truly a crime against
humanity.
In conclusion, I refer to the tendency of the
Security Council to encroach on the jurisdiction of the
General Assembly. Just because the three pillars of the
United Nations — peace and security, development and
human rights — are interdependent, it does not ipso
facto mean that the Security Council must allocate
all these functions to itself. The Security Council is a
non-representative, limited member body with opaque
working methods. It cannot presume to prescribe policy
choices on issues of development and social inclusion
to the wider membership of the United Nations.
The Council will, however, have our full support in
its efforts to curb dangerous and extremist trends. The
consolidation of political processes and solutions, while
also building durable State institutions, will go a long
way in addressing extremism and radicalization. We
would encourage the Council to pursue such solutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, we express our condolences to the people of
France, Russia and Lebanon. We in Iraq are also affected
by the continuing and multiform terrorist operations.
We see martyrs die every day. We want to express
our thanks to you and your country, Mr. President, for
preparing and organizing this open debate on a subject
that is of growing importance, given the close link
between security challenges and the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
The best way to guarantee sustainable peace
and tolerance and to prevent conflicts is to reinforce
sustainable development and to guarantee equal

36/86

17/11/2015

opportunities for all. We also need to establish justice
in the distribution of national wealth, without excluding
anyone on the basis of race, ethnic origin or belief. The
objective of creating secure and inclusive societies,
based on a solid foundation, is defined in Goal 16 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). Creating such societies
requires respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as for international law, which
prohibits interference in the internal affairs of States.
Such interference exacerbates divisions, including
divisions based on religion and belief, and creates
insecurity at the domestic level. It unleashes conflict,
which leads to destruction and massacres within local
societies. It also undermines the development gains that
States have achieved over previous decades — gains
that are being lost in the wars we are seeing at the
moment.
Fair and equal participation and access to resources
between neighbouring States along a river, for example,
prevent conflict between the countries on that river.
The absence of justice and equality in regard to water
quotas impedes the sustainable development of the area
through which that water flows, which contravenes the
right to water. Furthermore, mutual investment in the
water of an international river contributes to sustainable
development among the countries along that river, and
that closes the door on conflict.
The spread of Takfiri thinking or apostasy
throughout the modern world demonstrates the lack of
global security, as well as the failure of the international
community to face up to the Takfiri thinking of schools
whose teaching deviates from regular education. Such
thinking permits massacres, hostage-taking, sexual
enslavement, immolation and the other crimes that
are being committed against those who hold different
religious or other beliefs. The failure to address such
delinquent thinking and to eliminate it is a strategic
failure of the mechanisms that have been established to
eradicate terrorism, namely the programmes within the
United Nations or outside it.
We must not forget that the pressure on the
environment, the scarcity of natural resources and
climate change itself are all factors that contribute to the
outbreak of wars and conflict. Given that reality, Iraq
has made its contribution to the document on climate
change whose adoption we expect to see in Paris.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Women can contribute to the prevention of conflicts
and peacebuilding. Women’s rights must be guaranteed
by societies and women must not be excluded or
deprived of their rights, especially since they often
suffer the most in situations of armed conflict. In
Iraq, we are making progress towards the completion
of a national plan to apply resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, including with respect
to decision-making in those areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I would
like to express the heartfelt condolences of the people
and Government of Liechtenstein to all those affected
by the recent terrorist attacks committed by Daesh in
France, Lebanon, Iraq and elsewhere.
When adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
in September, our Heads of State and Government
recognized that peace and security will be at risk
without sustainable development. We are grateful to the
presidency for organizing today’s debate, which offers a
first opportunity to explore some of the relevant issues.
The concept paper (S/2015/845, annex) rightly
places strong emphasis on the need for prevention.
Conflict prevention and the promotion of peaceful
societies, as established in Sustainable Development
Goal 16, go hand in hand. Serious violations of human
rights are often a key indicator of conflict to come and
are thus a key aspect of prevention. Two key elements
must be in place for the Security Council to play its
rightful role in that regard. First, the Council must
have access to relevant information at an early stage.
Secondly, the Council must be willing to take decisive
action on the information before it. Concerning the first
aspect, the United Nations system has significantly
enhanced its early warning capacity over the past few
years. Generally speaking, the information necessary
for the Council to act in a preventive manner is available
within the United Nations system. That, however, will
have an effect only if such information is placed before
the Council in time. In that respect, the Human Rights
Up Front initiative should prove to be an important
advance.
The decisive aspect, however, is Council members’
resolve to take action when the relevant information
is before them, especially when a situation is about to
escalate and could result in atrocity crimes. The code

S/PV.7561

of conduct on Security Council action against atrocity
crimes, which 106 States support at the moment, gives
hope that the Council will become more effective at
prevention. Resolution 2248 (2015) on Burundi, which
was adopted by consensus last Friday, is certainly a
positive signal. We look forward to seeing more States
support the code of conduct and also to its consistent
application, especially by those Council members who
have already signed it. We also hope that it will serve
as an additional incentive for the Secretariat to be very
proactive in forwarding information to the Security
Council.
The Council can also play a much stronger role in
helping to create accountable institutions and ensuring
equal access to justice as a key ingredient of sustainable
peace. Such efforts should focus primarily on the
strengthening of national judiciaries, which is the best
way to ensure a lasting contribution to sustainable
development in the countries concerned. Capacitybuilding and technical assistance can be made availabIe,
and are already being made available, by different parts
of the United Nations system. If necessary, hybrid
models can be put in place, particularly in situations
of transition from armed conflict. There are also great
opportunities for the Peacebuilding Commission in that
regard. In most cases, justice efforts should be driven
by the countries concerned, but at the same time the
Council should consistently call on them to fulfil their
obligation to fight impunity for the most serious crimes
and should mandate international assistance where
needed. Where a country is clearly unwilling to provide
justice, with impunity impeding sustainable peace, the
Council should consider referring situations to the
International Criminal Court. However, given its track
record in that regard, the Council should reconsider
its referral modalities; in particular, it should ensure a
strategy for effective follow-up.
There are several specific aspects of the 2030
Agenda that merit separate discussion, but the issue
of human trafficking, in particular, is a challenge that
would be worthy of an open debate in the Security
Council. Human trafficking is not merely one of the
great human rights challenges and tragedies of our
time; it can also destabilize societies and pose a threat
to international peace and security. We hope that such
a debate could galvanize a coordinated approach to
human trafficking across the United Nations system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.

15-3704637/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Bird (Australia): It is well understood
that prevention is always better than cure. Conflict
prevention was the reason that the United Nations
was created, yet it remains a predominantly crisisdriven Organization, reliant on traditional response
mechanisms that are straining to meet increasing need,
particularly as contemporary conflicts are becoming
more complex and asymmetrical and posing ever
greater threats to a larger number of civilians.
The evidence drawing the link between peace
and security and development is overwhelming. The
report of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, States of Fragility 2015: Meeting
Post-2015 Ambitions, affirms that conflict can lead
to a reversal of national development gains by more
than 20 years. The World Bank has also identified the
correlation between violence and poverty.
As others have mentioned, Sustainable Development
Goal 16 affirms the universal recognition accorded to
promoting just, peaceful and inclusive societies and
to preventing conflict. In order to achieve sustainable
peace and security, the United Nations must address the
root causes of conflict and end the cycle of violence
and relapse. That requires an integrated approach. The
Security Council has a crucial role to play in addressing
that.
First, more regular and comprehensive briefings
of the Council on fragile and conflict affected
countries — informed by a range of stakeholders — could
promote better understanding of the drivers and
root causes. Secondly, the Council should enable the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to play the bridging
and advocacy role envisioned when the PBC was
established in 2005. In that regard, we welcome the
involvement of the Chair of the PBC in today’s debate.
Thirdly, the Council should consider how other United
Nations bodies can contribute to peace and security.
Programmes run by the United Nations Development
Group to support the rule of law, anticorruption and
effective and accountable institutions, can help in
addressing the drivers of conflict and in sustaining
peace following conflict. In turn, those considerations
could help ensure that Security Council mandates
draw on the full range of the United Nations conflict
prevention, mediation and development tools.
The Council’s mandates should reinforce ongoing
United Nations peacebuilding, State-building and
associated development efforts in the field to help

38/86

17/11/2015

prevent future conflict and build the foundations of
a peaceful and inclusive State. The United Nations
must also ensure greater operational cohesion at
Headquarters and in the field, reinforced by appropriate
leadership, capacity and resources for United Nations
peace operations and country teams. The successful
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
provided a useful example of how that can be done.
As co-facilitator, with Angola, of the consultations
on the review of United Nations peacebuilding, we
look forward to further discussions with the United
Nations membership on reforms to the way the United
Nations does its core business of preventing conflict
and building sustainable peace and security. Today’s
debate, which has highlighted the important role that
development plays in achieving sustainable peace,
contributes to that crucial reform work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union,
and I will add some national remarks.
In Italy’s view, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
the ongoing reviews of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
women and peace and security have some underlying
themes in common, including the importance of
conflict prevention, the need to break down silos and
foster an integrated approach towards the three pillars
of the Organization, and the central role of human
rights, respect for which is essential to fostering real
progress across the board.
The rhetorical battle on conflict prevention has
been won. There is broad consensus on its centrality
and on the great risks that can arise from inaction. Yet,
at the same time, prevention has become more difficult.
We must renew our collective commitment to conflict
prevention and operationalize the emerging broad
consensus among the membership. Allow me to share
some of Italy’s ideas.
First, with respect to raising awareness, we must
recognize that today’s security challenges are different
from those of the past and that the security landscape
before us is rapidly changing. In September, we
adopted the ambitious 2030 Agenda, which introduces
an integrated approach to sustainable development
by linking together the five P’s: people, prosperity,

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

partnership, planet and peace. While respecting the
various roles and mandates of the United Nations
bodies, closer attention should be paid to broader
security issues, which are a matter of concern for a
growing part of the membership, and to furthering
closer cooperation between the General Assembly and
the Security Council.
As an example of best practices, allow me to
refer to the open debate held, during the New Zealand
presidency of the Council, on peace and security
challenges facing small island developing States
(S/PV.7499). We fully supported that initiative and
followed it up with a ministerial meeting in Milan with
our partners from the small island developing States, on
climate adaptation and food security.
Secondly, in fostering an integrated approach
and addressing the root causes, today’s challenges are
complex by nature. As we advocate that the United
Nations must not work in silos, we should refrain from
using the same approach. Today we are faced with the
biggest refugee crisis since the Second World War,
causing, inter alia, increased migration pressure on
the Mediterranean region, where too many lives have
already been lost. As a Mediterranean country whose
navy is daily engaged in protecting and saving human
lives, we understand that there is no quick fix to that
phenomenon. It must be tackled from different angles:
through development by addressing the root causes;
politically, by finding solutions to the crises we are
facing; and by respecting human rights and the rights
of refugees.
As highlighted at last week’s summit on migration,
held in Malta between the European Union and Africa,
only an integrated approach addressing the root causes
can promote a long-term solution. In that regard, as
stated by Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, during
the recent Summit of the Group of 20, implementing
the recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals
will also play a critical role in the prevention of violent
extremist acts.
Thirdly, we must revitalize the preventive tools
at the disposal of the Council, collectively renew our
focus on the peaceful settlement of disputes under
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations and
deepen our partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular with the African Union,
under Chapter VIII. In the same spirit, Italy believes
in closer cooperation between the Security Council

S/PV.7561

and the Peacebuilding Commission, for instance
by inviting the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations to participate in Council meetings,
as appropriate. We also welcome the strengthening
of early warning mechanisms, such as the updated
analysis framework developed by the Office of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, the
principle of the responsibility to protect, the Human
Rights Up Front initiative and the role of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. All of those
represent valuable tools whose potential should be fully
exploited.
My last point is on funding. First, if we are to tackle
the root causes of potential conflicts, we must first and
foremost respect our commitment to financing the 2030
Agenda that we have just adopted. In that respect, I
can announce that the budgetary law currently under
consideration by our Parliament aims to increase the
official development assistance (ODA) resources of
Italy’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation by 40 per cent, in 2016. The ultimate goal
is for Italy’s ODA to reach 0.7 per cent of its gross
national income by the 2030 Agenda deadline.
Secondly and finally, with respect to resourcing
United Nations preventive tools and peacebuilding
activities, the reviews we have carried out highlight
that investing in prevention is not only a moral
obligation but also a smart investment, as the cost of
conflict intervention has become increasingly high.
We must now build on that awareness by significantly
strengthening the resources devoted to those activities,
thereby ensuring a more reliable and predictable funding
of the Secretariat’s core prevention and mediation
capacities. In the same spirit, it is important that
peacebuilding activities be regularly and predictably
funded to diminish the chances of conflict relapse.
I congratulate the President on the initiative of
addressing these issues in this open debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Speaking
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), let me
begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this debate.
I also convey my thanks to the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
At the outset, I would like to express my deepest
condolences to the people and Government of France,

15-3704639/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Iraq, Russia and Lebanon for the tragic loss of life of a
number of their fellow citizens, as a result of the recent
heinous terrorist acts.
NAM acknowledges the interconnectedness
of economic development, social development,
environmental protection, peace and security, human
rights and the rule of law. Efforts to transform the
United Nations into a more effective instrument for
preventing conflict should take into account the need
for a balanced, coherent and comprehensive approach,
in accordance with its Charter and international law.
In this context, it is critical that all principal organs
of the United Nations play an active role in devloping
and implementing a more effective collective security
system, in accordance with their respective functions
and powers.
NAM believes that it is indispensable for United
Nations Member States to develop common perceptions
and agreed approaches to address existing, new and
emerging threats and challenges to international peace
and security, as well as the root causes of conflict. Such
approaches to collective security would be legitimate
only if they were developed in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and by all
Member States acting together. The active participation
of each and every principal organ of the United Nations
is crucial, acting in the exercise of its respective
functions and powers without upsetting the balance
established by the Charter.
NAM underlines the collective desire to establish
a peaceful and prosperous world as well as a just and
equitable world order that remains encumbered by
fundamental impediments. These impediments are,
inter alia, the severe adverse impact of the reoccurring
global financial and economic crisis on the economic
growth and development of developing countries,
which could lead to increasing poverty and deprivation
in these countries; the continuing lack of resources and
underdevelopment of the majority of the developing
world; the continuing unequal terms of trade and the
lack of cooperation by developed countries; and the
coercive and unilateral measures imposed by some of
them and the use of force or the threat of the use of
force.
The rich and powerful countries continue to
exercise an inordinate influence in determining
the nature and direction of international relations,
including economic and trade relations as well as the

40/86

17/11/2015

rules governing those relations, many of which are
at the expense of developing countries.While NAM
supports United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
stress that United Nations peacekeeping operations
should not be used as a substitute for addressing the
root causes of conflicts. Rather, the root causes should
be addressed in a coherent, well-planned, coordinated
and comprehensive manner with other political, social,
economic and development instruments.
In the framework of this open debate, NAM
also welcomes the establishment of and supports the
Peacebuilding Commission as a coordinated, coherent
and integrated institutional mechanism to address the
special needs of countries emerging from conflict
towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction,
upon their request and in accordance with the principle
of national ownership. We underline the need for the
Peacebuilding Commission to establish a dynamic
partnership with regional and subregional organizations
and to ensure that regional efforts receive the requisite
attention and support. Integrated peacebuilding
strategies and programmes, if consistent and in line with
host-country strategies and programmes, could sustain
peace and prevent the re-emergence of hostilities and
conflicts.
Finally, even though we welcome today’s debate as
a contribution to enhancing the understanding of the
interlinkages between security and development, it is
important to stress that this issue goes beyond the core
competencies of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate. I should
also like to thank the representative of Sweden for his
briefing as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and of course, Ms. Bouchamaoui for her very inspiring
statement this morning.
I express my condolences to the Government of
France, to Lebanon and its people, and to Russia for
the downing of its plane. These are all acts that we
condemn vigorously.
This debate could not be taking place at a more
appropriate time. At the Sustainable Agenda Summit
our leaders afirmed that peace and security would be
in danger without sustainable development. We have
also reviewed the reports on peacekeeping operations

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the peacebuilding architecture, as well as that
on the women and peace and security agenda, which
appeals for a strengthened role for women in the
maintenance and building of peace, not only as a party
affected by the war but also as a fundamental part in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and
the achievement of lasting peace, which will allow us to
think of peacebuilding as a cross-cutting process that
takes place before, during and after conflict.
The concept note before us (S/2015/845, annex)
makes it clear that the Council recognizes that this
is a complex and multifaceted relationship that is
specific to each case. Allow me to cite the example of
my own country, Colombia, where we have identified
the convergence between the sustainable development
targets and some of the points that have seen the greatest
progress in our negotiations in Havana on the cessation
of hostilities and the building of a stable and lasting
peace. Forty-seven of the seventy points agreed upon
are consistent with the 47 sustainable development
targets, the accomplishment of which will, I am sure,
allow us to close the gaps between rural and urban
Colombia towards a lasting and sustainable peace.
Through its tools, the Council should create a
solid basis to prevent relapse into conflict and generate
sustainable peace, whose inclusive processes must
always be based on national ownership. Peacekeeping
operations and special political missions are instruments
whereby we can restore conditions of basic security and
trust in the political process, and strengthen national
capacities in the long term, facilitating the path towards
peacebuilding and, at the same time, sustainable
development.
Cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, of which we are a member,
has yielded important results and must be strengthened
with a view to overcoming fragmentation. The advisory
role of the Commission, the diversity of its membership,
its nature as a bridge between the Security Council and
the General Assembly and among the three pillars of
development, human rights and security, make it the
appropriate mechanism to coordinate processes leading
to sustainable peace.
Finally, when missions are established they must
be structured on the existing capacities of the countries
concerned and the activities of country teams must be
integrated into peacebuilding activities. In this way
and at the time of transition or the conclusion of the

S/PV.7561

mission, the country will be left with strengthened
support to enable it to continue in its peacebuilding
process towards lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on a subject that is very relevant in the light
of the events of recent days in Europe and the Middle
East. We take this opportunity to extend our sincere
condolences to the delegations of Russia, Lebanon
and France for the loss of human lives and the wounds
incurred from the recent attacks.
The changing nature of the violent conflicts
in different regions of the world is entrenched in
inequality, exclusion, the lack of equal opportunities
and jobs, frustration and social alienation. It suffices
to look at the news headlines of the past few days to
understand that our Organization’s work to maintain
international peace and security, prevent conflicts
and establish peaceful societies remains fragile and
insufficient. All United Nations organs, within their
respective remits, and the international community as
a whole must keep pace with these realities and work
better and more appropriately to improve our capacity
for prevention and response to build and maintain
peace. We cannot allow current conflicts to continue to
cause havoc or the conflicts of the past to return with
renewed violence.
Among the broad range of recommendations
derived from the review processes of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the peacebuilding
architecture, perhaps none better reflects the objective
and spirit of this meeting than that stressed by the
team headed by Ambassador Gert Rosenthal to
change the epicentre of peacebuilding efforts from the
reactive perspective that has prevailed for years to a
preventive one. In that regard, the focus on building
and consolidating peace should, in my delegation’s
opinion, be the guiding theme that allows us to reduce
the gap between the silos referred to in the concept
note before us (S/2015/845, annex). We believe that
the Peacebuilding Commission can and must play an
important role in this exercise.
The lessons learned over the past decade reveal
us that, in order to be successful, peacebuilding
requires a comprehensive focus on conflicts through
the establishment of a solid and unidirectional

15-3704641/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

linkage among the three pillars of the work of the
United Nations: peace and security, human rights and
development. Reversing fragmentation of efforts will
require coherent collective action to that end. In order
to translate recommendations into action, we must
approach prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping
as a political process that requires sustained attention
and long-term commitment and action. As part of
that dynamic, the necessary consent of Member
States should serve to bolster the principle of national
ownership.
The principle of national ownership must be
strengthened. We can build national capacities,
strengthen institutions and support good governance if
we involve the greatest number of stakeholders from
the very start, including, of course, women at every
stage. International, regional and subregional financial
organizations, when their constituent bodies allow, can
accompany and bolster the efforts of the United Nations
in addressing the causes of conflict in a preventive
manner.
As the Secretary-General noted at the beginning
of this meeting, the issue of financial resources is
also relevant to strengthening the Organization’s
prevention and response capacities. My delegation
believes that there is no better investment than
investing in peace, development and security for our
societies. We believe that the requests and mandates
to do more must be accompanied by a predictable
budgetary structure and strategic planning that allows
us to strengthen efficiency and effectiveness. We
therefore support and will continue to support firmly
the important recommendations made by the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture and the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations in favour of the immediate adoption
of proposals to establish a special and separate account
for special political missions, which are among the main
tools of the Council and the Organization in prevention,
mediation and conflict resolution.
Prevention is urgent and the risks of inaction are
greater than ever. The current session of the General
Assembly, focused on the follow-up of the review
processes in different bodies and commissions, provides
us with a valuable opportunity to convert our rhetorical
commitments into early and effective action aimed at
the prevention of violence and the establishment of
peaceful societies.

42/86

17/11/2015

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): Let me start by thanking
the United Kingdom presidency for this opportunity
and also joining others in offering our deepest
condolences to victims, families of victims, people, and
governments of countries who have been affected by
the recent terrorist attacks.
Two months ago, our Heads of State and
Government pledged to foster peaceful, just and
inclusive societies that are free from fear and violence.
That is clearly a noble but interrelated task that
requires a lot of stakeholders. The implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) requires a fresh look at the
relationship between peace and development. Indeed,
this very issue of relationship has provoked extended
debate in the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, and the debate was partly put to
rest by an innovative suggestion to place less emphasis
on what peace and security can do for development
and to utilize a reverse approach that was more in line
with the mandate of the Group. From then, on the Open
Working Group focused on what kind of development
could promote peace and security.
That is how Goal 16 and other interrelated
elements — such as the fight against inequality
and discrimination, the principle of inclusivity,
women’s empowerment and the leave-no-one-behind
principle — took shape and later commanded strong
support in Agenda 2030. Goal 16 and related goals
therefore are not about peace and security. They are
much more than that. First of all, they are cornerstones
for the full implementation of the social pillar. They are
also important drivers and enablers for the economic
and environmental pillars of sustainable development.
Agenda 2030 when implemented will ensure that
situations threatening international peace and security
arise less frequently. The Agenda will also assist in
the fight against terrorism and extremism, areas where
the Council also has to act, albeit with different tools.
Successful implementation will therefore lighten the
burden on the Council and assist it in making solutions
more robust and longstanding. This, however, does not
take away the authority of the Council. First, the onus
is squarely on the Security Council to find solutions
to conflicts so that affected countries and communities
can start their journey towards sustainable development.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, as many others have mentioned, conflicts
wipe out whatever progress is made in the field of
development. Therefore, the Council must put much
more emphasis on prevention.
The need for interaction can be best understood by
taking a quick look at the current refugee/migration
crisis. Until we put an end to the conflicts, we will have
no solution for the refugee crisis. Here, the Council has
a special responsibility to find and enforce political
solutions. Inaction by the Council cannot be substituted
by the compassion of others or rectified by addressing
the humanitarian consequences. While the Council
must do the firefighting, only sustainable development
is capable of taking care of the root causes that led or
contributed to the conflict.
Moving away from conflicts, human mobility has
all kinds of other causes. The current migration trends
are symptoms of underlying causes such as economic
hardship, environmental degradation, food and water
scarcity, and so on. In essence, these are different forms
of unsustainability, be it economic, environmental or
social. In these cases, the implementation of Agenda
2030 is the primary solution, while the Council has
an important supportive role to play. Agenda 2030
does not change the authority of any organ. Therefore,
there is no need to reinforce the division lines. To the
contrary, the integrated nature of threats will require
ever closer cooperation. To cement this understanding
and for changing our narrative, debates like this are
useful. However to really change our course we must
transform our words into action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I am pleased to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this very important
meeting. I want also to thank you for providing an
excellent concept paper (S/2015/845, annex).
We express our condolences to France, Russia,
Lebanon, Iraq and all those that have been affected
by the recent heinous terrorist attacks. But there is
one question that cries out for an answer. What is it
that the international community can do to ensure
greater cooperation that matches the challenge
we face — cooperation that surpasses the level of
cooperation and coordination that we know exists
within the terrorist camp? That is the question.

S/PV.7561

When our leaders adopted the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), they fully recognized that the
ambitious Sustainable Development Goals, which
are universal in nature, could be attained without
peace and security. They were also convinced that,
without ensuring sustainable development, it would
not be possible to address the root causes of conflicts
and achieve durable peace and stability. This strong
political message is reinforced by the outcome of the
review on peace operations, the report on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture (see S/2015/490) and the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). All these reviews agree on a number of issues,
among which is the need to address the problems
created by institutional fragmentation.
The nexus between security and development is no
longer a matter of theoretical debate; it is a practical
issue that we need to seriously consider if we are to
achieve lasting peace and prosperity. That is why it is
absolutely necessary to build synergy and coherence
among all stakeholders — the entire United Nations
system, regional and subregional organizations,
Member States and others — in the effort to build a
peaceful and inclusive world. Of course, we all know
this and have been saying so for quite some time, but
what has been lacking is concrete action to change
the way we do things so as to better respond to the
challenges.
We believe that there are things that the Council can
and indeed should do within its purview without unduly
infringing upon the competencies of other organs
and bodies within the United Nations system. The
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, as
well as peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction,
cannot be effectively addressed without understanding
the linkages between security and development.
Reduced preoccupation with jurisdiction and turf and
greater emphasis on enlightened self-interest might do
the trick. In this regard, I could not agree more with
the remark made by the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission this morning:
“By overcoming short-sighted turf wars, we would
not only increase the efficacy of the Organization
but, even more important, provide more effective
support for the societies that it was set up to help.”
The implication for the Council is very clear. Its
deliberations and decisions should be informed by a

15-3704643/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

thorough analysis of the security-development nexus
and its actions through the range of tools at its disposal
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts should reflect
this important dynamic. That is what I believe will
make the difference in translating our words into action
and effectively address the multifaceted challenges that
we are facing today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): We very much welcome this
extremely timely debate on the link between security
and development. It is a truism that security and
development are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
Long-term peace and security are not possible without
sustainable development and vice-versa. That is why
it is so important for the United Nations system to
“break down the silos”, as the excellent concept note
(S/2015/845, annex) prepared for this debate rightly
points out. It is time that all parts of the United Nations
system take account of the connection between security
and development and act accordingly.
Making the United Nations fit for purpose is not
only about more efficiency, better capacities and lighter
procedures, but also about changing mindsets. Let me
highlight three points that are of immediate importance
to us.
First, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable
Development
(General
Assembly
resolution 70/1) was a truly global success, not least
because we overcame one important impediment to
global progress, namely, our tendency to see the world
as divided between North and South, with development
and progress being a one-way street. In adopting
the Agenda, we have created high expectations for
improved coherence and a comprehensive approach in
tackling the challenges of the twenty-first century. This
also applies, by the way, to the United Nations system.
I shall cite but one example. Reducing violence in all
its forms, as pledged in Goal 16 of the Agenda, will
require new forms of cooperation between the Security
Council and other parts of the United Nations system.
Secondly, as German Foreign Minister Steinmeier
underlined during the high-level week of the General
Assembly, human rights, peace and security are
inextricably intertwined and have to be dealt with as
such within the United Nations system. Gross and
systematic human rights violations are often a root
cause of conflict and one of the main reasons why

44/86

17/11/2015

people flee their homelands. Introducing human rights
tasks into the mandates of peacekeeping missions, and
making these tasks more and more comprehensive over
the years, was an important step. But we need to think
about how we can do this more systematically, and
how we can make the best possible use of the synergies
between the many parts of the United Nations system.
Incidentally, a smart human rights policy is among the
best safeguards against crises.
Thirdly, we are in the midst of the most severe
global refugee crisis since the Second World War. Sixty
million people have fled their homes. In Germany
alone, we expect to receive more than 1 million refugees
in the course of this year, and there will be more. If
we want to come to grips with this situation, we will
need to develop answers at the national, regional and,
of course, global levels. The root causes are manifold,
and include armed conflict, lack of good governance,
poverty or a general lack of prospects to sustain a
living. Refugees fear for their lives as war has destroyed
their homes. Others flee because they are persecuted at
home for their beliefs or their way of life. The United
Nations system is a crucial part of the global response.
Thousands of people are committed to helping refugees
and improving living conditions in the countries of
origin and the transit countries.
We are deeply grateful to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
International Organization for Migration, the World
Food Programme, the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and countless other organizations for their
indispensable and outstanding efforts. But we need
to better combine their work. We need to reframe our
perspective to focus on what is necessary — what needs
to be done — and not on whose turf it is. From the
United Nations country teams to the Security Council,
we need to be aware that these are extraordinary times.
Business as usual cannot be the answer.
To conclude, there are many more examples
underlining the necessity of jointly resolving security
and development issues, let us draw on the entire
wealth of United Nations instruments to this end. The
effects will be mutually reinforcing. Positive economic
prospects and sustainable development will lead to
more stability and thus eventually bring about peace
and long-term security. A stable level of security is
a precondition for economic activity and in the end
prosperity, which is in the best interests of all.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French): May
I begin by expressing my most profound and sincere
condolences to the families of those who died in the
terrorist attacks on Friday in Paris. To the peoples of
France, and the other countries that have been victims
of attacks — Lebanon, Iraq and Russia — we also
extend our condolences.
(spoke in English)
I warmly thank the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this timely debate. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Representative of
Sweden, and Ms. Bouchamaoui for their remarks.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the topic of today’s debate, which very
accurately links together the three pillars of the United
Nations system: peace and security, development
and human rights. Peace and security are the basis
prerequisites for achieving sustainable development.
Conflict and violence undermine development gains
achieved over decades. At the same time, without
development and human rights there will be no durable
peace and stability. The risks of armed conflicts and
crises, forced migration, weak economies and corrupt
Governments, poor education, climate change and
natural disasters — just to name a few — are all closely
linked and need to be addressed comprehensively.
As voiced by our President during this year’s
Sustainable Development Goals debate (see A/70/PV.8),
the linkages between peace and security, development
and human rights are clearly recognized in the recently
adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1). The promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies, providing access
to justice for all, and building effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions at all levels are essential to
achieving sustainable development.
Strong national institutions can be based only
on the rule of law and must respect property rights,
freedom of speech and the media, open political choice,
and access to justice. Creating reliable institutions
is also a central part of the transformation needed to
enable countries prone to or emerging from conflict
to foster development, stability and peace. The rule
of law is essential to both preventing and to dealing

S/PV.7561

with the consequences of violence and conflict, as
well as transnational organized crime, trafficking and
illicit financial flows that directly impact sustainable
development.
I am pleased to see that the Council is taking a
more forward-looking approach. We must invest more
in conflict prevention. It is very hard to end ongoing
crises that often turn into armed conflicts. It is easier
and less costly, in every sense, to prevent violent
conflicts from escalating. The Council has a key role
to play in prevention, and bridging silos across the
development, security and human rights pillars is
central to supporting prevention efforts.
The Security Council has increased its focus
on peacebuilding to reduce the risk of relapse into
violence. The Council should continue addressing
peacebuilding through horizon-scanning briefings, by
ensuring that longer-term peacebuilding is considered
in mission mandates, and by strengthening and
reforming the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We encourage the Security Council to
address peacebuilding as early as possible. Addressing
the interdependence between peace and security and
development includes the protection of human rights,
including attention to women’s rights, also through
their participation in peace consolidation.
While the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention and sustainable development falls on
Member States, the international institutions must do
their part. The United Nations system needs to work
in a more integrated, flexible and coordinated fashion,
both at Headquarters and at country level, to respond to
the current global challenges, and give more weight to
prevention and early warning tools.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I commend the
presidency of the United Kingdom for convening this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security, which is most timely indeed. Kazakhstan
expresses its sincerest condolences to and solidarity
with the peoples and Governments of countries
suffering and affected by the brutal attacks, and stands
united with all for global security.
The series of terrorist attacks in rapid succession in
so many countries, combined with the displacement of
millions of refugees, pose the most prominent threats

15-3704645/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

to global peace today. We have to act promptly to avert
the actions of State and non-State actors that create
political, economic and social turmoil. This calls for
massive multidimensional strategies on all fronts, led
by the United Nations, together with Member States.
My delegation proposes that the United Nations
convene a global meeting on peace and security at the
highest level of Heads of State to evolve contemporary
means to fight and eliminate the root causes of conflicts,
terrorism and extremism. We need to reinforce
preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding, coordinated
with political mediation, the rule of law, human rights,
national reconciliation, and the improvement of living
standards. These have to be complemented by creating
public awareness, especially among our youth, of the
dangers of recruitment by extremist groups. They
must also foster a culture of peace, as Kazakhstan has
done by promoting inter-ethnic dialogue, creating the
Assembly of People of Kazakhstan, and hosting the
triennial Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions.
The escalation of violence and bloodshed is alarming
and new approaches must be conceived. That is why,
in addressing the General Assembly in September this
year (see A/70/PV.13), President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan delineated some proposals, which I
submit for consideration today.
First, our thrust has to shift from routine
conflict prevention and post-conflict recovery to a
new development strategy that would considerably
eliminate or reduce the threat of war and conflicts. He
therefore proposed the launch of a new trend in global
development under the 2045 global strategic initiative.
The first step on this road could be the development
under United Nations auspices of a concept entitled
NEW FUTURE, which means nuclear, energy, water,
food security, understanding, trust and urgent reforms.
Secondly, we propose that the Economic and Social
Council be transformed into a global development
council, comprising United Nations Member States
elected by the General Assembly and the heads of all
United Nations specialized agencies, including the
International Monetary Fund. It would become a global
economic regulator promoting economic and social
growth worldwide.
Thirdly, Kazakhstan offers to organize at the
highest level a United Nations international conference
designed to reaffirm the basic principles of international

46/86

17/11/2015

law and good governance to combat the weakening role
of global institutions and international law.
Fourthly, Kazakhstan proposes to establish a
United Nations unified global network to counter
international terrorism and extremism, as an outcome
of the Secretary-General’s forthcoming comprehensive
plan of action to combat terrorism.
Fifthly, the United Nations system, the Security
Council, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
must work closely with regional structures to find
comprehensive strategic solutions as proposed above.
A better coordination should be established among
the United Nations system, international and regional
structures, parliamentarians, religious leaders, media
and civil society, all engaging in concerted global
efforts. These aim at overall national capacity-building
with the participation of women at every stage. We must
also go towards the larger concept of human security,
moving away from State security to people-centred
security.
Finally, my country stands ready to be a reliable
partner in the larger multilateral action to preserve
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): First,
Belgium joins in today’s expressions of sympathy to
France and the French people.
Experience and facts reveal an inextricable
link between peace and security, on the one hand,
and inclusive and sustainable development, on the
other. Resolution 2171 (2014) and the presidential
statement of 19 January (S/PRST/2015/3) recognize
this interdependence and the need to develop a global
and integrated approach to addressing the underlying
causes of conflicts and preventing them. This means in
particular strengthening the rule of law and institutions,
promoting sustainable and inclusive development,
combating poverty and exclusion, promoting good
governance and democracy, and encouraging political
and religious tolerance.
The Security Council is not indifferent to the idea
that security, development and human rights must be
treated in an integrated manner. However, the results
in terms of conflict prevention and establishing lasting

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace remain debatable. The marked increase in crises
and their nature oblige us to reconsider the gravity and
attention that we accord to conflict prevention. In Syria,
Libya, the Central African Republic or South Sudan,
the conflicts have become enmired and more complex
with every passing year, entailing serious humanitarian
consequences and threats to those countries’ future. We
must attach greater importance to the early warning
signs of conflict, including not only serious human
rights violations and language inciting intolerance,
hatred or radicalization, but also social, economic and
religious marginalization.
The United Nations has excellent prevention tools
at its disposal, such as the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and his special envoys, the Standby Team of
Senior Mediation Advisers, peace and development
advisers, regional offices, the Office on Genocide
Prevention and Responsibility to Protect and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative. Furthermore, the
United Nations could make better use of its significant
presence in the field, including, for example, peace
missions, country teams, human rights offices and
humanitarian teams. Above all, the system must
operate more consistently in order to prevent conflict,
both in risk analysis and at the operational level. We
therefore welcome the emphasis that has been placed
on that point of view in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446).
The Security Council can heighten its understanding
of the link among peace, security, development and
human rights through field visits focused on prevention
or information-gathering, and by paying the required
attention to information emanating from the field
itself, including from outside traditional channels.
Civil society should be heard more often, including
in Arria Formula meetings. The advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission must carry more weight
in the eyes of the Security Council, for example in the
cases of countries in transition or when a situation is
no longer seen as urgent. The current review of the
peacebuilding architecture affords us the opportunity to
make progress to that end. In that regard, I welcome the
presence of the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
at today’s meeting.
Without consensus among the permanent Council
members, our early warning and prevention mechanisms
will be for naught. Belgium supports the initiative led

S/PV.7561

by France, Mexico and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group to promote the voluntary
limitation of the use of the right of veto in cases of mass
atrocities.
Finally, the Security Council is regularly called on
to define mandates on the strengthening of institutions
and the rule of law, particularly in the security
​​
and
justice sectors. Security sector reform is indeed a
decisive component in stabilizing peace, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. However, it is a very long-term
process that requires a strong political will and the
commitment of all concerned stakeholders. Belgium
therefore welcomes the adoption of resolution 2151
(2014) and calls on the Security Council to ensure its
follow-up.
As has already been stated in the Council, every
conflict is unique. There is no universal, readymade solution, but it is essential to recognize that
making peace and security sustainable requires a firm
commitment to prevention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): At the outset, may I
express our solidarity with the victims of the recent and
brutal attacks of terror in Paris, Beirut, Baghdad and
many other places throughout the world. We must join
efforts, overcome our differences and take all possible
steps to fight any kind of violent extremism, terrorism
and brutality based on hatred. That is our primary task.
Slovakia thanks the United Kingdom presidency
for having taken the initiative to convene today’s
open debate focusing on the correlation between the
maintenance of peace and security and development
through the promotion of peaceful societies. I also wish
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador
Skoog, the Permanent Representative of Sweden and
Mrs. Bouchamaoui for their respective briefings.
While we align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union,
I would like to make some remarks in my national
capacity.
No one questions any longer the importance of
security for development and the role that development
plays in preventing conflict. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) offers a unique opportunity to create
a continuum linking peaceful, inclusive and safe

15-3704647/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

societies and development efforts. The inclusion of
Goal 16 and its related targets in the new post-2015
development agenda reflects the growing recognition
of the importance of peace, safety and good governance
within the traditional development paradigm. As was
outlined in the concept note (S/2015/845, annex) for this
debate, we fully recognize the need to understand more
deeply the shared objectives that cut across the security/
development spectrum and would require joint action in
the fields of both security and development. Support for
security sector reform is one of those shared objectives
that link the security and development spectrums.
Slovakia and South Africa, as co-Chairs of the
Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform (SSR),
organized a high-level event that took place during the
general debate to discuss the link between development
and the security sector. We looked in particular at the
impact that the adoption of Goal 16 might have on SSR.
The outcome and recommendations of that meeting
were made available to all Member States. Slovakia
welcomed the Security Council meeting, held in August
under the presidency of Nigeria (see S/PV.7508), that
focused on the further implementation of resolution 2151
(2014). As a result of recent discussions, we would like
to put forward three key points and recommendations.
First is the issue of transition and national
ownership. Successful SSR will allow for the transition
from instability and repeated cycles of violence to a path
of stability, institutional development and maturity. As
outlined in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), we
should work more effectively and consistently on
political strategies that will support the emergence
of a nationally owned vision and full commitment to
reforms that address the source of conflict.
Second is capacity-building. To solidify commitment
to SSR, development partners need to be ready to
support targeted capacity-building for institutions and
training for security forces, including by enhancing
their understanding of human rights norms and
obligations and gender-related issues, among others.
Support for the reintegration of former combatants is a
huge challenge and currently remains a gap area from
which development partners have withdrawn in recent
years.
Third is the issue of partnerships. We welcome
the progress made in strengthening the partnerships
between, inter alia, the African Union and European

48/86

17/11/2015

Union on SSR. Going forward, we should ensure that
the Council is more closely engaged when concerted
action is needed to support partnerships and coherence
beyond the United Nations. South Sudan, the Central
African Republic and Mali are cases in point. Too often,
we have gone ahead with building up capacities and
institutions without a political strategy underpinning
those initiatives. In the area of SSR, this can have
abysmal consequences for the safety of people and
communities.
Finally, I would like to commend the work of the
United Nations Security Sector Reform Task Force,
which brings together the security and development
arms of the Organization to develop coherent United
Nations strategies. As we concluded during the highlevel event on SSR held in October in New York, the work
of the inter-agency Task Force should be strengthened
and complemented through an international delivery
network on security sector reform.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Before addressing the
issues of today’s open debate, I want to express my
deepest condolences to all those affected by the recent
terrorist attacks and the massive loss of life in France,
Lebanon and Iraq and in the downing of the Russian
civilian aircraft.
Let me start by commending the presidency of the
United Kingdom for convening this very timely open
debate, which acknowledges the mutually reinforcing
link between peace and development.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I shall make
some additional brief remarks in my national capacity.
Speaking from the experience of a country that once
hosted one of the largest and most successful peace
operations in United Nations history, I would like to
make the following points.
True and encompassing development cannot be
achieved and sustained without peace; peace cannot
be achieved and sustained without justice; and neither
peace nor development nor justice are truly possible
without respect for human rights and the rule of law.
That link has often been acknowledged, even at the
highest political level, yet a coherent, comprehensive
and implementable approach to crisis situations is still
lacking. Clearly there is a need to “break down the

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

silos”, as stated in the concept note (S/2015/845, annex),
and work together across all three United Nations
pillars. There is a need to fully understand not only the
complexity of each of the pillars but also their mutual
interdependence and potential.
The new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) is not only the
best starting point for a new approach, but also a
matrix on how to do it. The three important review
processes — on peacekeeping operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) — must focus on the link among
peace, development and human rights, and go beyond
operational improvements. They should provide a
foundation for a paradigm change. Open, inclusive
and effective partnerships are needed, both among key
stakeholders within countries and with international
partners. That includes the pivotal role of regional and
subregional organizations, as well as other sustainable
development stakeholders, such as civil society, the
private sector and development organizations.
Understanding the root causes of conflict is
crucial to conflict prevention, as well as to building
and sustaining peace. To that end, we believe that the
Security Council could make better use of available
insights and analysis. In that context, enhanced
cooperation with the Economic and Social Council
and the Human Rights Council comes to mind. I
would like to underline the importance and potential
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Due to its
composition and mandate, and especially through its
convening role in bringing together all relevant regional
and international actors, the PBC can bring a new
perspective and advice to the Council’s deliberations
and decision-making.
There is an evident and urgent need for greater focus
on conflict prevention. The number of ongoing conflicts
and wars and their enormous human, economic, social
and political costs clearly underscore that urgency.
Extreme poverty, social inequality or exclusion, the
uncontrolled exploitation of natural resources, youth
unemployment, lack of basic services, including health
care and education, to name a few, can be drivers of
conflict and sources of instability that can have dire
consequences way beyonod national borders, as we can
witness in the current migrant and refugee crises.
Therefore the 2030 Agenda, with all its goals and
targets, has to be regarded not only in the context of

S/PV.7561

development but also as an important contributor to
peace and security. That is the key message we should
take from today’s important meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Luque Márquez (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to express our deepest
condolences and solidarity with the Government and
people of France, in particular to the families of the
victims of the heinous terrorist attacks perpetrated
Friday night in Paris, as well as to the Governments
and peoples of Lebanon and Russia for the tragedies of
recent weeks. Ecuador unequivocally rejects all forms
of terrorism.
Overcoming poverty is a moral imperative of
humankind because, for the first time in our history,
poverty is not caused by a lack of resources, but by the
existence of perverse and exclusive systems. We believe
that the best strategy to overcome poverty is by reducing
social, economic, territorial, environmental and cultural
gaps. In that respect, inequality — reflected in the
opulence of some compared to the intolerable misery
of others — is a great affront to our human dignity and
one of the most deep-rooted causes of conflict.
It is clear that the three pillars on which the United
Natins is founded — development, peace and security
and human rights — are interlinked. The negotiators
of the San Francisco Conference recognized that
reality and therefore endowed our Organization with
different organs with the aim of promoting those
three pillars. For that reason, the Economic and Social
Council was created to undertake studies and reports
on international affairs pertaining to economic, social,
cultural, education, health and other related matters. The
Security Council was established with a mandate from
Member States to assume the primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. The
General Assembly, the universally representative body,
may discuss all relevant issues under the Charter of
the United Nations or that pertain to the powers and
functions of any other organ created by the Charter.
That same founding document defines the respective
tasks of each of the main organs and outlines the
mechanisms for cooperation and coordination among
them.
The delegation of Ecuador therefore reiterates its
concern over this new attempt by the Security Council
to address issues that, under the Charter of the United

15-3704649/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations, belong either to the Economic and Social
Council or the General Assembly and its subsidiary
bodies. This growing trend on the part of the Security
Council contravenes the founding principles of our
Organization. The Council claims to be seized of
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security that in fatc belong to other spheres, and
infringes on the rights and prerogatives of other United
Nations organs, which ultimately does not strengthen
our work but, on the contrary, undermines it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate,
which is of the utmost importance for Uruguay.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Olof Skoog; and Ms. Bouchamaoui,
President of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry,
Trade and Handicrafts for their briefings.
The due consideration of the three pillars of the
United Nations — peace, security and development — is
essential to face the major challenges of maintaining
peace and international security. The multidimensional
nature of conflicts, as well as new and growing threats
to the stability of nations, require coordinated responses
that take different national contexts into account and
are able to offer realistic and sustainable alternatives
to complex situations. We are convinced that the
structural causes of such conflicts are rooted in many
cases in rivalries and historical tensions, as well as in
the struggle for control of natural resources, ethnic
disputes and the creation of artificial boundaries that do
not reflect local realities. Similarly, poor governance,
corruption, growing dissatisfaction with the lack of
opportunities and inequality among and within States
are also decisive factors.
Analysing and identifying the underlying causes
of conflict and the actions that should be taken to
mitigate them are the best and most useful forms of
prevention. There can be no guarantees of international
security if we do not make greater efforts to prevent
entire populations from dying of preventable causes,
take urgent steps to eradicate hunger in the world and
respect the human rights of all without discrimination
based on race, sex or religion. Extreme poverty,

50/86

17/11/2015

hunger, exclusion and limited access to basic services
such as health, housing and sanitation are just some
of the factors that aggravate internal tensions and
provoke confrontations. However, we believe that even
if such factors do not by themselves result in armed
confrontation, the international community has a vital
obligation and role to play in overcoming them and
promoting an international environment conducive to
ensuring that all developing countries can maximize
their potential and guarantee respect for their peoples’
basic human rights.
While the development of effective, accountable and
transparent institutions, the protection of fundamental
freedoms and strengthening of the security sector
represent some of the main elements of inclusive and
peaceful societies, gaps in those areas can certainly
contribute to the development of conflicts. If the root
causes of conflict are not addressed, reconstruction
efforts are doomed to be merely superficial and
perishable. Given that undeniable reality, we believe
it is essential to ramp up international efforts to
support the countries that need it most and encourage
the creation of national development strategies for
the medium and long term. In that context, the role of
international cooperation is particularly important for
meeting immediate needs and building capacity for
sustainable development.
For these reasons, Uruguay believes firmly that
there is a close link between security and development.
Security efforts must therefore necessarily be
accompanied by strengthening action in areas that,
while not directly related to security, have an undeniable
impact on it. Every area of the United Nations system
must play its part, and if we are to obtain the most
effective results it is important that the responsibilities
of each be respected and their needs taken into account
in a democratic and transparent way.
Such efforts must also be accompanied by measures
aimed at reinforcing and, where necessary, reforming
the security sector in countries dealing with conflict,
as well as strengthening their institutions and judicial
systems and the rule of law. The role of the United
Nations is key to the cooperation and support that the
international community can offer in that regard. We
also believe it is essential to stress the importance of
ensuring that the goals in these areas are attainable,
credible and clear. Similarly, peacebuilding requires
not only strengthened institutions, good governance
and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

but also a productive system and economic and social
development capable of supporting achievements in
other areas.
Uruguay, as a major troop-contributing country,
has experienced the strong positive impact that building
stronger, more inclusive and resilient societies can have
on the ground, and recognizes the importance of a
political vision focused on rights and on the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We also believe that women
have a key role to play in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and would like to emphasize the importance
of ensuring their effective inclusion in peace agreement
frameworks and peacebuilding processes.
Today more than ever, we have a moral obligation
to renew our political will and commitment to peace.
The humanitarian crisis that Syria and Iraq are facing,
the recent terrorist attacks in Beirut and Paris and the
deaths caused by the actions of Boko Haram compel us
to commit to and support the millions of civilians who
are demanding answers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank you for the
choice of theme for today’s debate, Mr. President. It is
timely and reflects evolving thinking on consolidating
the efforts of the United Nations system to promote the
three pillars of its activities.
The current thinking presented for our collective
judgement emphasizes without equivocation that the
most important goal ahead of us is creating synergies,
coherence and coordination across the entire United
Nations system. That there is a need for such coherence
is beyond dispute. The three recent reviews of our
peacebuilding architecture and peace operations state
this clearly. The often conspicuous fragmentation of
the activities of all the actors involved undermines the
sustainability of the mutually reinforcing, interrelated
and indivisible primary objectives of our Organization,
its three pillars. It is true, of course, that the recognition
and pursuit of this goal are not new. We hope that the
current drive to revisit the continued objective of
synergies, coherence and coordination will produce
tangible results. Of course, we acknowledge and
commend the progress achieved so far. The collective
endeavour within the United Nations to develop a
legislative and operational capacity for coherence is a
welcome and encouraging development.

S/PV.7561

However, in highlighting the goal of concrete
results, we must emphasize the prevention at an early
stage of situations that, if not addressed, can result in
conflicts, major humanitarian crises and, not least,
atrocity crimes. The Secretary-General makes a cogent
and eloquent point when he concludes in his report
(S/2015/730) that prioritizing conflict prevention is by
far our most pragmatic and cost-effective option. While
we fully concur with that conclusion, it is of course
the human cost of conflicts that eventually moves the
conscience of the United Nations system. It is now
an accepted truth that, in the words of the SecretaryGeneral, the rhetorical battle on conflict prevention
has been won. It is equally true that it is possible to
detect conflict situations at a considerably earlier stage,
because more often than not they are a reaction to the
persistent injustice, discrimination and the denial of
rights that are major examples of the root causes of
conflict.
We speak from experience. The human-rights aspect
of conflict prevention should be a prominent focus
for the entire United Nations system, including, not
least, the Council. In that regard, the Security Council
could draw useful lessons from its own commendable
leadership on the particular issue of women, peace and
security. One such conclusion might be that all human
rights are a function of security. In fact, the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture has provided a useful and elaborate
analysis of inclusive societies (see S/2015/490). Civil
society is indispensable to conflict prevention.
From the international perspective, preventing
the outbreak of or relapse into conflict also involves
a change of mindset. Assessing the root causes in any
conflict situation and debate about the action to be
taken has never been isolated from a specific context
involving the multiple and not necessarily concurring
interests of international actors. From our own particular
experience, we have been witness to systematic abuse
of the international system and the manipulation of
interests aimed at disrupting an international mediation
effort, forum shopping and selectively interpreting
international law.
The international consolidation of peace efforts
is a desirable and indispensable objective in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution. Whether it is
achievable and sustainable in all situations is the
dominant challenge, since it revolves around the
basic capacity of Member States to surmount narrow

15-3704651/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

interests for the sake of broader peace efforts. There
is clearly an urgent need for effective collective
action on conflict prevention. However, the function
of prevention is debated against the background of a
deteriorating international context, as a result of which
smaller States suffer the strains of vulnerability. The
Council needs to be reminded that the powers bestowed
on it by all nations are to enable it to advance peace and
security for all.
Today’s debate is taking place in the immediate
aftermath of some atrocious acts of terrorism committed
against the people of France. The depth of cruelty has
left us shattered and shaken. We bow our heads before
the victims and express our deepest condolences to
our brothers and sisters, the people of France. The
persistence of terrorism reveals the international
system’s vulnerability to those who are outside
international norms and laws. The current change in
the conflict paradigm is equally a challenge to the
prevention paradigm. As ever, we need consolidation
and urgent solutions. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to create specific tools under the
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force.
Armenia has been a constant and committed
supporter of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide. The Special
Adviser, jointly with the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect, has put together an important
tool for prevention, the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes. Resolution 28/34 of the Human
Rights Council, sponsored by Armenia, duly reflects
that tool. The Special Adviser and his Office deserve
recognition of their efforts to detect emerging risks.
The Office is indispensable to the overall machinery of
prevention and therefore merits continued support for
strengthening its capacity.
Finally, the regional context of conflict prevention
requires broad recognition and support. The division
of labour, coordination and the non-duplication of
efforts and activities are the building blocks for the
effective use of the capacities of regional organizations
in conflict prevention and conflict resolution. There is
a good example of such regional efforts in our case.
Armenia consistently welcomes the support that the
international community, the United Nations and the
Secretary-General provide to the co-Chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

52/86

17/11/2015

Europe Minsk Group in the peaceful resolution of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas, Permanent
Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: At the very outset, my delegation
expresses its profound sympathy for all the victims of
the terrorist attacks in Paris, Beirut and elsewhere. Our
hearts and prayers go out to all those who mourn. Pope
Francis, in his address to the General Assembly of the
United Nations on 25 September, affirmed:
“War is the negation of all rights and a dramatic
assault on the environment. If we want true integral
human development for all, we must work tirelessly
to avoid war between nations and between peoples.”
(A/70/PV.3, p. 5)
United Nations affirmations that development,
peace and security and human rights are intimately
connected and mutually reinforcing abound, making
that link one of the guiding principles for peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. Member States have just adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with its
Sustainable Development Goals, thereby expressing
their determination
“to foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies
which are free from fear and violence. There can be
no sustainable development without peace and no
peace without sustainable development” (General
Assembly resolution 70/1, p. 2).
That consensus decision must be translated into
reality if we are to succeed in sparing present and future
generations from the scourge of violence and in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. Evaluations of the
Millennium Development Goals show that countries
in conflict have lagged far behind in achieving those
Goals and, indeed, many have retrogressed, thereby
amply demonstrating that development can thrive only
in the context of peaceful societies. The recognition of
that fact at the level of principle must be translated on
the ground into a common approach to building peace,
sustaining development and fostering human rights.
To avoid fragmentation, the insight that development,
peace and security and human rights frequently overlap
and coincide must find concrete expression in the
manner in which the various United Nations bodies and
agencies operate on the ground.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Official development assistance figures and
peacekeeping budgets show how conflicts are not
just an intolerable burden for people, but also an
enormous strain for the international community,
including financially speaking. Development projects
that could help to prevent conflicts must come first,
as they could substantially lessen future expenses in
peacekeeping operations. By the same token, resources
spent on peacekeeping operations should be shifted
to development projects as soon as possible, once
situations start to stabilize. Even though the Security
Council’s objective is not development per se, it could
help to mobilize resources for development as a key
component of its peace and security objectives.
The Holy See wishes to underline the important role
that grass-roots movements, faith-based organizations
and local communities play in the prevention of
conflict and in peacebuilding. Without their support
it would be very hard for the international community
to build peace and end conflicts. Their strengths lie
neither in material resources nor in scientific expertise
nor in political power, but in their being locally rooted
enablers of individuals and societies, and in their
capacity to produce and nurture leaders who are able to
inspire concrete action, develop a rapport of immediacy
with individuals and communities, and rally people to
work together for something greater than themselves.
However, they can also become major obstacles to
peace if they show partiality or indeed become parties
to the conflict.
Conflict prevention and peacebuilding are not as
dramatic and urgent as winding up active conflicts,
but they do require even greater attention, commitment
and sometimes more resources than ending wars and
civil strife does. They require perseverance, long-term
vision and commitment. They are consolidated through
thousands of daily actions that are the building blocks
of just and peaceful societies. They are realized when
both leaders and citizens transcend selfish interests
for the common good, reject a spirit of vengeance and
take the high road of healing and reconciliation. Those
elements underpin every effort towards achieving
sustainable development, durable peace and societies
that are more respectful of human rights. Without them,
military interventions and peacekeeping missions alone
will not solve the root causes of conflict.
The President: I now give floor to the representative
of the Republic of Korea.

S/PV.7561

Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea):
We thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
convening this timely open debate on the theme of
security, development and the root causes of conflict.
Indeed, the search for the root causes of conflict
seems extremely relevant today, in the aftermath of
the 13 November terrorist attack in Paris. I would like
to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s
deep sympathy and condolences to the families of the
victims, as well as to the people of France.
Today, it is more clear than ever that we are in need
of new and stronger ways to address the evolving threats
to peace. The United Nations must reinvent itself so
as to be fit for purpose and find a way to respond to
conflicts in an agile, coherent, coordinated way, while
staying mindful of the root causes of conflicts. In that
vein, my delegation welcomes the Security Council’s
recognition of the need to revisit the fundamental
challenge of identifying the linkage between security
and development. We echo the sentiments of the
Secretary-General, who stated that peacebuilding must
be a thread that runs through all our actions across the
life cycle of conflicts.
The Republic of Korea knows at first hand the
importance of the link between peace and security and
development. In the aftermath of the Korean War in
the 1950s, the United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency helped stabilize our war-torn country and
provided much-needed relief. Today, the Republic of
Korea is both a troop-contributor and a provider of
assessed contributions to United Nations peacekeeping.
This year alone, we have dedicated $7.5 million to postconflict reconstruction, providing assistance to fragile
post-conflict States in need of rehabilitation.
My delegation would like to highlight the following
three points in an effort to contribute to today’s
discussion on security and development. First, more
emphasis should be placed on peacebuilding, as it
lies at the nexus of security and development. United
Nations peacebuilding, when established back in 2005,
was founded specifically to address the challenge of
bridging the gap between security and development.
What we recognize today — perhaps more clearly than
10 years ago — is that the notion of peacebuilding
should be understood as encompassing not only efforts
to prevent relapses into conflict, but also efforts to
prevent the lapse into conflict in the first place.

15-3704653/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

The growing emphasis on prevention — before,
during and after a conflict — requires the Security
Council to have a better grasp of the reconstruction
and institution-building efforts necessary for recovery
from conflict and to support strategies for sustainable
development. That is exactly what the Peacebuilding
Commission, an advisory body to the Council, was
created to do. The Security Council must actively and
more frequently seek the Commission’s advice in both
its formal and its informal deliberations. In that regard,
we welcome the recent trend of inviting the Commission
to present its views to the Security Council.
Secondly, we feel that the key to a successful
mission is a well-defined mandate. Mandates need to be
better crafted by the Security Council so that mission
goals are more clearly articulated and integrated with
existing local realities and stakeholders. A solution
may lie in better integration among the various United
Nation bodies whose goals intersect. Breaking down
silos can help conflict-prevention efforts by tapping
into expertise so as to better understand the scope of
problems while seeking enhanced coordination with
various stakeholders. More frequent open debates and
Arria Formula meetings could be useful in that regard.
The Council should also aim to improve its working
methods so as to promote a more inclusive, effective and
transparent approach. On that point, we urge the Security
Council to seriously consider the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), especially those addressing the need
to establish the practice of a sequenced mandate that
would allow the Council to respond in a more tailored
and context-sensitive manner.
Thirdly, the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole, should strive for better cooperation
with regional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU). Close consultations with regional
stakeholders can provide early warning, conflict
analysis and insight into the specific dynamics of a
particular region. Strengthening partnerships with
regional organizations, such as the African Union,
was one of the issues emphasized during the recent
seminar on the implementation of the High-level
Panel’s recommendations in Seoul. Participants pointed
out that the current ad hoc cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union should evolve
into a more strategic and institutionalized relationship,
with the possibility of providing contributions to AU
missions approved by the Security Council. It is with

54/86

17/11/2015

that in mind that the Republic of Korea renewed its
pledge in September to strengthen our partnership with
the African Union so as to enhance its peacekeeping
capacity.
Finally, we believe that there is no better time
than the present to address the root causes of conflict,
as there are three parallel reviews being conducted
simultaneously — those on the peacebuilding
architecture, on United Nations peace operations, and
on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. If done correctly, they should
yield synergies that could revamp the way in which
the United Nations carries out its mandate on the
maintenance of peace and security. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the high-level debate on United
Nations and peace and security to be convened in May
next year aimed at building support among Member
States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this timely open
debate.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
It is deeply shocking to learn that the international
community was confronted with yet another act of
shameful terror in Paris last Friday, which claimed
innocent lives and inflicted massive pain and sorrow on
French society. Indonesia joins the chorus of Member
States in condemning such a cowardly act and expresses
its sympathy to the Government and people of France.
More than ever, the United Nations system and the
international community must place greater emphasis
on the peaceful resolution of disputes and conflict
prevention. That must be reinforced by a much-needed
comprehensive approach and partnership effort on the
part of all Member States. In that context, Indonesia
welcomes the clear emphasis on political solutions to
conflict, mediation and conflict prevention in the recent
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “The future of United Nations peace operations:
implementation of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations” (S/2015/682), the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations and conflict

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

prevention (S/2015/730) and the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490). We also concur with
the emphasis therein, and in today’s concept note
(S/2015/845, annex), on an integrated approach in
which there must no unbridgeable silos separating
development from peace and security and human rights.
Indeed, Indonesia is supportive of a holistic
approach, which it has long advocated at both the
regional and the multilateral levels. We are passionately
convinced of the primacy of dialogue, peaceful
political processes and equitable development since
we ourselves have directly reaped their fruit. Our
once restive province of Aceh would not have become
stable and peaceful, if such a combination had not been
implemented and owned by the people.
While my delegation shares the enthusiasm of many
others here today and in the recent Fourth Committee
debates, where prevention and comprehensiveness with
more responsive United Nations mechanisms have been
stressed, we also underscore the need for the Security
Council to function effectively. The Council must
fully uphold the principles of justice, international law,
human rights law and humanitarian law.
On the question of what more the Security Council
can do to break down silos so as to foster a more
comprehensive undertaking, my delegation would like
to offer following additional points.
First, we have noted that no one has disagreed with
the need to advance a holistic approach to promoting
peace and security. It is very encouraging that the
Council also stresses such an approach. All principal
organs of the United Nations and their subsidiary
entities have their respective mandates. They work best
when they stay within their respective domains, while
collaborating and cooperating with each other and
with external stakeholders, including relevant regional
organizations. Any undertaking to promote sustainable
peace and prevent armed conflict should make the best
use of drawing on the strengths of the entire United
Nations system.
In that context, Indonesia welcomes the two
recommendations by the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture.
The General Assembly, in its future quadrennial
comprehensive policy reviews, should include a
specific focus on sustaining peace and on examining
the success of the United Nations system in bringing

S/PV.7561

together development, humanitarian and peace and
security actions. The Secretary-General should
consider having objectives that incorporate peace
into performance compacts with the heads of all of
the relevant departments in the Secretariat and other
United Nations entities.
Secondly, the future intergovernmental consideration
of the aforementioned reports in the various United
Nations platforms will be a valuable opportunity for
the entire spectrum of Member States to re-evaluate the
working of the United Nations system in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and to see how best
to harness their respective wisdom and experiences so
as to help advance international peace and well-being.
Thirdly, in the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), world leaders have clearly underscored
poverty eradication as the overarching goal of the
new Agenda, with the imperative of integrating the
economic, social and environmental dimensions
of sustainable development at all levels. In that
regard, Sustainable Development Goal 16 addresses
the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies.
Correspondingly, achieving other Goals, along with
Goal 17 on strengthening the means of implementation
and revitalizing the global partnership, coupled with
the role played by the High-level Political Forum in
the Goals review framework, will also be critical in
buttressing a comprehensive and well-supported effort.
Finally, Indonesia reiterates the fundamental
importance of embracing and practicing a sound
principles-based paradigm to address and resolve
conflicts in a peaceful manner, including by addressing
the root causes of conflicts. We are ready to extend
our support to the United Nations system and the
relevant stakeholders in order to help promote effective
approaches to sustainable peace and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): Before addressing today’s
topic, we would like to convey our deep condolences to
the people and the Governments of France, Lebanon,
Iraq and Russia on the loss precious lives resulting
from the detestable recent terrorist attacks.
We thank the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing today’s debate and for its useful concept
note (S/2015/845, annex) to inform the discussion. I

15-3704655/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful remarks this morning.
The link between peace and security, development
and human rights is indeed inextricable. It is true that
the lack of development and of respect for human rights
can endanger international peace and security. However,
without peace and security, lack of development and
violations of human rights are a certainty. While we
must study the linkages between these three pillars,
we believe that peace and security is a prerequisite if
development goals are to be achieved and if human
rights are to be respected and promoted.
The Security Council’s responsibility is in the arena
of international peace and security. Ensuring national
peace, security and stability is the responsibility of each
sovereign State. Accordingly, primary responsibility
in cases where there is a lack of development or the
absence of ideal human rights conditions also lies with
Member States.
By pronouncing on development and human rights
at the national level, the Security Council will be going
beyond its mandate of maintaining international peace
and security. We believe that the Council’s ingress on
such issues should be avoided, for the following reasons.
First, there are international institutions,
especially United Nations institutions, that oversee
issues pertaining to development and human rights.
They are more suited to taking measures necessitated
by circumstances. If the Council were to start taking
up these responsibilities, the United Nations bodies
mandated to deal with these issues would lose their
relevance and importance.
Secondly, when we considered the annual report of
the Security Council (A/70/2) in the General Assembly
last week, we were told that the Security Council met
more than 250 times last year. This excluded meetings of
its numerous subsidiary bodies; the Council, therefore,
does not need to be burdened further with work that
would, at best, be a duplication of effort.
Thirdly, the Council needs to ask itself if its
structure and working methods are conducive to a
role that includes taking up these issues. It has only
10 elected members. Its openness, transparency and
accountability continue to be questioned by the wider
membership. By contrast, the Human Rights Council,
for example, comprises 47 elected members.

56/86

17/11/2015

Lastly, the Council already has a large number of
situations on its plate, ones pertaining to its primary
mandate. If the Council were to spend its time on crosscutting issues, the amount of time that it can spend on
areas that fall under its direct responsibility is bound
to decrease.
Pakistan believes that United Nations bodies
should fulfil their responsibilities within their
prescribed mandates. Issues, indeed, are interlinked.
But United Nations bodies working within their
respective mandates can cooperate effectively with one
another, and Member States can continue to interact
meaningfully with one another and with all such United
Nations bodies. Together we can address most, if not
all, issues in a comprehensive and holistic manner.
Mr. President, we welcome your delegation’s
desire to work towards a presidential statement in a
manner that enables you to take into account the views
expressed by Member States. We hope that in that
draft statement you will take into account the views
expressed by Pakistan as well.
I think that I stopped before the light started
blinking.
The President: I now give the floor to
representative of Romania.

the

Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like first to
congratulate the British presidency of the Security
Council for having organized this timely open debate
on a topic of such great relevance.
More than 1.5 billion people live in countries
affected by violent conflict, and few of them have
been successful in achieving any of the targets of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015.
The rule of law, human rights, peace and security,
and development are often viewed as de facto separate
concepts. The reality is that the problems we face
today in the global arena are not limited to these
predefined categories. Challenges such as poverty,
insecurity, violent conflict and terrorism transcend
those boundaries.
Terrorism threatens the core sovereignty of
a country; it constitutes a direct violation of the
United Nations Charter and a great impediment to
the implementation of the Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in French)
Allow me once again to offer our sincerest and
deepest condolences to France in connection with the
appalling terrorist attacks carried out in Paris.
(spoke in English)
Killing innocent people based on ideology
represents not just an attack on Paris, Ankara or Beirut,
but an attack on all of humankind. Therefore, it is not
just Paris, Ankara or Beirut that we should pray for: it
is the world. We must stand together in hunting down
the perpetrators and bringing them to justice.
Poverty does not cause terrorism, but it can
fuel resentments that terrorists then exploit, which
is why sustainable development must be part of
efforts to counter violent extremism. Development
is, indeed, the thread that runs through the 2030
Agenda, and the rise to prominence of the strong
interconnection between the three dimensions of
sustainable development — economic, social and
environmental — is a significant change compared
with the previous MDGs.
As we have already learned, there can be no
development without peace and no peace without
development, and there can be none of the aforementioned
without respect for human rights. These are the three
pillars of the United Nations: if one of them is weak, the
whole structure will be weak. Balance is key.
As a global Agenda that all States Members of
the United Nations have signed at the highest level,
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) should be
inspiring calls to action. Although some countries were
reluctant to recognize the fact that poor governance fuels
civil conflict and hinders development, the period from
2001 to 2015 proved that fragile States, characterized
by weak governance, have had the greatest difficulty in
achieving the MDGs.
I am proud to say that Romania, together with
Mexico and the Republic of Korea, has established
the Group of Friends on Governance for Sustainable
Development, as a flexible and informal space to
discuss issues related to good governance and foster
cooperation between multiple actors.
By including SDG 16, the 2030 Agenda recognizes
that global sustainable development is not possible
without progress in the realms of good governance,
inclusion, sustainable peace and security.

S/PV.7561

The report of the Secretary-General on overall
policy matters pertaining to special political missions
(A/70/400), dated 30 September, shows that the
global peace and security landscape has continued to
deteriorate in 2015 and that the number of major wars
has tripled since 2008. It calls for an urgent global
effort not only to respond to the proliferating number
of crises, but also to prevent them from emerging.
Prevention is first and foremost the responsibility
of member States. Therefore, the Security Council’s
mission of maintaining international peace and security
should be based on an integrated approach of conflict
management, preventive action and institution-building,
coordination among different actors, reinforced
partnerships with regional organizations and strong
national ownership.
As we can see from the current situation, ungoverned
spaces and post-conflict societies can generate security
threats not only for neighbouring countries, but also for
the international community as a whole. This is also
one of the main findings of Romania’s national security
strategy and of the European Union (EU) common
security strategy, and we fully support the European
Union statement made earlier.
Finally, the 2030 Agenda demonstrates that where
there is a will, there is a way. Given the multitude of
challenges to the international order, we believe that a
strong and effective United Nations, placed at the heart
of the multilateral system, is the appropriate forum for
addressing those challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): May
I begin by discharging a sad duty and expressing the
full support and solidarity of the Moroccan people with
France in connection with the barbaric acts that took
place, as well as our deepest condolences. We express
our sympathy and support to the families of the victims
and to the people of Lebanon, Russia and Turkey, who
have also been struck by heinous terrorist acts. We
offer our deep condolences to them and to all countries
affected by the scourge of terrorism. We condemn in
the strongest possible terms all of these horrific acts,
which require us to take decisions that are up to the
challenges that we are all facing.
I wish to thank the United Kingdom for having
organized this open debate in the Security Council

15-3704657/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

on this item of great relevance, on a cross-cutting
subject that is extremely important to the international
community as a whole. I thank you, Mr. President, for
the clear and precise concept note (S/2015/845, annex),
which underlines current challenges and calls for a
renewed vision of the nexus between peace, security
and development.
Security and stability are the pillars of development,
without which our countries cannot improve their social
situations or carry out their development initiatives.
Therefore, a holistic approach to addressing issues of
peace and security, development and human rights is all
the more necessary, given that we live in a world that
is becoming increasingly globalized, and characterized
by interdependence among States and societies, which
influence each other in the political, economic, security
and other spheres. The current situation serves to
illustrate that the traditional forms of cooperation need
to be reviewed. We hope that this debate will allow us
to enter into a wide-ranging consideration of ways to
improve that.
We have responsibility as Members of the United
Nations to ensure that the links among the main organs
of the United Nations established by the Charter are
effective and functional. To that end, we need to come
up with a vision and to find solutions in the short term
so that we can work together for a sustainable peace.
The root causes of conflict and instability are well
known, and they are often the same from country
to country — exclusion, political and economic
marginalization, unequal access to justice, the absence
of effective mechanisms to promote and protect human
rights, corruption, transnational crime and illegal
trafficking, especially in light weapons. Those are just
a few examples.
On the other hand, the establishment of inclusive
political and economic systems, the promotion of the
rule of law and the strengthening of State institutions
are often cited as effective solutions to attacking those
underlying causes. All of those reforms are necessary,
of course, and we must continue to support countries
that are at risk in those areas. Nevertheless, we need
to broaden our range of action. We need to implement
the holistic vision we are all calling for. Among the
means to succeed, we should make certain adjustments
in the way in which we cooperate, whether we are
talking about cooperation between Member States and
the Secretariat or between different United Nations
departments and agencies.

58/86

17/11/2015

For example, as a way to provide members of
the Security Council further information on the
challenges of development, the Council could consider
including the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) in these discussions, or even the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Given the
existence of its country offices, UNDP is the best
agency to brief the members of the Security Council on
such issues.
In his statement this morning, the representative of
Venezuela drew an unacceptable parallel between the
Palestinian question and that of the Moroccan Sahara.
We must remind that delegation that the question
of the Sahara is not one of decolonization, but of
achieving Morocco’s territorial integrity. The Security
Council took up the issue pursuant to Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, which pertains to
the peaceful settlement of disputes. The question of
the Sahara — perhaps Venezuela is unaware — is the
subject of a political process led under the auspices of
the Secretary-General and facilitated by his Personal
Envoy to achieve a mutually acceptable political
solution. During the past 10 months alone, Personal
Envoy Christopher Ross has been to the region five
times. Morocco assures the Special Envoy that it
remains fully comitted to that process.
Peace and security are threatened by other
factors — expansionism, threats to neighbours due to
links with illegal traffickers and massive violations of
human rights. Venezuela is threatening the security of
its neighbours and is trying to absorb a neighbouring
State Member of the United Nations just because that
small country has discovered oil reserves. Venezuela
persecutes the nationals of neighbouring States by
violating the rules of good neighbourliness and the
principle of respect for territorial integrity, which is
at the cornerstone of the Organization. Venezuela has
links with drug trafficking networks that threaten the
regional security and territorial integrity of another
neighbouring State, which has appeared on the front
pages of the international press.
It is paradoxical that a country that represents a
threat to its enemies can talk about peace and security.
It would have the moral legitimacy to do so if it were
to respect good neighbourliness, an inalienable right
set out in the Charter. It is important that the General
Assembly be careful in the election of members to
the Security Council by taking into account their
contribution to international peace and security, as

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

stipulated by Article 23 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need
for an integrated and consistent approach to achieve
the high goals of the United Nations with regard to
peace and security, development and human rights,
all of which place the human being at the centre of its
concerns.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative in organizing this open debate on the close
relationship between two pillars of the Organization,
namely, development and the maintenance of
international security. We thank the presidency for
drafting the concept note (S/2015/845, annex), and the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
At the outset, we would like to reiterate our
condolences to, and solidarity with, France in
connection with the barbarous it suffered recently.
The Charter of the United Nations sets out the
tasks of the Organization under three fundamental and
interdependent pillars — ensuring international peace
and security, achieving development and promoting
and protecting human rights. On that basis, we believe
that the work of the Organization ought to be focused
on individual persons and on ensuring their human
rights, including the right to development, all the while
fostering peaceful and inclusive societies in order to
ensure sustainable development, while leaving no one
behind.
In the same vein, the international community
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) at the highest level
possible. Its implementation is now our priority and
requires a renewed and strengthened global partnership
to ensure the appropriate means of implementation.
As noted in Agenda 2030, sustainable development
cannot be achieved without peace and security. In
turn, peace and security are at risk without sustainable
development. On the one hand, that implies the need
to revitalize cooperation in the area of international
security through disarmament and non-proliferation
initiatives and by generating confidence-building
measures to prevent conflicts and an arms race and
having at our disposal tools to address humanitarian

S/PV.7561

crises. On the other hand, we must recognize that many
of today’s armed conflicts are embedded in contexts
of deep structural gaps. That makes it imperative to
address the structural causes of violence, among which
are inequality, exclusion and discrimination for any
reason.
It is therefore urgent and necessary to implement
policies aimed at social, economic and financial
inclusion, with the goal of reducing the inequality
and disparity that generate dissatisfaction and so
as to create the conditions for an inclusive society
in which all individuals enjoy equal opportunities.
That is particularly important in societies with ethnic
and cultural diversity, where there is a greater risk
for discrimination and exclusion. Aware that social
inclusion policies allow the building of stable, just and
peaceful societies, my country sponsors the General
Assembly resolution entitled “Promoting social
integration through social inclusion”, a draft of which
the Third Committee adopted this morning.
Similarly, the Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development — specifically Goal 10,
on equitable societies, and Goal 16, on peaceful
societies — are consistent with that view. While
the implementation of the ambitious Agenda is the
responsibility of each State, it is essential to have a
favourable international environment in which peace
and security prevail. In that regard, we need the Security
Council to comply with its role in the promotion of
peace so that the enormous budgets we allocate to
military expenditures can be reallocated to finance the
means of implementation required to eradicate poverty.
Peru believes that combating economic inequality
and social exclusion, promoting respect for the rule
of law, ensuring the full and effective enjoyment of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
individuals, and safeguarding and promoting cultural
diversity contribute to the stability and social cohesion
that foster a climate of peace. That holistic vision is
reflected in the multidimensional mandates in many of
the peacekeeping operations established by the Council.
Therefore, the work aimed at development and restoring
the rule of law plays an increasingly important role in
the mandate of those missions. The United Nations must
also support development and social inclusion efforts in
post-conflict situations in order to definitively break the
cycle of conflict by directly attacking its root causes.
My country therefore wishes to underline the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in that undertaking.

15-3704659/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

To conclude, I wish to emphasize that Peru, which
has suffered violence in the past, is committed to
building peaceful and inclusive societies at the national
level. That is the best way to guarantee international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland): At the outset, let me
state that Switzerland is deeply shocked and saddened
by the terrorist attacks committed in the recent weeks.
Switzerland strongly condemns those heinous acts,
which go against the fundamental values of any society.
We extend our deep condolences to the families of the
victims and to all affected countries.
Peace and security, development and human rights
are closely linked. That observation is not new, yet we
are still struggling to adequately directing our efforts.
In that regard, it seems necessary to recall one of the
conclusions of the review of peacekeeping operations,
namely, the need to find political solutions to safeguard
peace and avoid conflicts. Switzerland welcomes this
opportunity to discuss ways that might enable us to
better meet the different aspects of this problem. I will
focus my remarks on three points.
First, Switzerland calls for boosting conflict
prevention. Conflicts are straining the countries
concerned and represent a step backwards in terms of
development. Moreover, efforts to stabilize countries
emerging from conflict and help them to build
sustainable peace are costly. The best way to lower
those costs and, above all, to avoid suffering is to
prevent conflicts. Strengthening human rights and the
rule of law are among the ways the Security Council can
contribute to a preventive agenda. Careful monitoring
of contexts in which human rights violations occur can
serve as an early warning mechanism, while timely
Security Council reaction following such violations
can contribute to the swift adoption of measures. More
generally, the Security Council could play a more
robust role in promoting accountability — for example,
by referring specific situations to the International
Criminal Court or by adopting sanctions against
perpetrators of violations. Nevertheless, conflict
prevention is not only about tools and instruments; it is
first and foremost about political will and leadership at
the national, regional and international levels.
Secondly, the United Nations has a broad range of
tools at its disposal. It is crucial to use them in a flexible,

60/86

17/11/2015

consistent and context-specific manner. In that way it
will be possible to resort more often to light-footprint
engagements that take into account existing United
Nations capacities and draw on them for support. Those
capacities, which include mediation, good offices and
special political missions, should also be strengthened
institutionally and financially. In particular, we should
make better use of the capacities of the peacebuilding
architecture, which is strengthened by its mandate to
address the root causes of conflict and to build bridges
among the different actors in the field. It is particularly
well placed to support an appropriate response.
Thirdly, the commitment of the United Nations to
peace needs to be more consistent. That is particularly
visible in situations of transition between the different
forms of United Nations engagement. However, in
order to ensure smooth transitions, we must encourage
consistency as soon as the Security Council begins to
take up the situation in a country. That consistency
must not be driven by any institutional or financial
consideration. United Nations efforts must be guided by
the needs on the ground. In that connection, joint and
participatory analysis and planning, conducted prior to
deployment in the field, are essential. The Human Rights
Up Front initiative is of particular value in that regard,
as it enables all stakeholders to respond in a coherent
and comprehensive manner and it ensures that field
expertise is taken into consideration. Finally, not only
does the United Nations have to assume responsibility
in this area. The establishment of partnerships is also
crucial — with the World Bank, for example.
In recent months, we have seen both a decrease in
available resources and a continuing increase in the
needs in the areas of peace and security, development
and humanitarian affairs. Switzerland is aware of
the growing number of challenges our world faces,
including that of the shrinking space in the field for
civilian, humanitarian and development actors. Based
on their long-standing presence on the ground, United
Nations funds and programmes can often play a
positive role in peacebuilding, as demonstrated by the
Joint Programme of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Political Affairs on
Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention
and the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and
Corrections, which are supported by Switzerland. That
gives us the confidence that we have the necessary
expertise and capacities at our disposal.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7561

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

all levels and at all stages builds a culture of dialogue
and makes peace more likely to be sustainable.

Mr. Grant (Canada): Before beginning my
statement, allow me to offer condolences from the
Government and the people of Canada to those from
many nations affected by the recent terrorist acts in
France, Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt and Turkey.

(spoke in French)

I am sure we can all agree on the broad principles
of security and development and the root causes of
conflict: first, that peace is a fundamental precondition
for development, as well as a development outcome in its
own right, and, secondly, that sustainable development
over the long term means addressing drivers of conflict,
exclusion and violence — and that includes support for
advancing democracy, good governance and human
rights.
Acting on those principles starts with prevention.
We have seen the results of responding only when a
crisis comes to a head: an international system stretched
to its limits and failing to respond adequately or in a
timely way. Investing in prevention means addressing
drivers of conflict at all levels and building the concept
of sustaining peace into all phases of our engagements.
Canada believes there is no need for new mandates
or institutions to do that, rather it requires using the
tools we already have; it requires leadership from the
Council, the Secretary-General and the relevant organs
of the United Nations; and it requires ongoing support
from Member States.
As a simple first measure, it would be of considerable
value to Council deliberations were relevant bodies,
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
the Department of Political Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council, to give regular briefings on country situations.
Such briefings should be integrated and grounded in
joint United Nations analysis. We also need to build
strong relationships between all actors, making the
sharing of information, ideas and resources a natural
part of our activities.
As we know from the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, solutions that are country-led and
inclusive are more likely to be perceived as legitimate
and to match the unique characteristics of specific
conflicts. Additionally, as has been proved, involving
civil society and investing in women’s participation at

Too often, we have seen a relapse into violent
conflict once a peace agreement has been signed. Even
an inclusive and comprehensive peace agreement needs
to be sustained and supported against unexpected
shocks and the sometimes predictable setbacks.
First and foremost, sustainable peace requires
not only resources, it takes time and determination.
Moreover, the way in which the international community
supports a process can evolve. As we saw in Sierra
Leone, providing support in a sequenced way, whereby
the Peacebuilding Commission pursues its commitment
to peace when the issue is no longer before the Security
Council, should be part of the normal course of affairs.
We also welcome the recommendations of the
Advisory Group of Experts aimed at stepping up the
conflict prevention and peacebuilding roles of United
Nations country teams and Resident Coordinators. We
encourage the strengthening of the joint programme of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Political Affairs on building national
capacities for conflict prevention.
Whatever our commitment, the United Nations
cannot be truly effective without adequate resources.
The report of the Advisory Group of Experts
(see S/2015/490) calls for predictable funding for
peacebuilding. How that is achieved is open for
discussion, but it is undeniably a prerequisite for
success.
(spoke in English)
The topic of this debate is a vast one. We do, though,
have the very useful recent high-level reviews of peace
operations and of the peacebuilding architecture and
the global review of resolution 1325 (2000), to which we
can refer. A great deal of good work has been done; it is
now up to all of us to work on effective implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me start
by conveying South Africa’s condolences to the
Government and the people of France, who this past
Friday experienced the cruelty of terrorism.

15-3704661/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

We would like to thank you, Sir, for the concept
note (S/2015/845, annex) circulated on security,
development and the root causes of conflict. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
South Africa associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We wish to make several
additional remarks in our national capacity.
South Africa fully supports the assertion in the
2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development to the
effect that sustainable development cannot be realized
without peace and security, and peace and security
will be at risk without sustainable development. In that
regard, peace and security will continue to elude us
if we do not address the nexus between security and
development. By and large, today’s conflicts have their
origins in disputes related to economic development
issues, including socioeconomic marginalization; the
disproportionate and unequal distribution of resources,
wealth and power within societies; the lack of
participatory democratic processes; corruption; and the
illegal exploitation of mineral resources, which fuels
those conflicts. For sustainable peace and stability
to be established, it is essential to promote economic
development and good governance, and to build strong
State institutions that act to mediate disagreements
and disputes within a given country in order to avoid
violent conflict.
While it is important for the Security Council to
take into account and consideration the developmental
and socioeconomic causes of conflict, the Council
should not in any way encroach upon the mandate
of other principal United Nations bodies, such as
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as the Peace Building Commission,
which are entrusted with that mandate. It is unfortunate
that the Council encroaches upon the mandate of other
bodies while neglecting its own mandate as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
the Council remains ineffective, failing to adequately
address key peace and security matters in places such
as Palestine, Syria and Western Sahara.
South Africa is of the firm view that it is vital to
integrate developmental aspects in international efforts
in the areas of conflict prevention, resolution and
management, including post-conflict peacebuilding.
In that regard, we welcome the work of other members
of the international community, including the World

62/86

17/11/2015

Bank as a critical partner in our collective conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts. In all such efforts,
the national context, policy space and specific needs
of the host country must be respected and protected.
Nationally owned interventions and development
strategies must be supported in addressing rising
levels of unemployment, poverty reduction and gender
inequality. In addition to working closely with the
national authorities of the State, greater collaboration
and coordination with regional and continental bodies
will be a fundamental prerequisite for greater synergy
and strategic coherence in our approaches. There is
a need to draw on strong partnerships between the
United Nations and regional bodies, not only in terms
of their comparative advantage in addressing conflicts
and responding to them, but in promoting regional
efforts geared towards greater regional development
and prosperity. This is underpinned by the realization
that instability and underdevelopment in one country
have an impact on an entire region, and in turn on
global stability, as they create sanctuaries in which
transnational crime and terrorism can thrive.
The stability of States is increasingly being
challenged by their lack of capacity to meet the
aspirations of their populations. In an increasingly
unequal world, the redistributive capacity of the State
must be strengthened. Inclusiveness in governance
also needs to be addressed, because a more inclusive
governance model is more likely to prevent recourse to
armed struggle to further political interests. A healthy
civil society that promotes dialogue and provides a
voice to those who feel marginalized will go a long way
towards providing non-violent forums for the peaceful
resolution of political disputes. National reconciliation
efforts also need to be put in place in order to address
the collective wounds and the recourse to vengeful
sentiments that can fuel relapses into conflict. South
Africa has experienced the healing effects of bodies
such as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and we wish to encourage countries that are emerging
from conflict to investigate the possible use of such
restorative mechanisms.
The causes of conflict repeat themselves and are
never fully addressed when countries emerge from
conflict. Therefore, global attention should remain in
place even after violent conflicts have been resolved.
During that time, consolidating the dividends of peace
needs to be the foremost consideration, with a robust
emphasis on stimulating economic development. A

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

happy and prosperous society is a peaceful society.
That needs to set the tone for preventive action and
sustainable peace.
We live in a world characterized by greater
inter-connectivity and mutual dependence. It is of
paramount importance to attend speedily to violent
conflicts, which often emanate from areas of the world
that are not geographically proximate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for organizing today’s timely debate
on this important subject.
I would like also to express my country’s deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
France following last Friday’s atrocities in Paris. Our
sympathies go also to the Government and the people
of Lebanon over their own recent suffering at the hands
of terrorists.
Last week’s terrible events were assaults on
fundamental human freedoms and values. They must
be condemned unreservedly. They reinforce our
determination to eradicate the scourge of terrorism
from our societies.
Central to that, of course, is the need to remove
environments of grievance and inequality within
which terrorists can flourish. We have to go to the
roots of conflict situations and tackle the problems
of inequality and disadvantage that all too frequently
underlie them. There is clear evidence to show the
deep interconnections among underdevelopment,
fragility and conflict. In many parts of the world there
is a vicious cycle linking those, which must be broken.
Only in that way can we hope to build peaceful and
inclusive societies that protect human rights, provide a
stable and prosperous environment and allow all human
beings to reach their full potential.
As our Heads of State and Government recognized
less than two months ago, there can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development. Both of those conditions are
predicated on the promotion and protection of human
rights, without discrimination. The agreement adopted
in September is often referred to as the 2030 Agenda,
but it is important to remind ourselves of its full title,
namely, “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”. The Agenda is about

S/PV.7561

nothing less than transformation: transforming the
conditions in which we all live and transforming the
future we offer our children. The challenges we face
globally are huge and urgent, and we must all work
collectively to overcome them.
One in four people in the world today lives in an area
that suffers from repeated cycles of violence. People
living in such areas are more than twice as likely to be
undernourished as those in other developing countries;
more than three times as likely to miss school; and twice
as likely to see their children die before the age of 5. And
the cycle continues, piling insecurity on top of poverty
and fuelling further insecurity and, in many cases,
conflict. A specific Goal in the 2030 Agenda recognizes
that fact of life — and indeed, of death. It recognizes
that reducing violence, insecurity and fragility is a
legitimate objective of development policy and that it
is essential for sustainable long-term growth, stability
and poverty reduction. The 2030 Agenda, which world
leaders endorsed in September, has enshrined that
objective in Goal 16 and its accompanying targets. That
is the most formal expression to date of a connection
that has in fact been made for a number of years
now. The 2011 New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States and this year’s reviews of the United Nations
peace operations and peacebuilding architecture all
point to the need to rebalance programming efforts
and resources in support of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.
The 2030 Agenda makes clear that we must use all
of the tools at our disposal to ensure that we do not
pursue sustainable development without addressing the
root causes of conflict. It also makes clear, for example,
that we cannot address inequality without addressing
human rights and that we cannot pursue economic
growth without recognizing the impact that it has on
the environment and stability.
We are embarking on an integrated and holistic
approach to these great global challenges, which we
believe is the one that offers the greatest prospect
of success. It is the challenge and the opportunity of
sustainable development. All States Members of the
United Nations have committed themselves to this
integrated approach. It follows that the United Nations
and each of its organs should reflect that integration
and the interconnectedness of all the goals and targets.
We must all come out of our silos.

15-3704663/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Council, of course, has particular
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.
But it must also play its role in ensuring that progress
is made on the interconnected and interdependent
priorities of peace and development. The Council must
recognize the central importance of the achievement of
both peace and development of ensuring that we have
inclusive institutions, the rule of law, the protection of
human rights and access to justice. The inclusion of a
dedicated goal on peaceful and inclusive societies in
the 2030 Agenda is a platform for the promotion and
protection of human rights for all.
Ireland trusts that, with the 2030 Agenda now
agreed as the basis for our work over the next 15 years,
a major effort will be made to ensure coherence and
unity across the United Nations system in tackling
issues related to security, development and the root
causes of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Paraguay.
Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, allow me to convey my
deepest condolences and express the full solidarity
of the Government and the people of the Republic of
Paraguay to our sister nations of Iraq, Lebanon and
France following the barbaric attacks that struck those
three nations during the past week, in which hundreds
of their citizens lost their lives. Those attacks have once
again tested the will and strength of the international
community before the implacable scourge of terrorism.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to extend
congratulations to the United Kingdom on its presidency
of the Security Council, which has facilitated this open
debate on security, development and the root causes
of conflict — an issue of vital importance to many
societies in the current international circumstances.
The fact that the Security Council has decided
to convene an open debate on this issue not only
reaffirms the crucial importance of the principles set
out in the recently adopted Sustainable Development
Goals, wherein Heads of State and Government again
reaffirmed that sustainable development cannot be
realized without peace and security and, furthermore,
that peace and security is in serious jeopardy without
the essential preconditions of development.
There can be no gainsaying the growing role that
the Council must play in terms of conflict prevention,

64/86

17/11/2015

through increasingly effective, efficient, decisive and
active efforts, free of the operational constrains that
could imply a political link, or vice versa, with some
root causes of conflict being linked to certain States, or
the marginalization of others.
I believe that many will agree that the root causes
of conflict hamper and sometimes outright prevent
the establishment of the conditions necessary for
development. Building and strengthening development
clearly requires peaceful and sustainable conditions
over a relatively long period of time, during which
a broad base of inclusion and social justice should
develop, including equal access to public services.
Moreover, the fostering of an environment conducive
to development requires the gradual strengthening of
social and political institutions to ensure that the most
vulnerable groups, particularly women and children,
have access to the benefits of development.
We must not forget that the Council, per se, lacks
functions and mandates regarding development. In the
light of that, the Council must renew and strengthen
its partnerships with the General Assembly and its
subsidiary bodies with a view to coordinating policies
and efforts so that the Council’s conflict prevention
may have direct and indirect effects, based on its
international peace and security functions. The gradual
implementation of the development commitments is
especially timely now, given the recent adoption here
at Headquarters of the post-2015 development agenda.
It is our responsibility, together with the international
community as a whole, to harmonize efforts towards
the gradual strengthening of the progress achieved
in development — just as we did 15 years ago with
the Millennium Development Goals — and thereby
significantly reduce the factors that influence the root
causes of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): In just the last two weeks we
have witnessed outrageous acts of terror around
the world. Terror is terror and should be condemned
loudly wherever it happens and whoever the victims
are. I would like to express my sincere condolences
and deepest sympathy to the French Republic and to
the French people in the wake of the horrific attacks
on Paris, the City of Light, this past weekend. Israel
understands the pain and devastation of terrorism first
hand. We know the people of France are strong and

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

resilient. They should know that the people and the
State of Israel stand by them in friendship and solidarity
at all times, and especially at these difficult moments.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
marks a new era of unprecedented global partnership
to combat the greatest global challenge, namely, the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions.
However, as events in Syria, Beirut, the Sinai and Iraq
make painfully clear, such noble goals will remain
beyond reach unless the challenges of national and
international peace and security are met head on.
The growing interdependence of security and
development is evident from the conditions of instability
and underdevelopment across the globe today. Countries
in situations of prolonged conflict suffer from decreased
economic productivity, dramatically increased levels
of poverty and declining health outcomes. Without the
stability of enduring peace, the promise of sustainable
development will remain unfulfilled. Moreover, due to
the increasingly brutal nature of some of those conflicts,
it has become ever more difficult for the international
community to support the peacebuilding initiatives and
institutions so desperately needed.
The rules of the game have changed, but the
international community has yet to respond adequately
to the new reality. We must develop up-to-date
mechanisms that will enable us to help the victims of
conflict in the short-term, and to improve the conflict
prevention capacities of those States in the long-term.
Unless the community of nations takes action, the
decline of political institutions and civil society in wartorn States will undermine the possibility of future
development for generations to come. Only an inclusive
approach, in which all stakeholders collaborate to
address the challenges, can succeed.
Stability and security are key to unlocking the
full potential of developing States. However, without a
comprehensive commitment to the goal of an inclusive
society, the benefits of peace and the promise of
sustainable development will remain elusive.
In the twenty-first century, no nation can prosper
if it neglects the building blocks of progress, namely,
accountable institutions, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and the empowerment of women. That
lesson is particularly relevant for many in Israel’s
region of the world, the Middle East. The disintegration
of nation States and national borders that we have

S/PV.7561

witnessed did not happen over night, nor where they
uncontrollable. It is a direct result of decades of
neglect, corrupt leadership and mistaken priorities in
our region. Throughout these lost years, some in the
international community stood silent, turning a blind
eye to dangerous ideologies and at times collaborating
with leaders responsible for harming their own people.
When children are indoctrinated instead of
educated, it breeds fundamentalism. When women
are segregated from the rest of society, instead of
being integrated into decision-making positions,
important voices of moderation are being silenced.
When leaders ignore desperate cries for more freedom
and more opportunity, the result is a people without
hope and a future without progress. When dangerous
fundamentalist ideologies masquerade as legitimate
religious views and are exported throughout the world,
it leads to terror. And when we go out of our way to
find a justification for some acts of terror, we lose our
moral compass.
The only sure path to both security and development
is the promotion of free and open societies. However,
we must not take that easy way out. We must not allow
the failure to achieve developmental success become an
excuse for violence, and we must not delude ourselves
that the root causes of conflict are limited to weak
institutions and slow economic growth.
Over the past two months, hundreds of innocent
Israeli men, women, and children have been brutally
stabbed in the streets, intentionally run over at bus
stops and deliberately shot at on their way to work — all
for the crime of being Jews living in Israel. In many
meetings in the Security Council, we have heard about
the root causes of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and much blame has been placed on Israel for lack
of progress, all the while downplaying, and at times
ignoring, Palestinian reluctance to negotiate, as well as
Palestinian terror and incitement. The wave of terror
that Israel faces is not about lack of development. It is
about the culture of hatred that pervades Palestinian
educational institutions and the Palestinian media
and incitement by Palestinian leaders. While each
conflict is different, no discussion of the root causes
of terror anywhere in the word can be complete unless
it addresses the dehumanization of the other, which all
too often lies at its heart.
The road to a peaceful, prosperous and secure planet
is long and winding but well worth the journey. Let us

15-3704665/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

commit to work together in the spirit of friendship and
in the name of humankind to make that dream a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Minami (Japan): Let me begin by expressing my
sincere appreciation for your leadership, Mr. President,
in convening today’s open debate. Before I go into the
substance of my statement, like the speakers before me,
I would like to extend my delegation’s condolences and
sympathy to the people and Government of France, in
connection with the terrorist attacks on 13 November.
Likewise, our condolences go to the peoples and
Governments of Lebanon and Iraq, which also recently
suffered from atrocious terrorist attacks.
Japan appreciates the fact that the Council is
focusing its attention on the root causes of conflict. By
using its political leverage for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding in a timely manner, the Council can help
avoid situations in which large-scale action is required.
As an active member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and a newly elected member of the Council,
Japan also welcomes the United Kingdom presidency’s
initiative in inviting the Chair of the PBC to this session.
Today, our eyes are fully open to the fact that peace
and security and sustainable development are closely
linked to each other. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) aims
at approaching the security/development spectrum in
an integrated way. Goal 16 is epoch-making. All the
Member States recognize the need for breaking down
silos. In implementing that Goal, every principal organ
of the United Nations has its role to play. In that respect,
let me underscore three points.
The first concerns the importance of the role to be
played by the Council. I would suggest that the Council
has a tendency to pay insufficient attention to the
nexus that should connect it to other intergovernmental
organizations when it discusses issues in New York.
In order to break down silos and make the discussions
within the United Nations system holistic, the Security
Council should ensure coherence with the work of other
bodies, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the High-level Political Forum,
the executive boards of funds and programmes and the
Human Rights Council, in addition, of course, to the
PBC. Particularly when it comes to laying the ground
for peace and taking measures based on long-term
projections, the Security Council should make full use

66/86

17/11/2015

of the comparative strengths of the relevant institutions.
That would help the Council to lessen its already heavy
workload. We believe that the Council should take the
lead in reaching out to those bodies.
Secondly, I would like to highlight the importance
of giving more priority to conflict prevention on the
ground. In that connection, the United Nations country
team plays a crucial role, and its updates should
enable the Secretariat to proactively brief the Security
Council. That would allow the Council to be engaged
at the outset in situations where increased tension is
observed, thereby preventing tensions from escalating
into conflicts.
Lastly, I would like to stress the importance of
institution-building in preventing conflict. It is for that
very reason that the PBC Working Group on Lessons
Learned, which Japan chairs, has focused on the annual
theme of institution-building. Japan intends to submit a
report on those activities by the end of 2015. We hope
to make additional contributions to today’s theme with
that report.
Before closing, allow me to briefly touch on Japan’s
engagement. Japan places human security at the centre
of its policy. That concept emphasizes placing people
at the heart of development policy and protecting them,
through empowerment, from various threats, including
conflict. Indeed, the concept of human security calls for
that seamless and coherent way of supporting efforts
aimed at sustaining peace and development, all the way
from the phases of conflict prevention and resolution
efforts to those of consolidation of peace, prevention
of relapse, reconstruction and sustainable development.
Japan is determined to take an active role in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation, through a holistic approach.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this debate.
At the outset, I would like to express my deepest
condolences and sympathy to the French people and
the families of the innocent victims in last Friday’s
terrorist attack in Paris. That was a heinous attack,
and we strongly condemn it. We support the French
Government in its efforts to bring all those who were
involved in planning and executing the attack to
justice. Those attacks, which are the latest in a horrible

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

series, demand a larger, coordinated response on the
part of the international community, in the spirit of
solidarity. Slovenia is committed to a joint effort with
the international community in combating terrorism
and will contribute, to the best of its ability, to ensuring
international and European security, as well as its own.
Conflicts, violence and fragility have significant and
long-term consequences for sustainable development.
Without peace, efforts aimed at eradicating poverty
cannot yield the expected sustainable results, and, to
achieve the latter, serious actions oriented to long-term
goals are needed to tackle the root causes.. The recently
adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) recognizes a strong
connection and interdependence between peace and
security, human rights and development and gives
special attention to countries most in need, including
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations. At its
core is a multidimensional approach to development.
That is vital, especially given that the nature of conflicts
has significantly changed. The key drivers of instability
include a wide range of factors, some of which are
political, economic, social and environmental. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can be
considered to be one of the tools available for fostering
and strengthening cooperation between security and
development actors.
Recent developments have demonstrated the
severity of security challenges worldwide. A global
humanitarian and refugee crisis of this magnitude has
not been seen for the past seven decades. The crisis in
the Middle East persists, and humanitarian assistance
alone cannot solve the security challenges, which
require political solutions and efforts to tackle their
root causes. In the past several weeks, Slovenia has
been confronted with an immense refugee and migrant
flow. Policies addressing that issue will require close
cooperation on the part of the whole international
community, and should incorporate a human rightsbased approach. Cooperation between the countries of
destination, origin and transit must be strengthened.
Slovenia is committed to the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. We believe that we should resort to diplomacy,
mediation and conflict prevention wherever possible.
To do so, we need to strengthen the conflict-prevention
capabilities of the Organization, and, in particular,
make greater and more effective use of Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations on the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Within the United Nations,

S/PV.7561

peacebuilding and peacekeeping are only two of the
many tools available, and they should complement each
other. But as conflicts are becoming ever more complex,
we have to increase our cooperation with regional,
subregional and other organizations. Cooperation
between security and development actors, together
with national Governments, must be established early
enough in the peacebuilding process and maintained
during conflict-prevention efforts so as to effectively
address the root causes of conflicts.
If conflict prevention is to succeed, we need to
recognize potential threats to international peace and
security as early as possible, and we need to ensure
effective, collective action. In that regard, we welcome
the Human Rights Up Front initiative as a new tool
aimed at ensuring that the United Nations system
takes effective action to prevent large-scale violations
of human rights or international humanitarian law.
Women can and should play an important part in all
aspects of the peace and security agenda, including in
conflict prevention.
The promotion and protection of human rights
represent an important element in preventing conflict
and promoting development. Human rights violations
and abuses present one of the early signs for the need
to action. In particular, we must pay special attention to
the situation of women and vulnerable groups.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Poland
joins other delegations in strongly condemning the
terrorist attacks in Paris on 13 November. Together
with the whole international community, we are deeply
shocked by that barbarous act, unprecedented in its
scale.
(spoke in French)
We offer our sincere condolences to the bereaved
families and express our solidarity with the people and
Government of France. During this difficult period, our
thoughts are with the victims of this tragedy, with all
the women and men of Paris, as well as with the French
nation.
(spoke in English)
Turning to the subject of today’s meeting, I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for once again
bringing to the Council the issue of the prevention

15-3704667/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

of conflicts, with special focus on the interlinkages
between development and peace and security. I also
thank the briefers for their contributions to the debate.
While Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union, allow me to
share with the Council a few additional thoughts from
the national perspective.
Our debate today has benefited greatly from a
number of important documents released this year.
I have in mind, in particular, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), which sets up the development framework for the
future. This year is also special in that three review
processes of the peacebuilding architecture, peace
operations and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) are under way. The Secretary-General’s reports
and their recommendations provide a good basis for
further work towards achieving better complementary
in the United Nations security and development policies.
The changing nature of conflicts requires a
comprehensive approach to stopping them before they
put international peace and security at risk. Prevention
lies at the heart of the United Nations activities. That
is also the foundation of the Human Rights Up Front
initiative, which seeks to strengthen the early-warning
capacities of the Organization. The United Nations has
at its disposal the tools needed to strengthen national
protection mechanisms and help countries become
more resilient in the face of conflicts and human rights
crises.
The Security Council, for its part, could make
wider use of horizon-scanning briefings. We are also
in favour of strengthening cooperation between the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
including the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The
Council could benefit broadly from PBC’s expertise
and advice, in particular when considering transitions
between various types of assistance. We hope that the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review process will
contribute to that end.
Poland would also like to underline the importance
of effective national conflict-prevention policies,
such as strengthening transparent and accountable
State institutions, fighting corruption and promoting
human rights and good governance. We also see the
need for States to promote and maintain safe and
enabling environments for civil society actors, who

68/86

17/11/2015

play an essential role in the prevention of human rights
violations, which too often result in conflicts.
The demand for conflict prevention, mediation
and good offices is growing rapidly. The good office
exchanges and the mutual reinforcement in mediation
efforts between the United Nations and European Union
should continue, and are most appreciated. Recent
examples also show the growing role played by regional
economic communities in Africa in mediation, such as
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
encourage the United Nations to intensify its efforts to
support regional organizations on other continents in
building their own mediation capacities.
Last but not least, the Department of Political
Affairs plays a central role in United Nations efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts around the world. We
hope that Poland’s first contribution to the Department
of Political Affairs multi-year appeal last year will
strengthen the Department’s capacity to detect crises,
allowing it to engage meaningfully in preventive
diplomacy and the strengthening of democratization
processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Please allow me, first of
all, to convey our deepest condolences and sympathy
to the people and Government of France at this difficult
moment.
(spoke in French)
We are all Parisians.
(spoke in English)
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like,
however, to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
In 2001, in its presidential statement S/PRST/2001/5,
the Security Council underlined that security and
development are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing, and are key to attaining sustainable
peace. Their relationship was recognized as complex,
multifaceted, and case-specific. The statement also
called for an approach to building a sustainable peace
that incorporates and strengthens coherence between
political, security, development, human rights and
rule-of-law activities, and addresses the underlying

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

causes of each conflict. That vision is now included in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) adopted in September by our
leaders.
While, on the one hand, we have adopted an
ambitious Agenda, on the other we have been
witnessing ongoing turmoil, extremism, sectarianism,
civil war and terrorism in many parts of the world,
resulting in death, persecution, property dispossession,
displacement, the destruction of cultural heritage and
forced migration. In order to reverse such worrying
developments, we should direct our efforts so that the
countries and regions in conflict zones are turned into
places in which sustainable development becomes a
reality. That can be achieved only by tackling the root
causes that have led to this unprecedented situation
with its political instability and economic insecurity.
The marginalization of communities and groups
based on racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious, cultural
and/or economic grounds undoubtedly contributes
to the destabilization of societies and underlies many
conflicts today. Social, ethnic and religious divides
have been a critical factor in creating conflict in many
regions of the world.
Exclusion, discrimination and deprivation are
causes of poverty and inequality that threaten social
cohesion. Dealing with the imperatives of peace
and security means reaching those who are most
vulnerable, including women and girls, children
and the elderly, people with disabilities, migrants,
refugees, the internally displaced and indigenous and
minority groups. An inclusive society should provide
equal opportunities for all citizens regardless of their
background, and in particular should ensure women’s
equal participation at all levels, since they play a crucial
role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Tolerance and sound democratic governance are the
best ways to ensure peaceful coexistence and welfare.
At the same time, strong and effective institutions
that are transparent, corruption-free, accessible
and accountable, along with democratic forms of
participation, are essential ingredients for inclusive and
sustained economic growth and peaceful and stable
societies.
Establishing peace, security and respect for
fundamental freedoms, and combating discrimination
and all forms of violence, are critical conditions
for development, but they are also the outcomes of

S/PV.7561

development. Addressing the sources of conflict
requires a multidimensional approach that must take
into account the interrelated areas of development,
human rights, peace, security and the rule of law. We
firmly believe that the 2030 Agenda provides us with
a unique opportunity to act together in order to shape
a safer, more peaceful, just and prosperous world for
ourselves and for our children and future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to offer our sincere condolences to the Government
of France in the wake of the barbaric terrorist attacks
in Paris. Ukraine condemns those deadly and brutal
actions and our people are in solidarity with the people
of France.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
convening this important and timely debate. Ukraine
fully shares the common vision that sustainable
development cannot be realized without peace and
security, and that peace and security are at risk without
sustainable development. But despite intensified efforts
in the areas of conflict prevention and strengthening
the relevant normative frameworks at the regional and
global levels, there is a clear gap between discourse and
practice. Today, more than 60 million people around the
world have been displaced by wars and do not enjoy the
standards of living and social protection that peaceful
and safe societies should provide. In recent years we
have witnessed a surge in violent conflicts and an evergrowing need for urgent humanitarian assistance.
While Ukraine subscribes to the idea that conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts must be nationally
driven and owned, the transnational nature of security
threats today often makes it difficult for States to
protect themselves when acting entirely on their own.
An effective and efficient collective security system
capable of addressing the root causes of such threats,
with the United Nations and the Security Council at
its centre, is essential. Our interconnected security
and development challenges require a more integrated
approach to conflict prevention that can strengthen
coherence between political, security, development,
human rights and rule of law activities.
Moreover, the complexity of the emergencies that
the Security Council deals with demands consideration
of the relevant economic, political and social dimensions
of conflict. In that regard, Ukraine believes that

15-3704669/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

recognition of the need for the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Secretary-General to coordinate their activities
within their respective mandates under the Charter of
the United Nations, as stated in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), is even
more relevant today.
It is critically important to identify the root causes
of conflicts at an early stage. In today’s world it is not
only internal socioeconomic development challenges
and external competition for natural resources that can
lay a foundation for the eruption of conflicts. We believe
they can also be caused by neglect of the Charter’s
purposes and principles, the precepts of international
law and the essential tenets of territorial integrity and
respect for other countries’ sovereignty. In that context,
the Russian aggression in Ukraine is yet another piece
of proof that the Council should play a more proactive
role in conflict prevention.
We believe firmly that sustainable development
cannot be achieved in places where explosions are heard
and civilians are killed. It cannot be achieved in places
where aggressive ideologies reign that advocate one
nation’s suppression by another and where key human
rights and freedoms are violated. As a result of Russia’s
treacherous annexation of Ukrainian Crimea and its
aggression in Ukraine’s Donbas region, more than
8,000 people have been killed. Critical infrastructure
has been ruined and Ukraine has been deprived of
about one-fifth of its economic potential. That external
aggression has led to the emergence of a new form
of poverty — a sudden or unexpected kind — that is
affecting the lives of more than 1.5 million internally
displaced persons in Ukraine. Every day of the war
in Donbas costs us around $5 million that we could
be investing in sustainable development. And the
internally displaced persons crisis is one of the most
pressing problems for the whole region, not just for
Ukraine.
Ukraine aspires to peace and prosperity and,
together with its partner States, has been making
every possible effort to settle the conflict by peaceful
diplomatic means. Once we have put an end to the
military aggression, established peace and restored
Ukraine’s full sovereignty over the Donbas region and
Crimea, we will focus on returning millions of people
to a normal life and restoring our economic and social
infrastructure on a basis of sustainable development.
Ukraine stands ready to accomplish this difficult task

70/86

17/11/2015

and calls on its international partners to cooperate with
it to that end.
We welcome the Security Council’s commitment to
enhancing dialogue and fostering more unity among its
members. Ukraine believes that improving the quality
of interaction on conflict prevention will boost the
effectiveness of the Council’s work. I would like to
emphasize that preventive diplomacy is our common
goal. If we wish to achieve sustainable development,
it is crucial that all Member States recommit to the
principle of conflict prevention. We must stay united
in our peacebuilding efforts. A system-wide effort
and the support of the entire membership are critical
to effectively addressing the interdependence between
peace, security and development. Ukraine is committed
to making its contribution to achieving sustainable
peace for development, including as one of the newly
elected non-permanent members of the Security
Council for the period from 2016 to 2017.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I would first like to offer my heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims of the terrorist
attacks in my country and in Lebanon, Baghdad, France
and all over the world. We firmly condemn such attacks
and those who perpetrate, support or finance them. We
would also like to express our deep condolences to the
people and Government of the Russian Federation in
the wake of the downing of a Russian plane over Egypt.
Syria associates itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We rely on the essential role of the Security Council,
as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations,
in maintaining international peace and security and
preventing conflict, based on how important we believe
it is to ensure the creation of an environment conducive
to development, stability, peace and inclusion, as well
as to support the United Nations bodies that deal with
development issues. In that regard, I would like to
recall the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), and in particular its
paragraph 47, which cites the central role to be played
by the high-level political forum on development, under
the auspices of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, in systematically reviewing the
Agenda.

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation is therefore concerned by the
holding of today’s meeting and the attempt to push the
Council to consider development issues that are not part
of its mandate under the Charter. Furthermore, we do
not support the selection of Sustainable Development
Goal 16 and its link with conflict prevention as part of
the Council’s agenda. If we insist on the fact that the
Security Council should not deal with issues outside its
purview, such as development, we do so for the practical
reason that we should neither dilute nor politicize
international efforts when we are trying to achieve our
common goals. Moreover, the exclusive mandate of
the Security Council to address issues of international
peace and security and conflict prevention needs to
be operationalized in the light of the disappointing
outcome of the Council’s work in this area. We need to
concentrate on what is within the Council’s domain and
not branch out into other areas.
With respect to international peace and security
and conflict prevention, we can make the Council
more operational by doing the following. We must
immediately and completely implement all Security
Council resolutions that have not been implemented for
years, in particular those on the occupied Syrian Golan,
Palestine and Israeli nuclear disarmament of Palestine.
Secondly, we call for the immediate, unpoliticized and
impartial implementation of resolutions on fighting
terrorism. Thirdly, we must uphold respect for the
sovereignty of States and non-interference in the
domestic affairs of States on the part of countries that
have a great deal of influence in the Council and that
arrogate to themselves the legitimacy that they deny to
others without taking into account the choices made
by peoples. We need to require accountability from
those Governments that have taken unilateral decisions
or poorly interpreted Council decisions in order to
justify interference in other countries’ affairs, thereby
spurring violence, extremism and terrorism in those
countries and others in the region, as occurred in Libya
after the military invasion. We also need to underscore
the interference of some countries since 2011 in the
internal affairs of my country, Syria, as they have
sought to undermine the Syrian State by force, using
what one speaker today called revolutionary terrorists
or coercive unilateral economic measures that have
made us lose decades of development and stability.
Many questions remain before the Council for action,
in particular certain resolutions, including resolutions
2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), which prohibit

S/PV.7561

the financing of terrorists and their travel to Syria and
to stop the trade in oil and antiquities with them. The
Council also needs to look into the catastrophic effect
of unilateral economic sanctions implemented against
Syria by European countries and the United States,
with the resulting conflict, unemployment, disease and
poverty, which are not the effects that the Charter or
Council resolutions were designed to achieve, but are
the result of the lack of political will and the failure of
wealthy countries, including some on the Council, to
live up to their historical obligations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Palau.
Mr. Otto (Palau): First, let me start by thanking the
presidency and the Government of the United Kingdom
for convening this very important debate. We thank His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog for his briefing and add our
admiration and congratulations to Ms. Bouchamaoui
and the people of Tunisia. We condemn the terrorist
attacks that occurred last week in France. Lebanon and
Egypt. Our prayers and thoughts go to the families and
friends of the victims of these tragic events. We stand
in solidarity with France, Lebanon and the Russian
Federation as well as the rest of peace-loving world in
calling for and taking action to defeat the enemies of
peace, freedom and humankind.
Palau agrees with the statements made during
the framing of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), and
that many speakers have reiterated today, to the effect
that sustainable development is not possible without
peace. In this Chamber, our challenge is to attest to the
fact that peace and security are not possible without
sustainable development. We think therefore that the
Council’s mandate to maintain peace and security has
to be adjusted to the realities of the twenty-first century.
For instance, the Security Council has an obligation
to take ownership of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the fight against climate change as
part of its core working deliverables. Additionally,
ethics for sustainable development should not only be
embraced, but protected and facilitated by the Security
Council.
We believe that to achieve peace we have to reach
back and deep into the component parts of the solid
foundation required for peaceful and secure societies.
We believe in what we have often heard about the need
to win hearts and minds in order to win the war. That is

15-3704671/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

true. However, we do not need to win the hearts and minds
of our enemies, but of our own children, youth, elderly
and leaders. We can win over their hearts and minds
in favour of peace, not by imposition but by conviction
demonstrated by achieving all the Goals contained
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
including the assurance that the plight of island nations
at risk of being swallowed up by rising sea levels and
the deteriorating health of the oceans are acknowledged
as a peace and security matter in the Security Council.
For us, this is the best way for the Council to ensure
equal protection and security for everyone, with no one
being left behind. Accordingly, we demonstrate that it
is the quality rather than quantity of peacebuilding that
is the key to successful peacekeeping.
During the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we heard many times that
the new framework would help us to move away from
business as usual. We therefore look to it to help us
accomplish the required paradigm shift from more
peacekeepers, more weapons and more logistical
concerns to resources directed at eradicating poverty,
educating youth and addressing the other core
pillars of long-lasting sustainable development and
peace. Quality peacebuilding will be achieved when
experienced peacekeepers can be deployed quickly
before a conflict worsens and when doctors, teachers,
engineers and civil servants of all kinds are deployed to
complement the work of military and police personnel,
strengthening the often weakened core elements of a
peaceful civil society that are required to repudiate
extremism, terrorism and genocide. Consequently, the
mandates arising in resolutions of the Security Council
must be clear, dynamic and, most importantly, forge
genuine and durable partnerships that hold the Council
accountable to the citizens that it serves.
I have one final thought to offer. We think that the
significant celebration of the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations should take place in
2030, because only then will we have an indication as
to whether the commitments we made in Sendai, Addis
Ababa, New York and Paris resulted in a paradigm shift
in the way we viewed, understood and took action on
the issues of security, development and root causes of
conflict, of the actions we committed to take in the
year 2015. For instance, did we learn from the model
that shows that there had been development advances
in nations that had not had a war on their soil in the
70 years of existence of the United Nations, compared

72/86

17/11/2015

to a lack of development in those that had suffered
conflicts? And did we take action accordingly? We
hope that, in 2030, there will be less sadness because
of terrorism and poverty and more development and
peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Spoerri: The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) very much welcomes this debate and
the Security Council’s concern for conflict prevention.
It may seem unusual for the ICRC to speak in a
debate on conflict prevention and peaceful societies.
The ICRC does not engage in the politics of conflict
prevention, development and peace. We do, however,
engage in the suffering and deprivations of armed
conflict on a daily basis, and it is from that suffering
that we are speaking to the Council today. The ICRC’s
mandate and mission mean that it sees first-hand the
devastation that armed conflict brings to people’s
individual lives and to the fabric and institutions of the
societies in which they live. It is from this experience
that we want to address the Council with four general
observations.
First, the humanitarian consequences of prolonged
armed conflict are driving many millions of people
deeper and deeper into poverty. The humanitarian
consequences of armed conflict cause enormous
development reversals as infrastructure and basic
services are destroyed, people are forcibly displaced
and whole communities are impoverished by conflict.
In protracted conflicts in particular, we observe the
entrenchment of poverty for millions of people, which
will be extremely hard to reverse and is in stark contrast
to the ambitions of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) of the United Nations.
Secondly, the ICRC and other humanitarian
organizations are increasingly engaged in development
tasks in today’s armed conflicts. In the absence of
conflict prevention and development institutions,
our humanitarian operations are frequently required
to support basic services and critical development
infrastructure in health care, water, sewerage,
electricity, heating, veterinary care, agricultural inputs
and food. In the absence of development investment,
millions of conflict-affected people depend on these
fragile services for their survival. In many armed
conflicts, particularly in urban settings, the ICRC
is supporting long-term services and sophisticated

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

infrastructure with short-term humanitarian budgets.
In many places, that means that we are engaged in what
may be described as “development holds” to prevent
even further degradation of infrastructure and services,
often for years at a time. To better meet these sustained
humanitarian needs, we need closer links between
humanitarian and development planning and financing.
Thirdly, several features of contemporary armed
conflict are in danger of making conflicts increasingly
intractable and protracted. We notice that conflict
spreads whenever it is not effectively addressed, and
does not stop at State borders. In many of our operations
today, we are managing a regional response to armed
conflicts that spread and damage people’s lives across
whole regions, as, for example, is the case today in the
Middle East and the Lake Chad Basin. We also notice
that the fragmentation and mutation of armed conflict
contribute to the protractedness of armed conflict and
the increase of poverty and suffering. Many States and
many non-State armed groups are directly involved as
belligerents in several of today’s armed conflicts. In our
experience, the active engagement of so many parties
to a conflict tends to create a momentum towards the
mutation and continuity of that conflict rather than its
resolution and termination.
Finally, we feel bound to observe that poverty
and suffering are much reduced in armed conflicts
in which international humanitarian law is widely
respected. It is evident to us that when international
humanitarian law is not respected, the prospects of the
people affected by conflict are significantly worsened
and the opportunities for peace are greatly reduced
by spirals of revenge and retaliation. These set in
motion new grievances and increase the intractability
of many armed conflicts today. We therefore urge the
Council to work actively with States to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law with the intention
of reducing suffering and poverty in armed conflicts,
de-escalating the levels of violence and shortening the
duration of armed conflict.
The ICRC thanks the Council very much for giving
us this opportunity to take part in this important
debate and to share our experience with it today. We
recognize the Council’s determination to address
conflict prevention across all three pillars of the United
Nations work. We hope that our observations will help
to inform the Council’s deliberations.

S/PV.7561

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me join others in
thanking the presidency of the United Kingdom for
organizing the debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Bouchamaoui and Ambassador Skoog
for their briefings.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
In addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.
First, let me join previous speakers in strongly
condemning the despicable acts of terrorism that took
place in Paris a few days ago, other atrocious acts of
cowardice and terror we witnessed recently in Lebanon,
and the downing of the Russian aircraft. Terrorism has
no borders and no nationality, and none of us is immune
to the threat. Hence, it is only through our unity — the
unity of international community — that humankind
will be able to vanquish darkness.
Many examples in modern history demonstrate
how security and development are intertwined in
pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations. The
root causes of conflict are often the political, economic
and social imbalances in society. We must therefore
focus on good governance. Upholding the rule of law,
strengthening independent judicial mechanisms, ending
impunity, and ensuring accountability and responsive
Government are some of the crucial measures to take
on the path to ensuring sustainable development for
all. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) offers real hope for
stability, prosperity and conflict prevention worldwide.
Goal 16 on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development, access to justice and
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions is one
of the central Goals, since the progress in all other areas
largely depends on efficient governance.
The international community can and must provide
assistance in building capacities in countries struggling
with development challenges, including for the
purposes of preventing and combating terrorism and
crime. But national ownership and determination to
solve the problems, coupled with democratic reforms,
good governance practices, the rule of law and the
eradication of corruption are essential prerequisites. As
a country that has undergone a dramatic change over
the past decade through reform and modernization,

15-3704673/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

and as a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Georgia stands ready to share its successful experience
with fellow Member States in the streamlining of all
segments of the public sector, the establishment of a
viable police force, the eradication of corruption and
the provision of swift and efficacious Government
services to all citizens.
As we speak on the need for inclusive societies,
let me stress how important it is that these goals be
applied equally to people living in conflict-affected
areas. The two Georgian regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia are under illegal foreign
military occupation. Georgian citizens residing in
the Russian occupied territories are deprived of the
minimal safeguards for their fundamental rights and
freedoms. The most vulnerable groups of population
cannot receive education in their mother tongue and
freedom of movement and other fundamental rights are
constantly denied. Let me reiterate that the men, women
and children living in conflict situations should enjoy
the benefits of development and progress like the rest
of us, and the international community should spare no
effort to that end.
Although Georgia continues to be prevented from
directly and fully addressing the needs of its citizens in
the occupied regions, in cooperation with United Nations
agencies, such as the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, we are implementing
crucial confidence-building measures and promoting
people-to-people contacts through meetings among
professional communities, the training of experts and
teachers, study visits and other activities. One of our
key priorities is the provision of health-care services to
those living beyond the occupation line, provided that
the people in need are not prevented by the occupying
Power from accessing these services. Addressing
the needs of the local population on both sides of the
artificial divide and improving the living conditions of
the sundered communities is important not only from
a purely humanitarian point of view, but also from the
human security and peacebuilding perspectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the
outset to thank the United Kingdom for having taken
the initiative to convene an open debate of the Security
Council on the issue of security, development and the

74/86

17/11/2015

root causes of conflict. There can be no doubt that this
is a key issue that must be considered by many United
Nations bodies, commensurate with their mandate and
area of expertise.
The link between security and development
and understanding the root causes of conflict is
key to addressing certain development issues at the
international level, in particular security threats that
are played out in military confrontations or strike at
the heart of capital cities, as we saw recently in the
senseless terrorist attacks on Baghdad, Beirut and
Paris. We also face challenges resulting from poverty,
famine and lack of health-care services, as well as those
relating to sustainable development. We must therefore
consider all of these factors when devising strategies to
address existing issues.
I should like to touch on several points that we
deem key to understanding the link between security
and development.
First, the causes of conflict include poverty,
unemployment, economic and social inequality, hatred,
exclusion, lack of education or access thereto, and
challenges linked to climate change. All of these have
been exacerbated by the global economic and financial
crisis and the lack of financial resources to deliver on
sustainable development, particularly through official
development assistance. We must therefore adopt a
strategy of preventive diplomacy in order to tackle
the root causes of conflict and prevent their spread or
escalation. Priority must be accorded to prevention in
order to bring about sustainable development for all
States and all levels of society, eliminate poverty and
exclusion, and promote democracy, the rule of law and
gender equality.
Secondly, the spread of terrorism has exacerbated
the situation and complicated the picture. Terrorism
represents a threat to international peace and security, as
well as to sustainable development. Therefore, fighting
terrorism is one of the most important elements in the
context of the link between security and development.
Thirdly, we need to identify the causes of conflict,
which are very complex. Sometimes they are clear, such
as the ones we have cited, but others must be further
investigated. Here I am thinking in particular of those
related to the fact that the international community
has not discharged its duty to address decades-long
conflicts that give rise to continuing hatred and deprive
peoples of justice and development opportunities. Like

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

cancer cells, they can have only negative effects, and
here I am thinking of the Palestinian question.
Fourthly, national responsibility is most important
in terms of conflict prevention and the protection of
civilians, in keeping with international instruments
and Security Council resolutions. It is also important
to respect the priorities and requirements set out by
national authorities, in line with national sovereignty,
so as to bring about social stability and peace. That
requires support for regional initiatives, in particular
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development.
Fifthly, dealing with security and development
issues and the root causes of conflict is a complex
undertaking that should involve multiple United
Nations bodies. We must not, however, allow any
United Nations organs to encroach on the mandates of
others. We must not burden the Security Council with
issues such as sustainable development, which does not
fall under its mandate, in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations. We must not allow the work of the
Security Council to overlap with that of other bodies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like first and foremost to convey our heartfelt
sympathy to and express our full solidarity with France
in connection with the horrific attacks that struck Paris
and the surrounding region last Friday. The horror of
those attacks, only a few days after the events in Beirut
and many other places, is a painful reminder that no one
is safe and that strengthened international cooperation
is imperative to combat the scourge of terrorism, which
can never be justified.
(spoke in English)
I wish to thank the British presidency for the spirit
in which it started the work of the Council this month,
and we specifically appreciate, as reported to Member
States by the President of the General Assembly, that the
overall intention of the United Kingdom is to conduct
the Council’s business in as transparent and interactive
a manner as possible. We look forward to seeing all
Security Council members following in this trailblazing
endeavour. I also thank the British presidency for having
convened this open debate and appreciate the valuable
contributions of the Secretary-General; our colleague
Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui.

S/PV.7561

Development, security and human rights are
intertwined, a linkage that Algeria has always
strongly defended, including by promoting this idea,
today enshrined in Sustainable Development Goal
16. Numerous General assembly resolutions, as well
as continued efforts to improve the working methods
of the Peacebuilding Commission, confirm this
correlation. We also want to stress the importance of the
normative work on women and peace and security and
call for its implementation, in particular with respect
to the prevention pillar, the participation of women in
peace processes and countering violent extremism and
terrorism.
We also stress the importance of cross-border
cooperation for the resolution of disputes and the
equal priority to be given to the implementation of
post-conflict reconstruction programmes for States
transitioning out of conflict.
Addressing the root causes of conflict means that
we have to perform a thorough examination of past
experiences, draw and learn lessons therefrom, and
admit that the symptoms, however dire and harsh,
are just the consequences of deeper problems and
imbalances. If we do not investigate the reasons that led
to conflict, we will continue our ever-riskier journey
into uncharted and uncertain territory.
We also deem it vital to stress that the Council and
Member States, collectively and individually, should
be careful about taking any action that might lead to
institutional vacuums or lawlessness in countries that
were or are still on the agenda of the Council. Thinking
of the day after is also important, and working with
regional organizations is equally so.
In this regard, I would like to remind the Council that
Africa faces complex, multidimensional challenges. I
wish in this regard to underline the fact that the African
Union has taken a number of initiatives, including
the African Peace and Security Architecture, which
supports efforts aimed at the prevention, management
and resolution of crises and conflicts, post-conflict
reconstruction and development. It is critical for us
Africans to identify potential conflict situations as
early as possible. The African Union continental earlywarning system, created in 2002, is yet another such
initiative and provides timely advice on potential
conflicts and threats to peace and security.
At the regional level, we support preventive
action ranging from institution-building to preventive

15-3704675/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

diplomacy, which protects and strengthens State
sovereignty. In that regard, Algeria’s actions in the
promotion of dialogue as a solution to the crisis in
our neighbourhood has been widely recognized. The
International Crisis Group, in its 12 October report on
the Middle East and North Africa, noted that Algeria
has emerged as an indispensable broker of stability
in North Africa and the Sahel. It emphasized the fact
that Algeria has at key moments promoted dialogue
and State-building as the best means for lifting its
neighbours out of crisis.
While we are in favour of the development of
Security Council tools for the prevention of conflicts,
ranging from the use of peace operations to interventions
through statements, resolutions and consultations with
the Peacebuilding Commission, we emphasize that the
Security Council may not be the only body that should
address the development, peace and security nexus.
Peace, security, inclusive institutions, the rule of law
and access to justice should also be deliberated in the
relevant forums: the Human Rights Council, the Sixth
Committee, the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly.
We believe that enhanced coordination among
all bodies under the Charter of the United Nations,
including the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Economic and Social Council, could contribute to
a better understanding of the interlinkages between
development issues and conflict prevention. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s plan of action on
preventing violent extremism, to be issued later this
year, since terrorism and violent extremism threaten
to reverse much of the development progress made in
recent decades.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
presiding over the Security Council this month and to
express thanks for the concept note (S/2015/845, annex)
for our open debate today on security, development and
the root causes of conflict. I also wish to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his valuable briefing, which
outlined the different tools and mechanisms available
to prevent conflicts.
Our debate today on the prevention of conflicts is
very important. It is one of a series that have addressed
this issue, together with a number of resolutions, such

76/86

17/11/2015

as resolution 2171 (2014), which specifies the Council’s
role in this regard.
Many parts of the world are witnessing conflicts
and wars that are very complex and more intertwined
than ever before. The number of civil wars has increased
from 4 to 11 since 2008, and the nature of war and
conflict has changed. Currently, we see many conflicts
and wars inside countries and inside societies, whereas
in the past they tended to be between two countries.
Countries have employed many strategies to attain
purposes that conflict with the principles underlying
the work of the United Nations.
Against that background, we must address the
issue of conflicts and how to prevent them using the
tools and mechanisms available to us. Today, as a result
of conflicts, more than 60 million people either have
been internally displaced or have fled as refugees. In
2015, more than $20 billion was spent on humanitarian
assistance and more than $8 billion on peacekeeping
operations. That tragic situation, the like of which has
not been witnessed since the Second World War, pushes
us to work together to benefit from the experiences of
the past and to find new ways of preventing conflicts
and of resolving them peacefully.
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations gives
the Secretary-General the right to bring to the attention
of the Security Council any matter which in his opinion
may threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security. That is why we call on the Council to
activate the mechanisms needed to establish an earlywarning system for the purpose of preventing potential
conflicts from breaking out. We must reinforce the
support available to the relevant bodies, including
the regional organizations, as they play a crucial role.
International diplomacy and mediation and an earlywarning system are the main elements that we should
focus on to prevent conflicts. It is also important to
consult the country offices of the United Nations.
There is no straight path to peace, only a tortuous
one. The post-2015 development agenda has opened
up new horizons for achieving peace. In the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1, annex), Goal 16, on the
establishment of peaceful societies and making justice
available for all, confirms the strong link between
peace and development. There can be no peace without
development and no development without peace. That

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

is why we must deal with any conflict before it gets out
of hand.
Finally, I wish to repeat that the Security Council
needs to assume its responsibilities in maintaining
peace and security, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations. It also needs to work on dealing with the many
important issues, such as the Palestinian conflict and
the Syrian crisis. The fact that those conflicts remain
unresolved shows how paralysed the Council is.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
extend our deepest condolences to France, Lebanon and
the Russian Federation on the recent terrorist attacks.
As a country that has been a target of terrorism,
most recently in Ankara in October, Turkey stands in
solidarity with the international community in the fight
against this universal scourge. I also wish to express
our appreciation to the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this debate.
People are at the centre of sustainable development,
and the fundamental conditions for achieving
development are peace and security. Preventing
conflict, ensuring peaceful societies and promoting
good governance and the rule of law are crucial
enablers of sustainable development. Our 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), including its Goals and targets, not
only recognizes but also gives concrete expression to
the link between peace and sustainable development,
especially through Goal 16. Achieving sustainable
development paves the way for peace, while stability in
turn sets the stage for economic growth and sustainable
development.
In our view, both the quality and the quantity of
growth are important. We need to strive to ensure
that economic growth is inclusive and its benefits are
shared by all. Inequality, not just of incomes but also
of opportunities, is a source of social and political
instability. That fact is the starting point of the overall
emphasis that Turkey has placed on the concept of
inclusivity, notably throughout most of its presidency
of the Group of 20.
Protracted armed conflicts and transnational threats
against today’s security environment are inherently
political issues and require political solutions, while
poverty, social inequalities, the lack of inclusivity,

S/PV.7561

the inefficient use of natural resources and ecological
degradation are often among the causes that lead to
crises. Addressing those causes will have a positive
impact on the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
Conflict prevention, peacebuilding, the promotion
of durable peace and development are among the core
United Nations activities that should be carried out
using a comprehensive approach. Effective mediation,
based on political inclusivity and technical expertise, is
a cost-effective tool in conflict prevention and conflictsolving processes, especially with regard to addressing
the root causes of problems.
Another pillar of our strategic focus on United
Nations efforts to sustain peace under the Charter of the
United Nations is a stronger emphasis on peacebuilding
alongside peace operations, with a view to addressing
the full conflict cycle. The broad prospect of
peacebuilding, encompassing a wide range of activities
from development partnership to institution-building
and from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
to security-sector reform processes and the promotion
of human rights and the rule of law, makes it all the
more relevant in a comprehensive approach.
We believe that a focus on the interdependence of
migration and development also merits attention in this
debate. Turkey has a long history as a crossroads of
migration. It is our firm belief that migration can be
a significant driver of development. There exist many
examples of the positive contributions that migrants
have made to the economic growth and sustainable
development of both source and destination countries.
On the other hand, we cannot achieve our
Sustainable Development Goals without addressing
complex
humanitarian
emergencies.
Effective
measures must be taken by all to meet the needs of
people living in areas affected by humanitarian crises.
International cooperation should also strengthen
the resilience of communities hosting refugees and
strengthen burden- and responsibility-sharing, without
at the same time cutting back on much needed official
development assistance. That is why Turkey has long
been defending the necessity of a stronger emphasis on
the humanitarian-development nexus.
Taking only palliative measures and ignoring the
need to tackle the root causes of refugee and irregular
migrant flows would yield only temporary and limited
success. We need to focus on eliminating or at least
reducing push factors, like wars, conflicts, human

15-3704677/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

rights violations and economic deprivation in the
countries of origin. Inclusiveness is important not only
within countries, but also among countries. After all,
we now have a new universal sustainable development
Agenda, whose fundamental commitment is to leave no
one behind.
We certainly have a moral obligation to address
inequality, but we also need to address inequality
because we know that it hinders economic growth.
We need to create a more inclusive and equitable
system of global partnerships with the engagement
of all advanced, emerging and developing countries
based on mutual respect and benefit. Additionally,
the enhancement of the representation and voice of
developing countries in the global decision-making
architecture are necessary in order to strengthen the
resilience of global governance, as well as the trust
of people in our system. Unfortunately, in too many
cases, inaction by the Security Council on international
peace and security issues has had a direct affect on the
well-being of peoples. A more democratic, transparent,
effective, accountable and representative Council
will be key in addressing the challenges related to
development and peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the African States.
Let me, at the outset, express our thoughts and
prayers for all those who continue to suffer from the
scourge of terrorism, not only most recently in France,
but also in Lebanon and Egypt.
We are deeply grateful to the United Kingdom
presidency for calling for this debate at this time. We
would also like to thank Secretary of State Greening
and the Secretary-General for their statements. We
associate ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The United Nations, as we know, was founded to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to reaffirm our faith in fundamental human rights,
and to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom. The Organization has since
then become the fundamental actor in joint efforts
to seek common solutions to common problems that
challenge humanity. The multiplicity of terrorist acts,

78/86

17/11/2015

the spread of organized crime and the growth of illegal
economic activities in the world are impediments to the
development that we seek and represent a growing risk
to the stability and survival of some of our Member
States.
Terrorism remains one of the most potent threats
to international peace and security. The recent events
in Kenya, Lebanon, France and Egypt have once again
demonstrated the need for the Organization to assume
its role as the preeminent multilateral forum to address
today’s crises and challenges. In that context, let me
state Africa’s strongest condemnation of all terrorist
acts. We call on the international community to adopt a
zero-tolerance policy towards all acts of terrorism and
to eradicate the structures of terrorism, its network of
supporters, its financing centres, its training facilities
and all those who seek to establish and foster incubators
of hate.
It is patently clear to all of us that national solutions
are no longer sufficient to meet the current security
threats, which are cross-border in structure and
complex in nature. It is time for the United Nations to
demonstrate the necessary political will to agree on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. It
is time to consolidate the normative framework against
the increasingly complex and terrorist challenges that
we face around the world.
In this era of global transformation, peace, security
and development have become ever more closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The African
States emphasize the importance of peace and security
as a necessary precondition for development, not only
on our continent, but in the rest of the world. There can
never be development in the absence of true peace and
stability.
As we proceed to implement the post-2015
development agenda, adopted recently in the form
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), the African States
would like to emphasize the imperative need for
peaceful and inclusive societies as a key component
for sustainable development. The African continent
has made remarkable progress in becoming more
prosperous and peaceful. In January of this year, in
Addis Ababa, the African Union adopted Agenda 2063
as its 50-year transformative agenda for peace, security
and development. Over the past two decades, Africa
has made considerable progress in strengthening

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

democratic governance through the support of regional
and subregional organizations. The continent has
adopted measures to address tensions and the threat
of conflict. It also continues to monitor and promote
human rights, build peace and security, and consolidate
good governance.
Much has been done, but much still remains to
be done. The African States note the need for greater
efforts to implement the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as envisaged in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nations. The peaceful settlement of disputes
can only be achieved through frank and open dialogue
based on mutual respect. Conflict prevention is a much
more cost-effective and sustainable option than force.
Mediation and prevention efforts, facilitation and the
use of good offices remain central tools in managing
situations of imminent and latent conflict. The African
Union’s contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts demonstrates its strong commitment to the
search for peace and stability, and it stands ready to
increase its profile in the peacekeeping landscape.
The ongoing 10-year review of the peacebuilding
architecture is timely. It compels all of us to face headon the challenges of building and sustaining peace and
the ever-present risk of lapses or relapses into conflict.
The broad focus of the review will be critical, given
the need for comprehensive, integrated approaches
in that area. We welcome the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490), which, in our view,
covers most of the discussions and recommendations
made repeatedly over the years by Member States,
including countries on the Peacebuilding Commission’s
agenda, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations, civil
society and partners, such as the international financial
institutions.
We must take the bold steps needed to translate
our deliberations into a resolution that can bring about
the transformation that we all seek. Peacebuilding is
the work of all and must be at the core of the work of
this Organization. The question is, of course, how to
achieve peace and progress without creating avenues
for waste or unnecessary duplication within the
Organization. The business of peacebuilding must
inform our inputs and must focus our minds on making
sure that the recommendations contained in the reports
of the Advisory Group become a reality. Of primary
importance is the need to deploy the necessary resources

S/PV.7561

to meet our overall aspirations of peace, security and
development.
In conclusion, as we consider the critical link
between peace, security and development, partnerships
with regional organizations and other relevant
institutions must be given consideration.
We also believe that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and other actors must focus on the broader
ideal and principle of sustaining peace before and after
conflict. All principal organs of the United Nations and
the United Nations system must focus on that broader
objective, and we must consider new approaches that
can break down institutional silos and ensure that we
work collectively as one.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the member States
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC).
SADC aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone on
behalf of the African Group.
Allow me to join in expressing our heartfelt
condolences to the families and friends of the vicims
following the tragic events in France and elsewhere, in
which a significant number of human lives were lost as
a result of terrorism and violent conflict.
Allow me also to sincerely commend the British
presidency of the Security Council for the initiative
to hold this open debate at a time when there are
serious threats to international peace and security.
Today’s open debate, on security, development and the
root causes of conflict, is very timely inasmuch as it
affords the international community the opportunity
to reflect on this important matter. The tragedies the
world is currently experiencing serve to underscore the
need to intensify global efforts towards the effective
management and prevention of conflicts and terrorism
in all their forms and manifestations. SADC sincerely
commends the Council’s continued engagement with
Member States on pertinent issues concerning the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The discourse regarding security and development
is often a difficult one. While some would argue that
security is needed to enhance development potential,

15-3704679/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

others would advance arguments to the contrary. That
clearly demonstrates the fact that the two issues are
interrelated and that the attainment of both should be our
ultimate aim. A deficit in either could result in untold
suffering, leading to conflict. SADC believes that peace
and security are prerequisites for the attainment of
sustainable development. The two provide a conducive
environment for development, which in turn results in
improved quality of life for our citizens.
Many reasons have been advanced as root causes
of conflict throughout the world. We often see nations
and communities tear each other apart for reasons
such as the inequitable distribution of resources, the
lack of good governance, social exclusion, political
intolerance or environmental conflicts, among many
others. Consequently, where such conflict situations
exist, democracy and the rule of law are undermined,
resulting in the suppression of individuals by the very
machinery that ought to protect them. That glaring
failure by States to fulfil their obligations to protect
their citizens can be attributed to weak governance
institutions, poor leadership, the marginalization
of certain communities and the lack of inclusive
development. In essence, conflict can be attributed to
the absence of a positive social contract between those
in power and civil society.
As the United Nations marks its seventieth year
of existence, it remains as relevant as ever as the only
universally agreed platform for addressing international
disputes through peaceful means. In accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
is entrusted with the responsibility for maintaining
of international peace and security. In that context,
the Council needs to be more proactive and to invest
more in conflict prevention, mediation and arbitration,
instead of attempting to manage conflicts that are
already raging.
As we scan the horizon, any scenario that exhibits
the potential for conflict should be met with unwavering
resolve and all appropriate tools at the disposal of
the international community should be put to use. In
that regard, it is important to address any simmering
situation before it escalates into a full-blown conflict
that could lead to untold suffering and devastation,
especially on the part of vulnerable social groups.
While acknowledging the primacy of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security, there are equally more important partners that

80/86

17/11/2015

must be involved. First and foremost, States and their
citizens must play a leading role in finding solutions
to their problems. Imposing solutions and maintaining
a monopoly on making peace is counterproductive.
It is therefore prudent for regional and subregional
mechanisms to be at the fore of efforts to promote
sustainable peace and development. For that reason,
SADC remains committed to contributing to a stable,
just and peaceful security architecture by strengthening
effective, inclusive and accountable national and
regional institutions. In that respect, the SADC nations
have entered into bilateral and regional peace and
security frameworks that seek, among other things, to
address conflict within and among States.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate SADC’s
constructive engagement with and commitment to
working with the United Nations and with our own
continental body, the African Union, to enhance
international security and development. Taking place
against the backdrop of devastating terrorism attacks
on innocent civilians, today’s debate should serve to
strengthen our resolve to combat conflict and all other
forms of insecurity. We owe it to the multitudes of our
people, our children and posterity to ensure a safe and
secure environment that allows the human spirit to
thrive to its fullest potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Andanje (Kenya): I would like to begin by
conveying my Government’s message of sympathy and
condolence to the Governments of France and Lebanon
following the recent terrorist atrocities.
My delegation commends the presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important debate.
We are delighted to make our contribution.
Kenya aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
by the representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of the
African Group.
Kenya attaches high priority to conflict prevention
and to addressing the root causes of conflict, in equal
importance, with regard to their impact on development.
They are inseparably connected. It is indisputable that
development has no worse enemy than war. Conflicts
result in death, suffering and the displacement of entire
populations. We recognize that the absence of peace and

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

security in countries in conflict impedes sustainable
development. Kenya therefore welcomes Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 16, on peace, justice and
strong institutions. Nevertheless, we are convinced
that Goal 16 is more of a development challenge and
that it should not be seen as a security challenge. It
should serve as a framework that supports the effective
implementation of the rest of the SDGs.
My delegation fully supports efforts aimed at
assisting countries emerging from conflict. We
concur with the view that this requires an approach
that incorporates and strengthens coherence across
the political, security, development and human rights
sectors — an approach that also includes the rule of
law and addresses the underlying causes of conflict.
Security and development ultimately depend on respect
for human rights and the rule of law. However, there
are other equally important, interrelated considerations
that need to be taken into account. Nothing happens
in a vacuum. Many factors impact development, both
within countries and among them. Such factors compel
us to address pressing issues in the context of existing
reality rather than in terms of the outcome we might
wish for. That can sometimes be inconvenient.
I would like to briefly underline my delegation’s
views on the connection between peace and security
and development in the context of supporting the
Council’s prevention agenda and working to better
understand the root causes of conflict. I will highlight
four issues touching on the root causes of conflict and
global governance. The point is not to revisit history
as some distant, past event. We must understand the
seeds of conflict in today’s world so that we can seek
solutions from an accurate understanding of the root
causes of conflict.
The rule of law and human rights are vital to global
security and prosperity. The rule of law must be seen to
be fair, while addressing global injustices and inequality
and promoting fairness. However, if we do not remain
true to those ideals, they will not gain legitimacy and
credibility in the eyes of others. None of the SDGs can
be achieved without genuine transformation whereby
our different communities can live together in peace
and security.
All countries should enjoy due rights, equal
opportunities and fair participation in global, economic,
financial and trade affairs. We have to give our people,
not only in each nation but also throughout the world,

S/PV.7561

the benefits of globalization, which unfortunately
accrue to a few. They must at least have a chance to
share in the prosperity.
Finally, my delegation believes that the security of
everyone is linked to that of everyone else. It is only by
working together that we can make each other secure.
As we consider how to address the issues of security,
development and the root causes of conflict, we should
not lose sight of the fact that our hope for success will
hinge on upholding collective responsibility, global
solidarity, the rule of law and mutual accountability.
The President: I thank the represenative of Kenya
for coming from his capital to participate in our debate
and, as well, for being so prompt in his timing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Let me start by joining
others in expressing my deepest condolences over the
terrorist attacks in recent weeks.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries, namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden
and my own country, Norway. I will circulate my full
statement. Let me make six points.
First, social, economic and political exclusion are
often the root causes of conflict. From Libya to Yemen
and from Burkina Faso to Mali, the international
community is trying to assist in building peace.
State-building must be an integral part of peacebuilding.
We must do more to create responsive institutions
based on the rule of law and to foster inclusive politics
in order to ensure that the social contract is established
or, indeed, re-established.
Secondly, inclusion is important for peace
agreements to be sustainable. The inclusion of local
communities, civil society and women in peace and
reconciliation processes must be given higher priority.
They bring to the table questions and concerns that are
important to the entire population. Greater investment
in gender equality and women’s empowerment is
an investment in the stability of societies and the
prevention of conflicts.
Thirdly, conflict prevention and mediation must
move to the forefront of our action. In the SecretaryGeneral’s report on resolution 2171 (2014), on conflict
prevention (S/2015/730), he calls for a collective
recommitment. We agree. Member States must let the

15-3704681/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secretary-General be more hands-on. The good offices
function is too important to be micromanaged.
Fourthly, the United Nations system is fragmented,
which weakens our ability to prevent conflict and
assist in building legitimate and resilient States. We,
the Member States, contribute to such fragmentation
through the way we fund the United Nations. We can
do much more when it comes to coordinating our
bilateral engagements. The review of the peacebuilding
architecture proposes to make so-called peacebuilding
compacts. We need to explore that and other ideas on
how to foster closer cooperation among the main actors
in peacebuilding.
Fifthly, we need more reliable sources of funding
for conflict prevention. It would save lives, but it would
also safeguard development gains. Here is a calculation:
the annual cost of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic is approximately $628 million. The Nordic
countries, indeed, supported the creation of the Mission
in 2014. The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic — in the same
place — had a budget of merely $20 million in 2012. It is
of course always difficult to make an exact calculation,
but prevention is much more cost-efficient than the
cure. We also need to invest more resources in building
local capacity for peaceful conflict resolution.
Sixthly, upholding human rights is one of the
fundamental obligations of any Government. Often
we see that deterioration in respect for human rights
can be a telling sign, an early warning, of worse things
to come. By addressing such situations and ensuring
accountability for the violation of human rights, the
worsening of those violations and conflict can be
avoided. It is therefore important that the Security
Council take those issues into account in its conflict
prevention efforts.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries urge the Council
to focus on the primacy of politics in peace operations
and in conflict prevention. The Security Council must
put the politics of inclusion at the centre of efforts to
address the root causes of conflict
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Ms. Pajević (Montenegro): Let me begin by
offering my deep condolences to the victims of terrorist
attacks in Paris and Lebanon.

82/86

17/11/2015

Montenegro is pleased to contribute to this
important open debate. We warmly thank the United
Kingdom for this initiative and for providing a platform
for our deliberations. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the other briefers, for their important
comments this morning.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
We are all aware of the urgent need for a stronger
and more effective United Nations, which is in all our
interests and without which we will not achieve peace
and security. We know that our Organization can do
better, and that without peace and security, development
will not happen.
It is hard to remember a time when more crises
were simultaneously preoccupying the United Nations,
its agencies and the broader international community.
And we know that the effects of conflicts are felt for
years to come — years of missed opportunities and
years destroying the chances of a generation.
We need to do more to prevent conflict, as we live in
an age where we have immediate access to information
about potential risks of instability in countries around
the world. The Security Council may consider making
better use of the options at its disposal so as to prevent
the emergence of conflicts. Making progress in shifting
from a culture of reaction to one of prevention continues
to be essential. The international community should
recognize that early action can prevent enormous
human suffering, fear and displacement. Needless to
say, it is far more cost-effective.
Ongoing crises are also a reason that Montenegro
believes that cases of mass atrocities ought to be tackled
with more decisiveness by the Security Council.
However, the maintenance of international peace
and security is not only the task of the United Nations
and other international organizations. It is a process of
individual, collective and institutional transformation,
a process of inclusive development based on the
universal values of respect for life, justice, solidarity,
human rights and equality between men and women.
For countries emerging from conflict with fragile
peace, institution-building and reform is crucial. Such
countries need targeted and effective international
assistance, under the auspices of the United Nations, so
that they will be in a position to provide protection for
their people and deliver basic services. We should keep

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

in mind that stability is about countries having a strong
economy and healthy and educated population, as well
as strong institutions. It is a long-term process, but it is
a prerequisite for sustainable peace.
It is important to recall that non-discrimination and
the inclusion of all groups in the workings of society is
an enormous asset and a key for stability. Transparency,
accountability and effective management and oversight,
with a view to strengthening the legitimacy and integrity
of security and judicial institutions, is also important.
Credible and legitimate governing institutions that
are able to deal with their citizens’ most pressing
needs — economic growth and jobs, basic services and
access to justice — are of the utmost importance.
The risk of extremism, terrorism, organized crime
and conflict grows where people have no education
and no hope for the future, where there is a lack of
development and exclusion. It drives migration. We
should keep in mind that the poorest people on the
world not only lack food, but they also lack justice and
jobs.
Inclusive education provides young generations
with self-confidence and ambition to be constructive
and valued members of society. And it helps to bring
about more sustainable peace. Moreover, addressing
the realization of the human rights of young people is a
way of influencing the social and economic conditions
and the well-being and livelihood of future generations.
Only by approaching the issue of violent extremism and
promoting peace and security in that way can we ever
hope to face the challenges of securing a lasting global
peace and sustainable development. And this should
be the primary responsibility of all Member States and
regions.
The problems and challenges facing the world
today require a collective global response, and no other
international organization enjoys the legitimacy and
the capacity to unite the international community in
common cause to find enduring solutions to conflicts
and to ensure sustainable peace and development.
Today’s knowledge about the root causes of conflict
is much greater; we have a wider range of potential
tools at our disposal that we should use with focus
and dedication to achieve results. Working together
towards a world that will bring about peace, security
and development is our task, our challenge and our
opportunity, and Montenegro is committed to playing
its part.

S/PV.7561

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): I should like to join other
colleagues in extending our deep condolences to the
Government of France, the French people and the
families of all the victims who lost their lives in a string
of terrorist attacks in different locations, including a
Cambodian restaurant — Le Petit Cambodge — in Paris
on 13 November. Shocked and deeply saddened by the
attacks, the Royal Government of Cambodia and the
Cambodian people strongly condemn the abominable
crimes and hope that the criminals will be severely
punished.
Permit me to congratulate you, Sir, on the United
Kingdom’s accession to the presidency of the Council
for this month, and to thank you for organizing this
open ministerial debate on the foremost relevant topic at
the present time. Your concept note (S/2015/845, annex)
compels us to generate practical results to possibly
achieve our commitments under the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), and is likely to lead us on the path to equitable
sharing and caring, which are the building blocks of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We have a long road to travel and rigorous actions are
needed.
It is unfortunate that armed conflicts continue to
rage and claim the lives of combatants and civilians
alike, including children in some parts of the world.
Violent extremism, which continues to pose threats
to peace and security, has diminished our hope. We
may understand the root causes of a conflict, yet we
do not stand united enough to join together to address
them. In that regard, my delegation buys into the ideas
contained into the concept note, which rightly points
out that the cycle of conflict arises from people being
left out, marginalized, excluded and malnourished, and
may therefore easily fall into the traps set by the groups
of violent extremism, organized crime and terrorism.
These factors could result in slow development.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
played an important role in ending conflicts around the
world and establishing peacebuilding principles in many
regions. I believe that good governance and the rule of
law are essential preconditions for stability, without
which societies cannot function, let alone flourish. All
Governments need the stability and predictability of
good governance to flourish. Such partnerships at all

15-3704683/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

levels of Government and society will be essential to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and the
broader 2030 Development Agenda.
As a post-conflict country, Cambodia has achieved
full peace. One of the solutions that can secure longlasting peace is through win-win policy that addresses
the needs of all parties concerned. Through its lessons
learned, Cambodia’s win-win policy — initiated by
Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen,
Prime Minister of Cambodia, to wipe out the political
and military organization of the Khmer Rouge at that
time — contained three key points: securing a safe
environment for peaceful coexistence; ensuring careers
for those who were willing to integrate themselves into
society; and safeguarding the property of those who
defected to the Government. Despite the this policy,
justice still needs to be handed down. In the case of
Cambodia, the top perpetrators of serious crimes have
been brought before the hybrid court whose functions
are coordinated by the Royal Government of Cambodia
and the United Nations.
In a wider context, my country believes that the culture
of peace must be cherished in the hearts of all people,
regardless of their religious beliefs. Confidence-building
measures and preventive-diplomacy, through multilateral
and regional mechanisms, must be established. Similarly,
mediating the interests of all social groups — be they
poor, unequal or of any ethnic community — and
adopting reconciliation in a step-by-step process on a
variety of levels will ensure durable peace and security.
The United Nations branches have their own role to
play in establishing more peaceful and secured societies.
However, conflicting interests have diminished the
core value of each entity. I believe that we have not
yet exhausted our efforts to save the whole world from
sliding into conflict.
In conclusion, I hope that our debate today will
send a good message to the outside world that the
United Nations is relevant in its endeavours to maintain
international peace and security. In this regard, we
must work to ensure the fundamental freedoms of all
humankind. We must work to enhance and respect
human dignity, international norms, equity and
inclusiveness for all nations and population.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.

84/86

17/11/2015

Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): On behalf of
the delegation of Azerbaijan, I would like to offer
our deepest condolences to the families, people and
Governments of the victims of recent terrorist attacks.
Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Ensuring peace, security and development is a
common aspiration that was set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations, to which we solemnly recommitted
ourselves on 23 October. It is also an integral part of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and should remain a core
priority for international cooperation. The United
Nations system, in particular the Security Council,
is now required to focus as never before on the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In this statement, we would like to focus on
unresolved protracted conflicts, their implications for
peace and sustainable development, and the role of the
Council in their resolution.
Today, many armed conflicts around the world
are enduring due to multicausal factors, actors and
root causes. Situations of illegal occupation are often
the most difficult conflicts to resolve. The persistence
of such conflicts perpetuates cycle of violence and
undermines regional stability. They have already
resulted in the destruction of lives and property, the
mass displacement of people, a region-wide refugee
crisis, the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
and organized crime.
Such situations require the serious attention and
urgent action of the Security Council. In this context,
primary focus should be placed on the implementation
of the Council’s resolutions and on greater use of
enforcement measures, including diplomatic, financial
and economic sanctions to prevent and combat the status
quo. The implementation of the Council’s resolutions
is key to strengthening the role and legitimacy of the
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security and to strengthening confidence in the capacity
of the United Nations to advance peace.
All efforts aimed at preventing and resolving
conflicts must be based on the principle of respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States. Resolute and targeted measures
are required to end impunity for the most serious

15-37046

17/11/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

crimes within international community and to bring the
perpetrators to justice.
The Nagorno Karabakh conflict between Armenia
and Azerbaijan is a notorious example of a protracted
conflict situation. Instead of genuinely engaging in
efforts to promote peace and regional stability, Armenia
pursues its military aggression against Azerbaijan. Yet
in 1993, the Security Council adopted resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), which
reaffirm the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the Republic of Azerbaijan, including the Nagorno
Karabakh region, recognize and condemn the fact of
invasion, and demand the immediate, complete and
unconditional withdrawal of the occupying Armenian
forces.
Unfortunately, these resolutions are yet to
be implemented. In the meantime, the occupying
Power consolidates the status quo and carries on
with its illegal practices. These include but are not
limited to indiscriminate attacks against the civilian
population along the front line, systematic violations
of the ceasefire regime, forced demographic changes
to prevent the displaced Azerbaijani population from
exercising its right to return, illegal settlements on
the occupied territories, and illegal exploitation of
natural resources. Azerbaijan is interested in finding
the quickest possible resolution to the conflict, but it
can be resolved only on the basis of full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan
within its internationally recognized borders. The
sooner Armenia withdraws its troops from the
territories, the sooner we will be able to fully mobilize
to work to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Maintaining international peace and security is
central to the Organization, especially the Security
Council. The Council’s primary duty is to resolve
existing conflicts and prevent potential ones, and that
is the only way it should contribute to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals.
In conclusion, on behalf of the delegation of
Azerbaijan, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for convening this open debate.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s debate featured many speakers

S/PV.7561

discussing many different things, and that has only
strengthened our conviction that the Security Council is
not the place to examine this issue. On top of that, some
delegations attempted, with a persistence worthy of a
better aim, to use the forum of the Council to express
views that have no relation to today’s discussion in
order to promote their national agendas, particularly
the Ukrainian delegation. If the topic of the conflict
in Donbas is to be raised, it is worth recalling the
overthrow of the State in 2014, which was achieved
with the support of a number of Western States and
which began with bloodshed in Kyiv, and subsequently
in other parts of the country as well. I would like to
recommend to the Ukrainian delegation, which will be
taking a seat on the Security Council next year, that
they learn to restrict themselves to the subject under
discussion and not to put on a political performance on
the same issue every time.
The President: Severaldelegations have asked
for the floor to make further statements. I intend to
accede to their requests. However, I would remind all
delegations that are not Council members that they are
limited to one additional statement only.
I now call on the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I will be very brief.
Listening to the statement of the Azerbaijani delegation,
one comes to a very simple conclusion. Azerbaijan has
turned Armenophobia into State propaganda at a level
that is far beyond injurious. That alarming assessment
has been voiced by international and intergovernmental
institutions that specialize in combating racism. The
speaker from Azerbaijan was referring to four Security
Council resolutions that are more or less 20 years old.
Meanwhile, Azerbaijan continues to reinterpret those
resolutions, whose core requirement was the immediate
cessation of all hostile acts and the establishment of a
durable ceasefire. Azerbaijan not only failed to comply
with that requirement, it intensified its aggression and
its military operation against Armenia in Nagorno
Karabakh, using mercenaries closely linked to notorious
terrorist organizations.
Regardless of Azerbaijan’s distractive stance,
Armenia will continue its efforts to settle the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict by exclusively peaceful means
and on a basis of the purposes, principles and norms
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Ukraine.

15-3704685/86

S/PV.7561

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the representative of the Russian Federation for his
recommendations, and I hope we will see each other
more frequently around this table next year.
I would first like to say that our statement fully
coincided with the concept paper distributed before the
meeting (S/2015/845, annex) and with the topic under
discussion. I also have a very short recommendation for
the Russian delegation. For us, a key goal is not just
assembling here in order to discuss problems; it is also
to solve those problems, and in order to do that, we first
have to comply with the Security Council’s resolutions.
I would like to remind the Russian representative
of resolution 2202 (2015), and I really hope that his
delegation will be able to start complying with its
provisions and make every possible effort to fulfil
those of the Minsk agreements as well.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): It has become
a feature of Armenian policy to level accusations at
a country whose territory it continues to occupy and
whose civilians it has brutally massacred and continues
to kill on a daily basis. It is unfortunate that the forum
that the Security Council provides has once again
been abused for the purpose of disseminating lies.
The arguments on the Armenian side are particularly
astonishing, and they are voiced in the Security
Council, the very Chamber in which four resolutions
were adopted that reaffirmed the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Azerbaijan, including the Nagorno
Karabakh region, recognized and condemned the fact
of invasion and demanded the immediate, complete and
unconditional withdrawal of the occupying Armenian
forces.
To refresh the Armenian representative’s memory,
it should be noted that it was the Armenian side that
rejected the timetable for implementing the measures
in the Security Council’s resolutions. While continuing
to deny its involvement and role in the conflict, the
Government of Armenia has openly asserted its
ownership of the Nagorno Karabakh region of the
Republic of Azerbaijan and exercised effective control
over it. In its national security strategy for 2007,
Armenia claimed to be acting as a guarantor of the
security of Nagorno Karabakh. No explanation was
provided, however, as to how those guarantees, which

86/86

17/11/2015

affect of a portion of Azerbaijan’s territory, accord with
international law.
The entity that Armenia tries to portray as
independent, the Nagorno Karabakh republic, is
nothing more than an occupation regime under the
direct control of the Government of Armenia. All the
key figures of the puppet regime illegally established
by Armenia in the occupied Nagorno Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan are in fact representatives of Armenia’s
political system. The incumbent President of Armenia,
Serzh Sargsyan, started his career by chairing the
separatist self-defence committee from 1989 to 1993, a
position that he left in 1993 in order to assume the post
of Minister of Defence of Armenia. His predecessor,
Robert Kocharyan, was the first so-called President
of the occupation regime from 1992 to 1997. He then
moved to Armenia, becoming Prime Minister, and
from 1998 until 2008 served as its President.
On 15 June 2015, President Serzh Sargsyan of the
Republic of Armenia officially approved a rotation
between the Deputy Chief of the General Staff of
Armenia’s armed forces and the so-called Minister of
Defence of the separatist regime. No further comments
are necessary to explain the logic and attitude of the
Armenian leadership concerning the issue of the
protection of civilians and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be brief. I agree with my Ukrainian
colleague that the primary responsibility of the Security
Council is finding solutions to problems, however
complex they may seem.
As it happens, the Minsk agreements, as affirmed
in resolution 2202 (2015), do indeed represent a format
that provides for a solution. The main thing is to ensure
that they are implemented in their entirety, and not
selectively, without picking and choosing only those
provisions that are to the liking of one side alone.
The President: I would like to thank everyone
for participating in this very full debate and for their
patience, and the interpreters for all the work they have
done today.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

15-37046
