S/2022/39

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 January 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 26 January 2022 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8950th meeting of the Security Council,
convened on 19 January 2022 under the agenda item entitled “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question”. The interventions of the in-person
participants will be published as an official record of the Security Council (S/PV.8950).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members
for the 8950th meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements,
copies of which are enclosed: Azerbaijan (on behalf of the Movement of NonAligned Countries), Costa Rica, Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, Qatar and the Republic of Korea. These statements will be issued as
an official document of the Security Council in accordance with the procedure set
out in the letter by the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent
Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which
was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, and reference to the official document will be made in S/PV.8950.
(Signed) Mona Juul
President of the Security Council

22-00933 (E) 310122 140322

*2200933*

S/2022/39

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 120 member States of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Norway on its successful presidency
of the Security Council this month and to express our gratitude for the opportunity for
the Non-Aligned Movement to present its position on the question of Palestine, which
has historically constituted an issue of concern and vital importance to the Movement
and remains one of the longest-standing items on the Security Council’s agenda.
During the online Mid-term Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held on 13 and 14 July 2021, under the theme “The Non-Aligned
Movement at the centre of multilateral efforts in responding to global challenges”, the
ministers adopted a political declaration, stressing, inter alia, that a just, lasting and
peaceful solution to all aspects of the question of Palestine, based on internationally
endorsed parameters enshrined in the relevant United Nations resolutions, must
remain a priority on the Movement’s agenda and an ongoing responsibility of the
United Nations until it is satisfactorily resolved in all its aspects in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
In that regard, the member States of the Movement once again reaffirm
that this ongoing historic injustice, with the over 54-year Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian territory and other Arab territories at its core, continues to pose
a serious threat to regional and international peace and security, is the source of
innumerable human rights violations and violations of international humanitarian
law and requires urgent attention and action, in accordance with international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations. The
international community cannot remain paralysed on this issue and cannot accept
arguments that it is intractable or that peace is not possible at this time. International
consensus on a just solution is firm and clear. We have multilateral political and
diplomatic tools to promote the achievement of a peaceful resolution and must use
them responsibly and urgently.
The Security Council in particular has a clear responsibility for ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security. It must uphold its Charter duties
and must act to implement its own resolutions, which constitute the foundation
for a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conf lict. The question of Palestine
cannot be the exception to international law and to the authority of the Security
Council. We therefore remain deeply concerned that, for too long, this organ has
been unable to fulfil its mandate on this important question, particularly due to
the use of the veto by one permanent member. The members of the Movement
call on the Security Council to overcome its paralysis and fulfil its Charter duties
towards the Palestine question, restoring credibility to this organ and upholding
its obligations towards the achievement of a just and peaceful solution to this
protracted conf lict and tragic injustice.
The Non-Aligned Movement still believes that resolution 2334 (2016), which
reaffirmed the Security Council’s many relevant resolutions on the matter, provides
the most effective and viable path to peace, setting forth the essential requirements
and parameters for the achievement of a just outcome on the basis of the twoState solution along the 1967 lines, in accordance with the long-standing terms of
reference of peace endorsed by the international community, namely, the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including the principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, as well as ensuring
2/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

the fulfilment by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including to selfdetermination and the independence of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and a just solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
We therefore reiterate NAM’s call for full compliance with resolution 2334
(2016) and for the effective implementation of its provisions and obligations,
particularly by the occupying Power. That includes respect for States’ obligations
with regard to distinction, which is a matter central to ensuring accountability.
We also underscore the need for the intensification of international and regional
diplomatic efforts aimed at bringing an end to the Israeli occupation, which began in
1967, and achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive solution, as also called for in
resolution 2334 (2016), and we call on the Security Council to examine all practical
ways and means to ensure its implementation, as it has pledged to do.
Similarly, the member States of the Movement continue to call for full respect
for, and the implementation of, all other relevant resolutions, including with regard
to the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities and the status of occupied
East Jerusalem. Respect for United Nations resolutions and international law would
create the necessary conditions for bringing an end to the occupation, justly resolving
the conflict in all its aspects and making Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a
reality for the benefit of both peoples, the region and the international community
as a whole.
It is imperative that action be taken immediately, in line with international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, to redress the situation on the ground,
which has been marked by rising violence, particularly settler violence, and terror and
tensions that must be urgently de-escalated, and to foster an appropriate environment
in the pursuit of peace. That must include a halt to all unilateral and unlawful
measures, which serve only to embolden Israel to further pursue its illegal policies
and practices in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Actions
that undermine Security Council resolutions and the historic and legal status quo of
Jerusalem and its holy sites are provocative and dangerous, destroy the prospects for
peace and should not be supported or celebrated by any country. Threats of annexation
by Israeli officials and continued settlement activities and forced displacement of
Palestinian families from their homes and lands must be unequivocally condemned.
Any measures taken in that regard must be forthwith rejected as null and void and
without any legal effect and must be met with firm measures of accountability for
such grave breaches, including lawful countermeasures.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for full respect for the historical status quo
at the holy sites, for the Hashemite historical custodianship exercised by His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, King of Jordan, over the Christian and Muslim
holy sites in the city and for the protection of the sanctity of the holy sites.
The Non-Aligned Movement commends the efforts of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of
the Islamic Cooperation. The Movement welcomes the Call for Al-Quds/Jerusalem,
signed in Rabat on 30 March 2019 by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco
and His Holiness Pope Francis, to stress the important role that Al Quds/Jerusalem
plays as a city of tolerance and mutual respect among the people of the three
monotheistic religions and the need to preserve its specificities and features as a city
of peaceful coexistence.
In relation to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains of great concern to the
Movement, particularly the grave humanitarian situation, which regrettably continues
to deteriorate day by day. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for the
22-009333/17

S/2022/39

complete lifting of the illegal Israeli blockade, which continues to inflict untold
humanitarian, social and economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian
children, women and men in Gaza. This crisis must be comprehensively addressed
in accordance with international law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, and the relevant United Nations resolutions and in
the context of the unequivocal calls and overriding responsibility to bring an end to
the illegitimate, belligerent Israeli foreign occupation of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, since 1967.
In the absence of a solution, the member States of the Movement reiterate
their call for the continued provision of the needed humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees. The NonAligned Movement therefore stresses the importance of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), along with
other United Nations agencies and international organizations, in alleviating their
plight and calls for full support for UNRWA’s mandate to ensure the continuity of
its vital programmes and its contribution to regional stability. In the light of the
continuing financial shortfalls, we urge the international community to provide
UNRWA with sufficient and predictable funding to ensure the continuity of its
indispensable operations in all fields of operation.
As Israel has clearly abdicated on its obligations as the occupying Power to
protect the Palestinian civilian population, as prescribed by the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention, we also reiterate our long-standing call for international protection for
the Palestinian people. This is urgent in order to alleviate the dire state of insecurity
of the occupied population and prevent the loss of more innocent human lives.
Failure to do that can lead only to further escalations and the tragic loss of more
civilian lives.
In that connection, we reiterate our grave concern about the lack of
accountability for all the violations committed by Israel, many of which may amount
to war crimes. The absence of justice only fosters greater impunity, leads to the
recurrence of crimes and destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby further
diminishing the prospects for peace. We continue to call for international action,
particularly by the Security Council, to ensure a cessation of, and accountability
for, the violations that are being systematically committed by Israel against the
Palestinian civilian population under its occupation. We reiterate that Israel must
comply with its duties and responsibilities under international law and must be held
to account if it continues its blatant contempt of this organ and its international
legal obligations.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan, the Non-Aligned
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December 1981, which purports
to alter the area’s legal, physical and demographic status and its institutional
structure, as well as the Israeli measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. In that regard and in line with our
principled position, we once again demand that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981)
and fully withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to its 4 June 1967 borders, in
implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In addition, we reiterate
our condemnation of the unilateral and arbitrary proclamation by the United States
of America on “Recognizing the Golan Heights as part of Israel” and renew our call
on the Security Council to unequivocally condemn that provocative act.
Moreover, the member States of the Movement emphasize that Israel must
withdraw from all Lebanese territories, including Shaba’a farms, the Kfar Shuba

4/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

hills and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar village up to the Blue Line, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006).
In conclusion, we seize this opportunity to reiterate our call for the international
community to act collectively and responsibly, to uphold international law and to
exert all the necessary efforts in support of the just Palestinian cause, the ultimate
goal of which is to bring an end to this historic and grave injustice. We reaffirm our
commitment to promoting a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight of the Palestine
refugees, and reaffirm our support to the Palestinian people in their struggle to
achieve justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations,
including to self-determination, freedom and independence in their sovereign and
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

22-009335/17

S/2022/39

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the
United Nations, Rodrigo A. Carazo
[Original: Spanish]
Let me congratulate Norway and Foreign Minister Anniken Huitfeldt for
her successful presidency of the Security Council in the month of January and for
organizing this timely open debate on one of the longest-standing items on the
Security Council’s agenda. I would also like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing.
As we have heard repeatedly, the cycle of violence in the Middle East continues.
There will be no real and lasting solution to the conflict without political will on
both sides. The lack of a solution to the conflict not only affects the Palestinian
population but also directly affects the Israeli people. In that regard, Costa Rica
wishes to express its concern regarding the following issues.
First, the human rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territory remains
grave, in particular due to Israeli violations of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. Costa Rica reiterates the need to
ensure that the welfare and human rights of the peoples of the occupied territories,
including prisoners, detainees and humanitarian personnel, such as Juana Ruiz
Sánchez Rishmawi, be safeguarded, particularly during a serious health crisis like
the current one, which crosses borders and communities. In turn, we recognize and
reaffirm the need to safeguard Israeli rights to security and peace while paying equal
attention to the rights of Palestinians, including non-discrimination and freedom of
movement. Respect for human rights is non-negotiable.
Secondly, in 2021 we saw the highest level of settler violence since 2012.
According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than
400 settler attacks against Palestinians were recorded during the first 10 months of
2021. We therefore reiterate our concern about the expansion of illegal settlements,
settler-related violence, demolitions and confiscation of Palestinian homes, which
is steadily worsening. In particular, we deplore the creation of a commercial and
entertainment space in Ma’ale Adumim, now known as Mishor Adumim, in the
occupied West Bank. That project seeks to normalize the process of annexation of
the occupied Palestinian territory.
Moreover, five years have passed since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), which calls for an end to all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, yet Israel continues to ignore those provisions. We urge the Security
Council to take responsibility in order to ensure that its decisions be obeyed. We also
strongly call on both parties to adopt an approach based on equality and full respect
for international law and human rights.
Finally, we urge both sides to avoid unilateral actions that could further
exacerbate tensions and undermine prospects for the resumption of negotiations
and the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Preserving the viability of the two-State solution and consolidating the 20 May 2021
ceasefire are key issues that must continue to guide discussions. We urge both States
to resume the peace process on the recognized international legal parameters, based
on 1967 borders and the resolutions of the Security Council.

6/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of January and to wish you
every success in presiding over the Council’s proceedings. I also thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing.
Egypt aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, the Group of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Five years have passed since the adoption of Security Council resolution
2334 (2016), which occurred when Egypt was a member of the Security Council.
That resolution stressed the need to put an end to Israeli settlement activities and to
distinguish between the territories occupied since 1967 and the rest of Israel. Since
that time, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories has only deteriorated
further. Settlement has expanded in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
There have been attempts to expel Palestinian families from the East Jerusalem
neighbourhoods of Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan. Palestinian homes and facilities,
including those built through the support of donors, have been demolished. Murders
of unarmed Palestinians, particularly children, by the occupying forces and settlers
have increased without even the most minimal protection provided to Palestinians
by the occupying forces. Israel also issued a decision classifying six Palestinian
civil society organizations as terrorist organizations even though they are partner
organizations of international donors, not least the United Nations.
The holy sites in East Jerusalem have not been spared violations by the
occupying forces and hardline religious groups. Such violations led to the recent
escalation between the two sides last May, which resulted in the dozens of fatalities.
Egypt has repeatedly warned of that danger, stressing the need to respect the legal
and historical status quo in East Jerusalem under the patronage of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan. In the face of all this, Egypt has worked to contain the situation
and maintain the ceasefire in cooperation with all regional and international parties
concerned. We have announced the allocation of $500 million for reconstruction
projects in the Gaza Strip, to be implemented by Egyptian companies. Egypt is also
continuing its efforts to make the ceasefire permanent and look for ways to resume
negotiations. Last month, it hosted a six-party meeting that included the Foreign
Ministers and intelligence chiefs of Jordan and Palestine.
The historical responsibility of Egypt with respect to the Palestinian cause and
defence of the rights of the Palestinian people once again calls upon us to reaffirm
that the only solution that can break the vicious circle of violence and avoid further
bloodshed for the innocent is to grant the Palestinian people their legitimate rights,
above all the right to an independent Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with agreed international
references, the Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution.
To achieve that goal, the right climate must be created for the resumption
of negotiations. All unilateral actions, especially settlement, must be halted. An
international peace conference must be held in accordance with agreed international
terms of reference, and support must be provided to the Palestinian Authority and
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
so that the latter can fulfil its mandate with respect to Palestinian refugees.

22-009337/17

S/2022/39

At the regional level, Egypt supports the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and looks forward to cooperating
with him and assisting his efforts to achieve a comprehensive settlement to the
Yemeni crisis through a political solution that guarantees the unity, sovereignty and
independence of Yemen. Such a settlement must fulfil the aspirations of the Yemeni
people and end their humanitarian suffering, in accordance with the basic terms of
reference for the crisis, namely, resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementing Mechanisms, and the outcomes of the National
Dialogue Conference.
Egypt devotes attention to supporting United Nations efforts in Syria and
Yemen, where it is crucial to push forward the political process and bring about a
comprehensive ceasefire within the parameters set forth in the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We stress the need for the Security Council to play a more
proactive role to bring about political settlements of those crises, impose ceasefires
and combat terrorism and illegal armed organizations.
Egypt reiterates its deep concern about the continued launching of attacks by
vessels on other vessels at sea and the attendant threat to international freedom of
navigation. It condemns in the strongest terms the attacks against Saudi Arabia and the
escalating use of force outside internationally agreed frameworks by certain parties
in the region, a course of action that violates international law and the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and threatens regional and international peace and
security. Also of concern is the continued interference by certain countries in the
region in the internal affairs of other States and the fuelling of sectarian divisions to
stir up conflicts.
Egypt continues to support all efforts to bring about stability in Libya and
hold the postponed presidential and parliamentary elections simultaneously and as
soon as possible, with a view to putting Libyans in charge of their future.
We are working with all of our Libyan brothers to ensure that stability is
maintained during the current transition. We are following with concern recent
tensions in Tripoli, where some militias have once again taken up arms, as well as
the delay in the departure of all foreign forces, mercenaries and foreign fighters
from Libya, which is a violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the outcomes of the Berlin and Paris tracks. In that connection, Egypt supports
the efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and hopes for tangible progress
in consolidating security and military institutions in Libya, which will be a key
component of the stability desired for that country.
Egypt continues to support economic reform efforts in Libya in its capacity as
Chair of the economic working group established by the Berlin process. It is working
to bring about the consolidation of Libyan economic institutions, the reunification
of the Central Bank of Libya and transparency in revenues and expenditures, with a
view to preserving the wealth of the Libyan people, ensuring that it is spent in their
interests and not squandered and safeguarding the rights of each region.
In conclusion, Egypt reiterates that a just and comprehensive peace can
be achieved and further violence averted in the Middle East only if there is full
compliance with internationally recognized resolutions and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, especially the principles of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and non-intervention in their internal affairs, and
only if all Arab territories occupied in 1967 are liberated, especially in Palestine and
the Syrian Golan.

8/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the
United Nations, Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom
[Original: Arabic]
First of all, my country’s delegation supports the collective Arab position
on the Palestinian issue as expressed in the statement of the Group of Arab States
in New York delivered on behalf of the Group by His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt. We also support the statement of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries delivered by His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan and the statement of the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation delivered by His Excellency the Permanent Representative of the Niger.
My country’s delegation would like to thank the Permanent Mission of Norway
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month. We commend you,
Madam President, for giving Member States an opportunity to express their views
at this open debate on a subject that touches upon security, peace and stability in the
Middle East and the world as a whole.
The Security Council is meeting today to discuss the continued aggression,
persecution and repression being perpetrated in complete violation of human rights
and international law against the people of the State of Palestine and its territories
occupied for more than seven decades by the Israeli entity, which is the occupying
Power. That puts before the Council a genuine and decisive challenge in supporting
the oppressed Palestinian people.
We call on the international community to stand firmly and unequivocally
against aggressive settlement policies, activities intent upon ethnic cleansing and
demographic change, and violation of the sanctity of houses of worship and holy
places by the occupying Power. We must act to provide justice for the Palestinian
people, which is being subjected to genocide, and restore their legitimate rights
in accordance with Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. We must
take measures to ensure the protection of civilians under occupation and force the
occupying Power to withdraw from all occupied territories, including Jerusalem,
release Palestinian detainees in Israeli prisons and halt Israeli settlement measures
aimed at Judaizing the city of Jerusalem and eliminating its Arab Islamic character.
We reiterate yet again Iraq’s unconditional support for the just Palestinian
cause and the steadfastness of the Palestinian people. We reiterate our condemnation
of continued incursions into the Al-Aqsa Mosque by the occupying Power, the Israeli
entity, its practice of spreading terror among defenceless Muslim worshippers and
its brutal attacks on our people in the State of Palestine. We condemn the illegal and
illegitimate decisions on Jerusalem issued by the usurping Israeli occupier, and we
reject the denial of Palestinians’ historical right to the land of Palestine.
We reiterate my country’s firm position that a just and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question is possible only through the establishment of a
full-fledged independent Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance international resolutions. We urge action to
be taken to implement the provisions of international agreements, the Charter of
the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international
humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention. We also reject any
step that runs counter to international law in relation to Jerusalem. We call on the
States of the world that have not yet recognized the State of Palestine to do so as soon
as possible. We call for support for the aspirations of our brother Palestinian people
to exercise their legitimate rights, which would greatly enhance and consolidate
security, stability and peace in the Middle East.
22-009339/17

S/2022/39

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
It is an honour to have the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Her
Excellency Ms. Anniken Huitfeldt, preside over this meeting, knowing the historic
and active role of her country as a peacemaker and a partner for peace in the region.
We thank Norway for holding this quarterly open debate at the ministerial
level, with the hope to contribute to “renewed efforts to create a political horizon for
a solution to the conflict”, as its concept note aspires. As a positive step, we welcome
the ministerial-level meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians held in Oslo last November.
True Peace in the Middle East — a just, lasting and comprehensive peace —
can come about only through the establishment of a Palestinian State. That was
precisely the essence of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, adopted 20 years ago at
the Arab Summit in Beirut, which is still as valid today as it was two decades ago.
The Arab Peace Initiative offers a comprehensive solution to the conflict based on
the land-for-peace formula and on the basis of internationally agreed parameters,
international law rooted in all relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), and most recently 2334 (2016), which constitute the united legal
and political positions of the United Nations on the question of Palestine.
Despite all the international efforts and the resolutions of this organ, the reality
on the ground for the Palestinians has worsened in over 70 years. The cruel reality
of the occupation has not changed — Israeli military campaigns of aggression in
Gaza, an expansionist settlement policy coupled with the demolition of Palestinian
homes to make way for Israeli settlers, and efforts to deprive Palestinians of their
fundamental rights — is still the daily reality for Palestinians. All of that continues
with a growing sense of impunity.
The Security Council has to uphold its responsibility for peace and security
for the Palestinian people by implementing its own resolutions, creating a political
horizon based on respect for international law and moving beyond mere words of
condemnation. Prolonging this untenable status quo will only ensure the death of
every prospect for establishing a Palestinian State.
The Chief of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, warned again that the
lack of long-term funding for the Agency poses an “existential” threat to millions of
Palestinian refugees, including those living in Lebanon. In December, I accompanied
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, on his visit to a refugee
school in Tripoli, in northern Lebanon. I saw and heard poor Palestinian children —
some of whom are twice refugees, having fled the civil war in Syria where they were
living in Palestinian refugee camps — tell Mr. Guterres that they go to sleep hungry
many nights a week because their families cannot afford to feed them anymore. It
was heartbreaking. No child should go to sleep hungry.
The services provided by UNRWA are essential to the livelihood of those
Palestinian children. The cuts in contributions to UNRWA, in addition to the
pandemic, have brought misery to the lives of thousands of Palestinian refugee
children. That is why we implore the Security Council and all peace-loving and
children-loving nations to guarantee predictable and sustained funding for UNRWA.
As I mentioned, the Secretary-General visited Beirut in December with a
Christmas message of solidarity at a time when the Lebanese people were reeling
under multiple crises, from the pandemic to the financial crisis to the aftermath of the
10/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

Beirut port explosion. That was compounded by political gridlock that prevented the
Government from meeting to solve the daily problems of the population. Everybody
across the political spectrum in Lebanon welcomed the Secretary-General’s message
and his visit. His call for dialogue and unity had a positive impact on the atmosphere
in the country.
Today, a month after the visit of the Secretary-General, we are welcoming a
positive development. The Government is returning to hold its meetings, and the
country is readying itself for the upcoming parliamentary elections, to be held in May
2022. A lot of hope hangs on those elections to infuse new momentum in the political
life of the country. The upcoming meetings of the Government are important for
putting the country back on track for political and financial stability through steps
to pull the country out of its financial crisis with the help of international institutions
and Lebanon’s friends.
Lebanon highly values the important role that the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) plays in peace and security in south Lebanon and is
grateful to the troop-contributing countries for their decades-long commitment to
peacekeeping in Lebanon.
The daily Israeli violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) increase tensions in the area and represent a
threat to peace and security. But the presence of UNIFIL and its role in de-escalation
and reducing tension are essential to keeping the status quo and preventing any
miscalculation or escalation on the border. The Lebanese Government remains
committed to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety, and we
call again on the Security Council to put an end to Israeli violations.
In resolution 2591 (2021), which renewed UNIFIL’s mandate, the Security
Council authorized UNIFIL to take temporary and special measures to support and
assist the Lebanese Armed Forces with the provision of relevant additional non-lethal
material and logistical support, owing to the economic crisis Lebanon is facing.
Those provisions are very timely and needed and further accentuate the important
role UNIFIL is playing in Lebanon.
The Middle East is ripe for a different future, a future of peace. The road
towards peace is a well-travelled one, and everybody knows what is required to
reach this much-promised peace. We need peacemakers and people with courage to
start the journey. I hope the Security Council can show the way soon.

22-0093311/17

S/2022/39

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Observer Mission of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation to the United Nations
As Chair of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) group, I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the States members of the OIC.
Our deliberations today take place while the situation in the Middle East,
particularly in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
dangerously worsening. In fact, 2021 was the bloodiest year since 2014 in terms of
casualties and crimes perpetrated by the Israeli occupation.
The new year of 2022 starts with the Palestinian issue remaining as the
most prominent challenge on the international political agenda. The previous year
witnessed the escalation by Israel, the occupying Power, of its apartheid practices,
colonial settlement expansion, land confiscation, home demolition and displacement
of Palestinian civilians, in violation of international humanitarian law, human rights
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. The failure of the Security Council
to hold Israel accountable for these illegal policies has regrettably emboldened
Israel to refuse to heed any of the Council’s resolutions in blatant defiance of the
international community.
Throughout the past year, Israeli occupation forces continued to use excessive
and indiscriminate force with impunity against Palestinian civilians, causing deaths
and injuries, including among children, women and elderly. Israel also protected
fanatic Jewish settlers and encouraged them to create militia groups, carry weapons
to terrorize Palestinian civilians, wreak havoc, fire weapons, assault people, ram
cars, raid towns, torch structures and vandalize homes, properties, crops, mosques
and agricultural fields.
In that regard, we forewarn that if such illegal acts are left unchecked, it
would further embolden the occupying Power and the fanatic settlers to continue
committing violations and crimes against the Palestinian people and fomenting
further and widespread violence, thereby creating a situation of total instability and
chaos, with dangerous ramifications.
The prevailing challenges and serious developments cannot be seen in
isolation from other illegal measures and unilateral actions by the Israelis aimed
at forcibly and unlawfully altering the legal, historical and political status of the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially targeting the occupied city of Jerusalem.
This city has been enduring endless Israeli attempts to isolate and Judaize it through
ongoing settlement construction, excavations, incursions and desecration of Islamic
and Christian holy places, seizure of properties and home demolitions and attempts
to illegally expel Palestinian families from their homes, among other violations.
In that regard, we reaffirm that East Jerusalem remains an integral part of
the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967, whose illegal annexation by
Israel has been rejected and remains unrecognized by the international community.
We therefore call on the Security Council to urgently act to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to immediately cease its illegal actions and measures and comply
with international law and relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016).
Thousands of Palestinian prisoners, including elderly people, children, women
and ill prisoners, in addition to 500 administrative detainees, have been experiencing
illegal, inhumane and oppressive measures in Israeli prisons. Israel, the occupying
Power, must be held fully accountable for the well-being of all Palestinian prisoners,
including the cancer-stricken prisoner Nasser Abu Hamid, who needs urgent health
12/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

care. The OIC calls for releasing ill and administratively detained prisoners held
without trial or charge without delay, and for pressuring Israel, the occupying
power, to honour its obligations under international human rights law, international
humanitarian instruments and the relevant Geneva conventions, and to release all
the Palestinian women and children it is illegally holding captive in its prisons.
As a result of Israel’s ongoing denial of their legitimate rights and illegal
colonial occupation, millions of Palestine refugees continue to endure decades of
displacement, dispossession and injustice. Their plight is worsening as the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
experiences an unprecedented funding crisis. We are confident that cooperation
and joint action by all international actors in burden-sharing and in sufficiently
and predictably supporting UNRWA’s core costs will mitigate these challenges and
enhance the Agency’s ability to meet the growing needs of Palestine refugees in all
areas of operation in these difficult times.
The OIC affirms that addressing the political challenges in Palestine should
not overshadow the dire socioeconomic situation further worsened by the decision
of the Israeli authorities to continue withholding Palestinian tax revenues. Such an
illegal decision constitutes a violation of international law and Israel’s commitments
under signed agreements and exacerbates the financial, economic and humanitarian
crisis experienced by the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm that the Security Council and the
International Quartet, along with other international key players, should fulfil their
responsibilities and contribute to reviving a credible and meaningful political path
for achieving a just, comprehensive and durable solution based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions. For its part, the OIC will spare no effort in supporting
the Palestinian people in their struggle to regain their legitimate rights, including
their right to self-determination and independence in their State of Palestine based
on pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, and a just solution for the Palestine
refugees on the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). These are the core
components of what will be a just, lasting and comprehensive peace, and the OIC
calls on the Security Council and the international community as a whole to exert
all necessary and serious efforts to advance the achievement of this just solution
without delay.

22-0093313/17

S/2022/39

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
We thank you, Madam President, for holding for holding this important open
debate. I should also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing and his diligent efforts.
As the world remains preoccupied with the challenges associated with the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the Middle East is not immune from those challenges,
even as it continues to deal with ongoing crises that leave human suffering, insecurity
and stability in their wake. That should provide an incentive for the international
community and the United Nations to make every possible effort to address those
crises and confront challenges to peace and security in the region.
The oldest of those issues is the Palestinian question, which still awaits
resolution. Illegal occupation and settlement continue in flagrant violation of United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Unjust practices include
illegally annexing Palestinian territory, barring Palestinians from the use of their
natural resources, seizing and destroying their property and displacing them from
their homes. In the shadow of the occupation, there have been repeated attacks
on Muslim and Christian holy sites, reflecting attempts to Judaize holy sites in
flagrant non-compliance with international laws and instruments. Those include the
recent incursion into the Ibrahimi Mosque. There have also been repeated attacks
on unarmed Palestinians, as has occurred in towns and villages north of Nablus.
All that serves to underscore the need for the international community to fulfil its
responsibilities to protect the Palestinian people and their holy sites and put a stop
to those flagrant violations of human rights and international law and instruments.
We reaffirm the firm position of Qatar in support of full enjoyment by our
Palestinian brothers of all their inalienable rights. The State of Qatar recognizes the
need to address the difficult humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people. Qatar is committed to promoting conditions conducive to peace and stability.
The State of Qatar remains in the vanguard of States providing relief assistance,
humanitarian aid and development support. Its ongoing efforts in the Gaza Strip
include a cash assistance programme and the provision of fuel and basic building
materials to help improve living conditions.
We also affirm the consistent position of Qatar in support of efforts to
resolve the Palestinian issue and bring about sustainable peace in the Middle East.
A just, durable and comprehensive settlement will require an end to occupation
and settlement in all occupied Arab territories, a resolution of the refugee problem
and the exercise by Palestinians of their inalienable rights, including the right to
self-determination and the establishment of an independent State within the 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the vision of a twoState solution, which the international community has agreed is the only way out
of the conflict. In that connection, the State of Qatar stresses that efforts to reach
such a settlement will only succeed if they are pursued on the basis of international
law, United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab peace
initiative, and via negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides.
With regard to the crisis in Syria, Qatar has repeatedly stressed that ending
it will require a political solution in accordance with the first Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and
accountability for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including the use of
14/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

chemical weapons. Qatar remains in the vanguard of countries providing assistance
to meet the humanitarian needs of our Syrian brothers.
With regard to Libya, Qatar looks forward to an end to the crisis and the
suffering of the Libyan people. We stress the need to consolidate progress on
security, political and economic aspects, to proceed with a Libyan-led United
Nations-supported political process and to assist the interim Government of National
Unity in carrying out its duties, consolidating State institutions, providing basic
services and development and holding free, fair and inclusive presidential and
legislative elections.
With respect to Yemen, the State of Qatar reiterates its firm position in
support of that country’s unity and territorial integrity. Qatar looks forward to the
crisis being resolved through negotiations between the Yemeni parties on the basis
of the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216
(2015). Qatar also continues to play a humanitarian role in supporting our Yemeni
brothers, including through a $90 million contribution to the World Food Programme
to help meet urgent food security needs and avert famine.
In conclusion, the peoples affected by the ongoing crises in the Middle East
deserve every possible effort to end and resolve those crises so that they can enjoy
the security and stability to which they aspire — and which they deserve. Qatar
will remain committed to playing a positive role in support of anything that helps to
achieve that goal.

22-0093315/17

S/2022/39

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
I would first like to thank the President for convening today’s open debate and
to thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing. My Government appreciates his tireless efforts
and dedication to bringing peace to the region.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its support for a two-State solution, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions, international law and
bilateral agreements, as well as its position that the status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem must be respected. We call on both Israel and Palestine to resume peace
talks and reiterate our support for the mediation efforts of the Quartet and the
international community.
My delegation is alarmed at the escalation of settler-related violence in the
West Bank and in and around Jerusalem. All acts of violence, by any side, especially
those perpetrated against civilians, cannot be justified and must stop. Those who are
responsible for such acts must be held accountable. We urge all sides to refrain from
further escalation, which undermines the possibility of lasting peace. In that context,
my delegation remains deeply concerned about the growth of Israeli settlement,
demolitions and evictions. Such unilateral actions are not helpful to addressing the
current situation. What we witnessed in May 2021 must not be repeated.
Amid these various challenges, the Republic of Korea welcomes a number
of positive developments: the ongoing engagement between Israeli and Palestinian
leadership and their agreement that includes relieving the Palestinian Authority’s
financial crisis, the United States-Palestine Economic Dialogue, and the continuing
mediation efforts of Egypt. It is also noteworthy that housing plans for the Palestinian
people have been endorsed by the Israeli Government. Furthermore, my delegation
takes note of the first round of the municipal elections in Palestine and its high
turnout rates. We look forward to the second round taking place in March 2022,
as planned.
My delegation welcomes the outcomes of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee’s
ministerial meeting in Oslo last November, taking note of constructive discussions
between Israeli and Palestinian officials on economic cooperation between the two
sides, including enhancing the movement of goods in and out of the Gaza strip.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its strong support for those efforts by the
international community aimed at meeting the Palestinian people’s humanitarian
and development needs. To this end, in 2021, it contributed approximately $7 million
both bilaterally and multilaterally, in cooperation with the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the Office for Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, and the United Nations Development Programme.
Taking this opportunity to do so, my delegation expresses its grave concern
for the military escalation in Yemen. The conflict has taken an alarming toll on
civilians, especially women and children, who are being disproportionately affected
by this protracted conflict. In this context, the Republic of Korea condemns the
Houthis’ seizure of the United Arab Emirates-flagged vessel and urges the Houthis
to immediately release the vessel and the crew. Furthermore, we condemn the
recent attacks on Abu Dhabi, for which the Houthis claimed responsibility. My
Government calls for the warring parties to initiate dialogue for a peace process
based upon Special Envoy Grundberg’s proposals. We also hope that cooperation on

16/17

22-00933

S/2022/39

the FSO SAFER oil tanker between the parties will be enhanced to prevent a global
environmental tragedy.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its commitment to continuing its constructive
role in advancing peace and stability in the region, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the international community.

22-0093317/17
