General Assembly-Twenty-third Sesaion

Taking note also of the view expressed in the report
entitled Capital Punishment-Developments 1961 to
1965 that there is an over-all tendency in the world
towards fewer executions,
Taking note of the report of the meeting of the
Consultative Group on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders held in August 1968, in so
far as it relates to the question of capital punishment, 7
and of the view of the Group that there is a strong
trend in most countries towards the abolition of capital
punishment or at least towards fewer executions,
Desiriltg to promote further the dignity of man and
thus to contribute to the International Year for Human
Rights,
1. Invites Governments of Member States:
(a) To ensure the most careful legal procedures and
the greatest possible safeguards for the accused in
capital cases in countries where the death penalty
obtains, inter alia, by providing that:
(i) A person condemned to death shall not be deprived
of the right to appeal to a higher judicial authority
or, as the case may be, to petition for pardon or
reprieve;
(ii) A death sentence shall not be carried out until
the procedures of appeal or, as the case may be,
of petition for pardon or reprieve have been
terminated ;
(iii) Special attention be given in the case of indigent
persons by the provision of adequate legal assistance at all stages of the proceedings ;
( b) To consider whether the careful legal procedures
and safeguards referred to in sub-paragraph (a) above
may not be further strengthened by the fixing of a
time-limit or time-limits before the expiry of which no
death sentence shall be carried out, as has already
been recognized in certain international conventions
dealing with specific situations;
( c) To inform the Secretary-General not later than
10 December 1970 of actions which may have been
taken in accordance with sub-paragraph (a) above and
of the results to which their consideration in accordance
with sub-paragraph ( b) above may have led;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments of 1\Iember States to inform him of their present
attitude to possible further restriction of the use of
the death penalty or to its total abolition, and to state
whether they are contemplating restriction or abolition
and also to indicate whether changes in this respect
have taken place since 1965 ;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a report on the matter dealt with in paragraphs 1 (c)
and 2 above to the Economic and Social Council at
one of its sessions to be held in 1971.
1727th plenary meeting,
26 November 1968.

2394 (XXIII). Capital punishment in southern
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling that article 3 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights provides that everyone has the right
to life, liberty and security of person,

'See Of!kiol Records of the General Assembly, Twndy"""" Stsnon, Annexes, agenda item 59, document A/7243,

annex.

Further recalling that article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that no one shall
be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recalling Security Council resolution 191 ( 1964) of
18 June 1964 urging the Government of South Africa
to renounce the execution of any persons sentenced to
death for their opposition to apartheid,
Recalling Security Council resolution 253 ( 1968) of
29 May 1%8 condemning the inhuman executions
carried out by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia
which have flagrantly affronted the conscience of
mankind and have been universally condemned,
Also recalling General Assembly resolution 2145
(XXI) of 27 October 1966, ;n which the Assembly
decided that South Africa's Mandate for South West
Africa was terminated, that South Africa had no other
right to administer the Territory and that henceforth
South West Africa came under the direct responsibility
of the United Nations, 8
Noting with concern the existence of the death penalty
as a means of suppressing resistance to the policies of
apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism by the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, by the illegal
South African regime in Namibia and by the racist
Government in South Africa,
1. Condemns the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, the equally illegal South African regime in
Namibia and the racist Government in South Africa for
resorting to the application of the death penalty and
the threat or use of capital punishment in their attempts
to suppress the natural aspirations of the peoples of
southern Africa to social and economic justice, civil
rights and political freedom ;
2. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
renounce the execution of any persons sentenced to
death for their opposition to apartheid;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights and
the Economic and Social Council to keep this matter
under constant review.
1727th plenary meeting,
26 November 1968.

2399 (XXIII). Report of the United Nation• High
Commi11ioner for Refugee•
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees9 and having heard
his statement, 10
Taking ncte of the progress achieved in the field of
international protection of refugees who are the High
Commissioner's concern and in the search for permanent solutions of their problems through voluntary
repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or
resettlement in other countries,
Recognizing the positive effects of the High Commissioner's work on economic and social conditions of
the refugees in the countries concerned,
8 The General Assembly, in its resolution 2372 (XXII) of
12 June 1968, decided that from that date South West Africa
would be !mown as Namibia.
9 Official Records of th, Gmeral Assembly, Tfl#11t1-third
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/7211 and Corr.2) and S•nltment No. 11A (A/7211/Add.l).
10 Ibid., Twenty-third Session, Third Cofflfflillu, 1611th
meeting, paras. 1-18.
