10

General Aasembly -

efficiency and co-ordination of activities of participating
organizations in order that the fullest benefits of the
programmes of technical assistance may be brought to
the countries served ;
3. Expresses its confidence that ail pertinent comments made by Member States in the General Assembly
concerning the nature, operations and other aspects of
the regular and expandèd programmes of technical assistance will be kepf in mind when any comprehensive
review of these programmes and their possibilities is
undertaken;
4. Invites Governments to give the fullest support
to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance
and to announce their pledges for the year 1956 at the
forthcoming Sixth United Nations Technical Assistance
Conference, in order to ensure the continued growth of
the Programme.
537th plenary meeting,
25 October 1955.
922 (X). Question of the establishment of an
International Finance Corporation

The General Assembly,
/faving received the report9 of the Economie and
Social Council on the establishment of an International
Finance Corporation submitted in response to General
Assembly resolution 823 (IX) of 11 December 1954,
N oting that a substantial number of Governments
have taken steps towards acceptance of membership, or
have declared their intention of acquiring membership,
in the Corporation in order to further economic development by encouraging the growth of productive private
cnterprise in member countries, particularly in the Jess
developed areas,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development for :
(a} Preparing the draft Articles of Agreement for
the International Finance Corporation ;
(b} Bringing about agreement by a large number of
its members to join in the establishment of the International Finance Corporation ;

2. Looks to the early establishment of the International Finance Corporation and to successful results
from its operations.
539th plenary meeting,
3 N ovember 1955.

923 (X). Question of the establishment of a Speelal United Nations Fond for Economie Development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of the economic development of the under-developed countries as an essential
condition for promoting such international relationships
as are propitious for the strengthening of peace and
the attainment of world-wide prosperity,
Considering the real need of the under-developed
countries for additional means for accelerating the development of their economic-social infra-structure,
which is basic to the substantial expansion of their production and to the well-being of their peoples,
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Suppfeme11t No. 3 (A/2943), chapter III A, paras. 178 to 190.

Tenth Seuion

Recalling its resolutions on the establishment of a
Special United Nations Fund for Economie Development and, in particular, reaffirming its unanimously
adopted resolutions 724 A (VIII) and 724 B (VIII)
of 7 December 1953,
RecaUing further its appeal to Governments to review
their respective positions as regards extending their
material support to such a Fund in accordance with
changes in the international situation and other relevant
factors, both national and international, as expressed
in its resolution 822 (IX) of 11 December 1954,
Having examined the further report10 of Mr. Raymond Scheyven, assisted by the Secretary-General and
a Committee of Experts, the comments 11 thereon of the
Economie and Social Council, included in the Council's
report at the request of the General Assembly under
resolution 822 (IX), and the statement12 made by Mr.
Scheyven on 3-1 October 1955,
Taking note of Economie and Social Council resolution 583 A (XX) of 5 August 1955,
1. Expresses its great appreciation of the work performed by Mr. Scheyven, assisted by the SecretaryGeneral and the Committee of Experts ;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies in the economic and social sphere,
to transmit to him, not later than 31 March 1956, their
views, as definitely as possible, relating to the establishment, role, structure and operations of a Special United
Nations Fund for Economie Development, bearing in
mind particularly the questions enumerated in the annex
attached hereto, in order that such views and replies
may provide material for the statute of the Fund when
it is decided to establish such a Fund ;
3. Requests further that the Secretary-General, in
addressing Member States as indicated above, provide
them with ail the relevant documents, including the records of the discussions on the subject at the tenth session
of the General Assembly;
4. Establishes an Ad Hoc Committee composed of
representatives of sixteen Governments, to be appointed
by the President of the General Assembly, to analyse the
replies and comments of Governments received under
paragraph 2 above, with a view to submitting to the
Economie and Social Council at its twenty-second session and to the General Assembly at its eleventh session
such interim report as it may be in a position to make,
and its final report to the twenty-third session of the
Council, it being understood that in making such reports,
it would not commit any Member Government;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
Hoc Committee with ail the necessary facilities;
6. Expresses the hope, in view of the increased support for the proposed establishment of a Special United
Nations Fund for Economie Development, that conditions more favourable to the establishment of an international Fund will be created in the near future, and
that savings from internationally supervised world-wide
disarmament will provide additional means for financIbid., Supplement No. 17 (A/2906).
lbid., Suppleme11t No. 3 (A/2943), chapter III A, paras.
142 to 177.
12 lbid., Tenth Session, Second Com111ittee, 366th meeting.
10
11
