A/RES/69/115

United Nations

Distr.: General
18 December 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 76

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2014
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/496)]

69/115. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-seventh session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the
elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability
and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission,1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17).

14-66936 (E)

*1466936*

Please recycle

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-seventh session

A/RES/69/115

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization of the draft convention
on transparency in treaty-based investor-State arbitration;2
3.
Notes with appreciation that the secretariat of the Commission has taken
steps to establish and operate the repository of published information under the
Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration (“transparency
repository”), in accordance with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, as a pilot
project temporarily funded by voluntary contributions,3 and in this regard requests
the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of developments
regarding the funding and budgetary situation of the transparency repository;
4.
Takes note with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission as
regards its future work and the progress made by the Commission in its work in the
areas of arbitration and conciliation, online dispute resolution, electronic commerce,
insolvency law, security interests and international trade law aimed at reducing the
legal obstacles faced by micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises throughout
their life cycle, endorses the Commission’s decision to compile information on
cloud computing, identity management, the use of mobile devices in electronic
commerce and single window facilities, including by organizing, co-organizing or
participating in colloquiums, workshops and other meetings within available
resources,4 also endorses the Commission’s decision to hold a colloquium and other
events in 2015 to celebrate the thirty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods within available
resources,5 and commends the efforts undertaken by the Commission to improve the
management of its resources while maintaining and increasing its current levels of
activity, including through avoiding overlap of work and the use of informal
working methods where appropriate, with due regard to the formal negotiation
process;6
5.
Notes with appreciation the projects of the Commission aimed at
promoting the uniform and effective application of the Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the New York
Convention), done at New York on 10 June 1958, 7 including the preparation of a
guide entitled “UNCITRAL Secretariat Guide on the New York Convention”, in
close cooperation with international experts;8
6.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard
appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their legal
_______________
2

Ibid., chap. III and annex I.
Ibid., para. 109.
4
Ibid., para. 150.
5
Ibid., para. 255.
6
Ibid., chaps. III–V, VII, VIII and XV.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17),
chap. III, sect. E; and ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17), para. 117.
3

2/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-seventh session

A/RES/69/115

activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to
promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
7.
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, and in that
respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the
work and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the implementation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals and the preparation of sustainable development goals;
8.
Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and
methods of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive
deliberations, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in
annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session,9 requests the Secretariat
to issue, prior to meetings of the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder
of those rules of procedure and methods of work with a view to ensuring the high
quality of the work of the Commission and encouraging the assessment of its
instruments, and in this regard recalls its previous resolutions related to this matter;
9.
Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of
Korea, towards reaching out and providing technical assistance with international
trade law reforms to developing countries in the region, notes with satisfaction
expressions of interest from other States in hosting regional centres of the
_______________
9

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).

3/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-seventh session

A/RES/69/115

Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in
particular their funding and budgetary situation;10
10. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions
to the Trust Fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries
that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General, in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and
to increase expert representation from developing countries at sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and
capacities in those countries to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment
for business, trade and investment;
11. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General;
12. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial
relations should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to
promote the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
13. Notes the rule of law briefing and the rule of law panel discussion held at
the forty-seventh session of the Commission and the comments transmitted by the
Commission highlighting its role in promoting the rule of law, in particular through
facilitating access to justice, pursuant to paragraph 14 of General Assembly
resolution 68/116;11
14. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters,12 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of

_______________
10

Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. XIII.
Ibid., chap. XIV.
12
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
11

4/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-seventh session

A/RES/69/115

documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect
to the documentation of the Commission;13
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of
Commission standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the
Commission, including committees of the whole established by the Commission for
the duration of its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts, and
takes note of the Commission’s decision to continue the trial use of digital
recordings, in parallel with summary records where applicable, with a view to
assessing the experience of using digital recordings and, on the basis of that
assessment, taking a decision at a future session regarding the possible replacement
of summary records by digital recordings;14
17. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
18. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the resource-intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and
expand it, and in this regard welcomes efforts by the Secretariat towards building
partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to Governments, the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to
assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability
and usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles
and in securing the funding required for the coordination and expansion of the
system and the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar
focused on the promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a
uniform manner;
19. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and
encouraging the use of other relevant texts;
20. Welcomes the continued work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT
system, in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools
for the promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in
particular by building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal
practitioners to interpret those standards in the light of their international character
and the need to promote uniformity in their application and the observance of good
faith in international trade;
21. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their
_______________
13
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17), para. 276.

5/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-seventh session

A/RES/69/115

multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment, 15 commends the fact that
the website of the Commission is published in the six official languages of the
United Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain
and improve its website, including by developing new social media features, in
accordance with the applicable guidelines.16
68th plenary meeting
10 December 2014

_______________
15
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X;
58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80; and
61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
16
Resolution 63/120, para. 20.

6/6
