VI.

43/140. Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights in the Asian and
Pacific region
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions, in particular resolu­
tion 41/153 of 4 December 1986, on regional arrange­
ments for the promotion and protection of human rights
in the Asian and Pacific region,
Recognizing that regional arrangements make a major
contribution to the promotion and protection of human
rights and that non-governmental organizations may have
a valuable role to play in this process,
Bearing in mind that intergovernmental arrangements
for the promotion and protection of human rights have
been established in other regions,
Reiterating its appreciation for the report of the Seminar
on National, Local and Regional Arrangements for the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the Asian
Region, held at Colombo from 21 June to 2 July 1982, 145
and the comments on the report of the Seminar received
from the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific and from States members of the
Commission, 146

Welcoming the designation of the Social Development
Division of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific as a regional human rights focal point,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolu­
tion 1988/73 of 10 March 1988,27
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 1 47
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist
and encourage the Executive Secretary of the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific to pursue
the establishment, within existing resources, of a deposi­
tory centre for United Nations human rights materials
within the Commission at Bangkok, the function of which
would include the collection, processing and dissemina­
tion of such materials in the Asian and Pacific region;
3. Renews its invitation to States members of the Eco­
nomic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
that have not yet done so to communicate to the Secre­
tary-General as soon as possible their comments on the re­
port of the Seminar on National, Local and Regional Ar­
rangements for the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights in the Asian Region and, in particular, to address
themselves to the conclusions and recommendations in
the report concerning the development of regional ar­
rangements in Asia and the Pacific;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a continu­
ing fow of human rights material to the library of the Eco­
nomic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific at
Bangkok for appropriate dissemination in the region;
5. Notes the efforts of United Nations development
agencies in the Asian and Pacific region to promote the
human rights dimension more actively and systematically
in their development activities;
6. Encourages United Nations development agencies
in the Asian and Pacific region to co-ordinate with the
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
their efforts to promote the human rights dimension in
their activities;

145 A/37/422, annex.
146 See A/39/174-E/1984/38 and Add.I and E/CN.4/1986/19.

147 A/4Vt 70-E/1988/25.

213

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 148 on
the successful training course on human rights teaching
held at Bangkok from 12 to 23 October 1987 under the
United Nations programme of advisory services in the
field of human rights;
8. Draws attention to the summary of discussions and
conclusions in the report, in particular to the need to ad­
vance both formal and informal teaching of human rights
in the region, with emphasis on the identification of target
groups, particularly in rural areas;
9. Notes the general consensus among participants in
the training course that it would be useful for the better
identification of existing measures and the dissemination
of materials to establish a resource library that would col­
lect and disseminate laws, documents and other publica­
tions throughout the region;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a further
report to the General Assembly at its forty-fifth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, incorporating
information on progress achieved in the implementation
of the present resolution;
11. Decides to continue its consideration of the ques­
t ion at its forty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

43/141. Situation of refugees in the Sudan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/129 of 7 December 1987 and
its other previous resolutions on the situation of refugees
in the Sudan,
Having considered the report of the Secretary­
Genera)l49 on the implementation of resolution 42/129
and the action taken by the concerned organizations, and
the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, 87
Expressing its appreciation for the efforts made by the
Government of the Sudan for the reception of the refugees
and the provision of protection, shelter, food, health, edu­
cation and other humanitarian services to the ever increas­
ing number of refugees who have been crossing the bor­
ders into the Sudan since the early 1960s,
Recognizing the heavy burden shouldered by the people
and the Government of the Sudan and the sacrifices they
are making in acting as host to more than one million refu­
gees, who constitute approximately 7.5 per cent of the to­
tal population of the country,
Concerned that the great majority of the refugees have
spontaneously settled in various urban and rural com­
munities throughout the country and are thus sharing the
already meagre resources and services allocated to the in­
digenous population.
Expressing grave concern at the devastating and far­
reaching effects of the successive calamities, ranging from
the 1984 drought to the heavy rains and f oods and the lo­
cust infestations, that have afflicted the country, thus ex­
acerbating the already deteriorating situation resulting
from the presence of this great number of refugees,
Gravely concerned also that the Government of the Su­
dan, besides dealing with the difficult prevailing economic
and social problems, has the additional task of taking care
148 E/CN.4/l 988/39/ Add.\
149 A/ 43/ 534.
