S/PV.8322

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8322

nd meeting
Monday, 30 July 2018, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-24311 (E)
*1824311*

S/PV.8322

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing by
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia
and Eritrea.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Umarov.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): As mandated by
sub-paragraph (g) of paragraph 11 of resolution 1844
(2008), I have the honour of briefing the Security Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, covering the
period from 14 March to the end of July this year.
During the reporting period, with regard to the
arms embargo on Somalia, the Committee received 10
notifications pursuant to sub-paragraph (g) of paragraph
10 of resolution 2111 (2013), three notifications from
Member States pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2142 (2014) and two notifications from the Federal
Government of Somalia pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 9
of resolution 2385 (2017). The Committee also received
two post-delivery confirmations from the Federal
Government of Somalia pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 7
of resolution 2142 (2014), for which the Committee did
not receive advance delivery notification.
At the outset, I wish to welcome the signing of the
Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship on 9 July this
year by the President of the State of Eritrea, Mr. Isaias
Afwerki, and the Prime Minister of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Mr. Abiy Ahmed,
and salute the commitment by both parties to opening
a new chapter of cooperation and partnership. We also
positively note the 28 July visit of Somalia President
2/8

30/07/2018

Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo to Asmara
on the invitation of the President of Eritrea.
Today, my briefing will focus mainly on my May
visit to Djibouti, Ethiopia and Somalia and ensuing
Committee activities and decisions. The visit in May
marked the first occasion since 2010 on which the
Chair of the Committee has travelled to the Horn of
Africa region. We received great cooperation from
all countries we visited. All countries extended their
welcome and cooperation at the highest possible level.
All our interlocutors where frank in sharing with us their
perspectives. The region is committed to continuing
resolving issues and working towards further stability
and enduring peace.
When meeting with the delegation in Addis
Ababa, the Ethiopian Prime Minister noted Ethiopia’s
principled position in resolving conflicts by peaceful
means and expressed readiness to start a dialogue with
Eritrea. These views may have been the forerunner of
the developments witnessed in recent days. I regret that
Eritrea did not invite the delegation and did not take
the opportunity to provide its views on the situation
the Horn of Africa, including on the implementation
of sanctions.
I wish to reiterate the Committee’s continued
commitment to engaging with Eritrea. In this regard,
I addressed a letter on behalf of the Committee to the
Eritrean chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Mission, in
which I expressed the Committee’s regret at the lack of
response to the proposed visit to Asmara. I also called on
the Eritrean authorities to cooperate with the Committee
and the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group.
The visit to the region was a diplomatic and trustbuilding exercise. The goal was to engage directly with
the authorities to obtain first-hand information on the
situation in the region, including on the implementation
of sanctions measures on Somalia and Eritrea, and
assess and the effectiveness of the measures and their
implementation so as to promote peace and security
in the Horn of Africa. While acknowledging and
encouraging their efforts, particularly concerning
notifications to the Committee, I reminded Somali
officials of their obligations under the partial lifting
of the arms embargo and the requirement to comply
with them.
With regard to the charcoal ban, the Somali
authorities expressed serious concern about the
continuing charcoal trade, which contributes to
18-24311

30/07/2018

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8322

financing of the terrorist activities of Al-Shabaab. The
President of Somalia noted the importance of adequate
implementation of the charcoal ban, while the Prime,
Minister requested that the Committee sanction those
individuals and entities responsible for receiving
illicit Somali charcoal. The Committee will consider
that request very seriously. With regard to regional
dynamics, all interlocutors cited the destabilizing
effects of the Yemen war on the stability of the region.
The war has had an impact not only on arms flows,
but also on commercial relations, investment, trade
and tourism between Yemen and countries in the Horn
of Africa.

the Horn of Africa. The information that we gathered
enabled the Committee to act so as to enhance the
implementation of the sanctions measures on Somalia
and Eritrea. I would like to assure Council members
that the Committee will continue its contribution to the
Council’s efforts to achieve durable peace and stability
in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.

In terms of sanctions on Somalia, we observed the
firm resolve of the Federal Government of Somalia to
portray the new Administration in a new light of reforms
and willingness to take responsibility for their security
and future. Although that is commendable, it is the
view of the Committee that the arms embargo should
not be completely lifted until Somalia undergo political
and security reforms, and creates strong institutions
capable of securing an adequate level of weapons and
ammunition management. All interlocutors cautioned
against the premature withdrawal of the African Union
Mission in Somalia from the country, as they believe
that Somali forces are not yet ready to fully take over
responsibility for their own security. The Committee
fully endorsed other recommendations aimed at the
strengthening and the implementation of the sanctions
measures. As such, two notes verbales reminding
Member States of their respective obligations under the
terms of the arms embargoes and the charcoal ban were
distributed respectively on 25 and 28 of June.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I want to thank Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for his briefing
and for his dedicated efforts in guiding the work of the
Committee. We appreciate the outcome of his visit to
the region, which took him to Djibouti, Ethiopia and
Somalia. I must reiterate how much we appreciate the
objectivity and integrity with which he has managed the
work of the Committee. Of course, much has happened
since the Chair’s visit, and those events have enormous
implications for the work of the Committee, as well as
for the sanctions regime in a number of ways.

The President: I thank Ambassador Umarov
for his briefing and I express my appreciation for his
leadership of the Committee.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

I also proposed that the Committee discuss the
recommendations made by the joint verification team
in its first report of 1 May. The Committee met on
25 June. In that regard, the Committee has revised its
implementation assistance notice on the arms embargo
to include some of the recommendations made by joint
verification team. As the delegation was unable to meet
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia Michael Keating during our trip to Mogadishu,
the Committee held informal consultations on 20 July,
during which Mr. Keating shared his insights on peace
and security matters in Somalia as they relate to the
sanctions regime.

It is altogether impossible to deny that the politics
of the Horn of Africa are in the process of rapid change,
with salutary implications, all of which is the result of
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea, which
would have been totally inconceivable only a few month
ago. What has happened over the past couple of weeks
is indeed historic. Following a 20-year hiatus, Ethiopia
and Eritrea have decided to turn the page and open a
new chapter concerning not only the normalization
of relations, but the expression of commitment to
building relations that truly reflect the long-standing
ties between their peoples. What was once considered
impossible has been made possible thanks to the
courageous and bold steps taken by the leadership of the
two countries. The Ethiopian and Eritrean peoples, who
have longed for peace for two decades, have warmly
welcomed the breakthrough with much jubilation and
optimism. Gone are the days when no one could be sure
how long the guns would continue to be silent between
the two countries.

In conclusion, this was an important visit during
which the Committee gained invaluable insights into
the current political and security situation pertaining to

As just indicated, that has enormous meaning
and significance not only for the peoples of the two
countries, but also for the region, which has been

18-243113/8

S/PV.8322

The situation in Somalia

ravaged by conflict and crisis for far too long. It will
also make a major and historic contribution to the
efforts to silence the guns in Africa, while setting
an example of resolving conflicts in the continent.
Undeniably, the region will be in a far better position to
contribute to peace in Somalia. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development will be more effective in
bringing the countries of the region together to work
for peace and regional cooperation in all areas much
better than before.
It is in that broader context, that we would like
the Security Council to understand what is happening
between Ethiopia and Eritrea. That wind of change has
been welcomed by the region and beyond. Undoubtedly,
the positive momentum generated over the past couple
of weeks must be sustained, and the international
community has a responsibility to support the efforts
of the two countries. We believe that the Council has
a particular responsibility in that regard. Already,
improved relations between Ethiopia and Eritrea seem
to have facilitated the restoration of friendly relations
between Eritrea and Somalia, as was evident when
the President of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo, paid a State visit to Eritrea a few
days ago. It is impossible to ignore that that is a major
boost for progress in the stabilization of the situation in
Somalia. The Council must appreciate the significance
of that development for the security of the region.
It appears to us very proper that the Council should
support and encourage the bold steps taken by the
Ethiopian Prime Minister. That has underlined how
much doing things outside the box is necessary to
break log jams in conflict situations, no matter how
intractable they might have been in the past. If there
is a recognition of the broader context that I have
tried to explain just now, I do not think it would be
difficult to find innovative ways of acknowledging the
significance of that development in our region at a time
when conflict resolution is becoming very complex and
we have come to acknowledge how much the prevention
of conflict should be prioritized.
The breakthrough for peace achieved between
Ethiopia and Eritrea is without any doubt to
be celebrated. It is Ethiopia’s conviction that this
welcome development is not meant to be limited to
relations between the two countries. I would like to
take this opportunity to assure the Council that the
prevailing spirit is one of embracing, not excluding,
people in the region. It is in that spirit that we are trying
4/8

30/07/2018

to do our part to help restore friendly relations between
the good peoples of Djibouti and Eritrea. The Djibouti
Foreign Minister visited Addis Ababa last week to
deliver a message on behalf of President Guelleh to my
Prime Minister. He was able to conduct very productive
and useful discussions both with our Prime Minister
and his counterpart, our Foreign Minister.
Ethiopia has expressed its readiness to do whatever
is necessary to contribute to the normalization of
relations between Eritrea and Djibouti. It is our firm
conviction that such efforts are critical to peace and
security in our region. The new spirit that has been
created should exclude no country and is the foundation
on which Ethiopia’s policy is based. Naturally, that new
spirit also demands that no country should continue to
be isolated. The Council has an obligation in that regard.
Let me conclude by expressing our readiness to
work closely with the Council in the coming months
to sustain this remarkable achievement, which has
enormous implications for peace and prosperity in the
whole of Africa and even beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): The Federal Government of
Somalia was pleased to host the visit of Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, and other Committee members
to Mogadishu on 8 May. The Committee members
were briefed on some significant areas of progress
during their visit. There is no doubt that the peace and
security challenges facing Somalia remain daunting
but the Administration of President Farmajo is making
a serious attempt to address them, in line with many
of the recommendations of the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group.
Sanctions are designed as a tool to help tackle security
challenges, and we share the same aims of preventing
weapons from falling into the hands of terrorists,
cutting off funding to Al-Shabaab and ensuring that
Somalia’s resources of fish stocks and charcoal cannot
be exploited for the purpose of destabilizing the country.
Combating terrorism is not only a military endeavour;
it must include good governance, inclusive politics,
reconciliation and the work of combating corruption.
The objectives of the Federal Government of Somalia
and those of the Sanctions Committee are aligned in
those areas. But the Somalia of today is not the Somalia
18-24311

30/07/2018

The situation in Somalia

on which sanctions were first imposed. Al-Shabaab
remains a vicious threat and we must continue to
implement measures that choke off its resources and
limit its ability to attack innocent people. However,
Somalia has made considerable progress with regard to
public financial management, security-sector reform,
weapons management and accountability.
There is a long way to go, but the Committee and
the Monitoring Group should focus their efforts on
areas where the threat of instability is greatest. The
Monitoring Group has one of the widest mandates of all
sanctions regimes. We believe that Somalia’s progress
should be reflected in the Group’s mandate and focus
and that the Security Council should take into account
the Federal Government’s strong commitment to
continued progress. My Administration is making
a genuine attempt to improve our system’s processes
and standards. We recognize that there are those who
benefit from the status quo and seek to slow down or
reverse our progress. We therefore urge the Council to
support us by focusing on spoilers, not on the people
engaged in the challenging tasks of State-building.
We have demonstrated our commitment to
improving aspects of our compliance with the sanctions
regime through requests for the Security Council to
review and update its existing measures. For example,
paragraphs 10 (c) and 11 (a) allow weapons to go to
security institutions in Somalia that fall outside national
structures, such as undefined Somali security forces
and strategic partners of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, without prior notification or proper weaponsand-ammunition management processes in place, which
is problematic and exacerbates arms proliferation in our
country. Our Government would appreciate a careful
review and revision of those paragraphs. The Somali
Government will continue to build on that and, as set
out in Somalia’s Transition Plan, will develop standard
operating procedures to achieve a comprehensive
weapons-and-ammunition management system and
establish a management commission to counter the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, with the
aim of ensuring safe and effective distribution, storage
and security of stocks and trained personnel at both the
Federal Government and federal member state levels.
We are committed to ensuring that Somalia’s
resources are not used to finance Al-Shabaab’s
operations. In February the National Security Council
endorsed an interim fisheries revenue-sharing
agreement. In April the Cabinet agreed to ban the

S/PV. 8322

domestic sale of charcoal along with improving the
implementation of the charcoal ban. It is also important
to us that Somalia’s precious natural resources be
retained to assist in the vital process of our economic
regeneration. That means tackling illegal fishing and
ensuring that Somalia’s waters and rich fish stocks can
provide a livelihood for Somalis and help make stability
sustainable. On 5 June the National Security Council
reached an agreement on the ownership, management
and sharing of the country’s natural resources, as was
stated in our agreement on natural-resource sharing.
Somalia is a country emerging from decades of
war battling brutal insurgents. We are demonstrating
a strong commitment to reforming our institutions and
meeting our obligations under the sanctions regime.
Our efforts are slowly bearing fruit, but too often we
are criticized for what we have not yet achieved rather
than recognized for our progress. Our capacity is still
in the early stages, but building it will require the
support of our partners in the Security Council and
its subsidiary bodies. We hope we can count on their
steadfast support to our continued progress.
Lastly, we should not ignore developments in
the region. I would like to take this opportunity to
again welcome the most recent developments in the
protracted conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia. We
also welcome the signing of steps to implement the Joint
Declaration of Peace and Friendship on normalizing
relations between the two brotherly countries. President
Farmajo made a State visit to Eritrea last week. Somalia
stresses the importance of ensuring that Eritrea and
Djibouti can agree as soon as possible on the means
for a peaceful settlement of all the unresolved disputes
between the two States. I thank the Council again and
wish it the best.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Idris (Eritrea): It is a great honour to address
the Security Council on behalf of the Eritrean people,
whose struggle to create a peaceful and cooperative
neighbourhood is a matter of historical record. Three
generations of Eritreans have paid the ultimate sacrifice
to establish a regional order based on international law
and economic complementarity, while being mindful of
the shared culture and history of the people.
In recent weeks, the Horn of Africa has witnessed
a development of historic proportions. Eritrea and
Ethiopia have taken a bold step to end their state of

18-243115/8

S/PV.8322

The situation in Somalia

30/07/2018

war and open a new chapter of peace and friendship.
The war that prevailed for the past two decades has had
devastating consequences that have gone beyond the
two countries and peoples involved. It has obstructed
meaningful cooperation and undermined regional
conflict-prevention and -resolution mechanisms. The
agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia puts an end to
that distorted regional order of enmity and competition,
and opens new horizons for sustainable peace and
economic integration. It will strengthen the subregional
conflict-prevention and -resolution mechanism.
Moreover, today Eritrea and Somalia signed the Joint
Declaration of Peace and Friendship during the historic
visit of His Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo to Eritrea. They have agreed to exchange
ambassadors, forge political, economic, social, cultural,
defence and security cooperation and join hands to
address obstacles to regional peace and security. The
positive repercussions of those developments for the
entire region cannot be overstated.

of the citizens of the region. By lifting the sanctions
immediately and unconditionally, the Council can send
a positive message that it supports the desire of the
citizens of the region to live in peace and prosperity
together, and that the Council is ready to accompany
them on their arduous journey to remove the obstacles
to regional integration. The other option for the
Council is to maintain business as usual by imposing
preconditions, moving the goalposts and keeping these
politically motivated sanctions without justification.
The message to the citizens of the region will be that
the Council is unwilling to work together with the
regional developments and will continue to encourage
spoilers seeking to undermine the unfolding peace
and integration.

It has long been evident that the sanctions on the
people of Eritrea cannot be justified in the name of
maintaining international peace and security. They
have been kept despite the fact that the pretexts for
their imposition have been shown to be false for years.
In that regard, far from helping to promote peace and
amity in the region, the Council has undermined and
derailed regional cooperation for a decade. Within the
emerging regional context, we find it inexplicable that
the Council is discussing the sanctions on Eritrea today.
The most appropriate action for the Council would
have been lifting the sanctions, thereby indicating in
unequivocal terms its support to the recent positive
developments. Eritrea welcomes the calls by several
countries, including Ethiopia and Somalia, for lifting
the sanctions. We find it unacceptable that just a few
members of the Council continue to set conditions
and move the goalposts, with the intention of keeping
political pressure on the people of Eritrea for reasons
not related to the maintenance of international peace.
As in the past, it is clear that whatever Eritrea does in
fulfilling its commitment to the Council’s resolutions,
and regardless of the changes that the region has been
witnessing, those members are unwilling to lift these
unjustified punitive measures.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.

The Security Council should not miss another
opportunity to contribute positively to regional peace
and security in the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea.
What is at stake is the Council’s credibility in the eyes
6/8

For its part, Eritrea will remain committed to
redoubling its efforts and joining hands with the
countries in the region to ensure peace and accelerate
socioeconomic progress in the Horn of Africa and the
Red Sea region.

Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for his briefing
covering the period from March 2018 to the end of July
2018, and particularly for his visit in May to the region,
including Djibouti. I believe the visit gave the Committee
an excellent opportunity for direct interaction with the
authorities in the region and consultation with them on
how best to address some of the issues that continue to
plague the region and damage efforts to achieve peace,
development and prosperity.
Djibouti too regrets that Eritrea did not invite its
delegation or take this opportunity to provide its views
on the situation in the Horn of Africa, including the
implementation of sanctions. As its refusal to invite
the Chair or cooperate with the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea demonstrated, Eritrea continues to
display a pattern of behaviour characterized by denial,
obstruction and obfuscation.
As we stated in our letter to the Secretary-General,
which has been circulated to the members of the
Security Council, Djibouti welcomes the latest positive
developments regarding the protracted conflict between
Eritrea and Ethiopia and the Council’s readiness to
support both countries in their implementation of their
18-24311

30/07/2018

The situation in Somalia

Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship. That is indeed
a development we should all embrace and celebrate,
because the region has experienced various intra- and
inter-State conflicts with dire economic and social
consequences for far too long. They have depressed and
disrupted economic development and hampered efforts
towards regional integration. Apart from the physical
destruction of life and property, these conflicts have
diverted scarce resources from development to support
war. It might be worth assessing the region’s cumulative
losses in gross domestic product as a result of conflicts,
since it stands to reason that any such study would
undoubtedly prove that the benefits of investing in
peace far outweigh the costs. Silencing the guns and
realizing a conflict-free Africa is a challenging task,
but we should all work in earnest with full commitment
to that goal. The peoples of the Horn are incredibly
brave and talented and, given a chance, they can show a
phenomenal can-do spirit.
Djibouti concurs with the assessment by the Heads
of State of the African Union (AU), as underlined
in the AU Assembly decision adopted on 2 July in
Nouakchott regarding the unresolved border dispute
between Djibouti and Eritrea. It emphasizes that there
is an urgent
“need for all countries in the Horn of Africa to
engage towards maximizing possibilities for
achieving lasting peace in the entire region”.
It requests the AU Commission to continue with its
efforts to assist Djibouti and Eritrea in reaching a
peaceful solution to their territorial dispute and urges
both countries to extend the necessary cooperation
to the Commission. Let me state unequivocally that
Djibouti stands ready to work with the Commission.
In the same vein, Djibouti welcomes the letter dated
17 July by the Secretary-General regarding the ongoing
border dispute between the Republic of Djibouti and the
State of Eritrea with a view to assisting the countries,
in collaboration with the Security Council, in finding a
way forward either through mutually agreed arbitration
or other means of peaceful dispute settlement for
both parties.
Djibouti has invested in peace. We have submitted
a legal memorandum and a comprehensive statement
of the pertinent facts and legal principles applicable
to this matter and other matters that form part of the
dispute and have promptly provided a list of prisoners
of war in our custody. As the Secretary-General begins

S/PV. 8322

to undertake consultations, we need to approach the
resolution of this conflict in good faith and with an
open mind, while bearing in mind that the conflict
has been going on for the last 10 years, and we have
gone through six years of fruitless negotiations under
the auspices of Qatar. The Council should urge Eritrea,
in line with paragraph 40 of resolution 2385 (2017),
to meaningfully engage in the mediation efforts led
by the Secretary-General in collaboration with the
Security Council. We cannot afford to squander the
opportunity we have to build and own a future of peace
and development in the region. It is worth recalling that
the Qatar-led mediation effort broke down as soon as it
began because Eritrea refused to appoint a member to
the body that was established to mediate and has never
really shown any serious commitment of peace.
While noting the potential prospects for peace
in the region, there is no escaping the fact that the
international boundary remains disputed. Eritrea
continues to occupy Djiboutian territory, prisoners of
war remain unaccounted for, threats of force continue
to emanate from the Eritrean side and the risk of violent
confrontation remains high. As documented in the most
recent report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea (S/2017/925), there is ongoing activity on the
Eritrean side of the border at Ras Doumeira, and the
situation is vulnerable to manipulation by spoilers.
Furthermore, as documented in successive Monitoring
Group reports, Eritrea continues to recruit, train and
equip Djibouti rebels at the Anda’ali training camp,
from where they conduct violent raids on villages in
Djibouti and attacks on Djiboutian security forces. The
Monitoring Group’s report goes on to provide a detailed
account, based on testimonies by former fighters, of
how they participated in violent cross-border abduction
raids, including the abduction of children. We call on
Eritrea to stop stealing the lives of these children, who
are often psychologically traumatized and are a loss to
their communities and nation.
When it does these things, Eritrea defiantly ignores
Security Council resolutions. If those resolutions are
to be regarded as more than empty and meaningless
gestures, the sanctions for non-compliance must remain
in place as long as Eritrea refuses to comply with them.
At the same time, Djibouti would support action by the
Council to facilitate Eritrea’s compliance by laying out
a clear path within a reasonable timetable towards that
end. In that regard, Djibouti would like to make the
following observations.

18-243117/8

S/PV.8322

The situation in Somalia

30/07/2018

First, with respect to ending Eritrea’s support
to armed groups, the Council should resolve to send
a monitoring mission to Eritrea within a month, on
condition that Eritrea commits to full cooperation with
it, including granting full access to all information and
records deemed necessary and all personnel whom
the mission considers it necessary to interview. The
mission would report to the Council within 30 days of
its return from Eritrea.

(spoke in French)

Secondly, with regard to prisoners of war, the
Council should require that Eritrea account for them
to the same monitoring mission and permit access for
the mission and the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. Before adjourning the meeting,
and as this may be the Council’s last meeting in the
month of July, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Sweden to all those
who have supported us in our presidency during the
past month.

Lastly, based on the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and in close collaboration with the Security
Council, the Secretary-General should convene an
urgent meeting of the parties to facilitate an agreement
between them through mutually acceptable means for
peaceful dispute settlement, as set forth in Article 33
of the Charter of the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral should issue his recommended solution within
120 days and require that Eritrea and Djibouti either
accept that solution or, in the event that one of them
does not, submit the dispute to the International Court of
Justice for a final and binding resolution. It is Djibouti’s
view that this path and timetable would offer Eritrea a
fair, reasonable and prompt way to resolve outstanding
issues in a manner that vindicates the actions of the
Council and ensures compliance with international law.
On Somalia, Djibouti is heartened by the outcome
of the Somalia partnership forum and the progress
that Somalia is making in a number of critical areas.
We welcome the endorsement of the transition plan
by the African Union Peace and Security Council and
the commitment to its implementation as expressed
in its communiqué of 27 July. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) continues to play a
critical enabling role as Somalia strives to develop its
capabilities in order to gradually assume responsibility
for security. AMISOM deserves the continued support
of the international community. In that regard,
Djibouti welcomed the renewal of AMISOM’s mandate
through the adoption of resolution 2431 (2018) earlier
this morning.

8/8

In conclusion, the emergence of a new Horn of
Africa is now possible and a goal that is within our reach.
Djibouti stands fully ready to deliver on its contribution
with the aim of achieving a comprehensive, lasting and
robust peace in the region for the benefit of our peoples.
Getting bogged down in the past is not an option. Let us
work together to build a better future for our children.

First, I want to thank our colleagues from the Security
Council Affairs Division for their professionalism and
courtesy over the past month, including the Conference
Management Service, officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff, who have, as always, done
an outstanding, very generous and supportive job. I
thank all of them. I also want to thank other parts of
the Secretariat that have supported us on substance
updates, and so forth, and as briefers on a regular basis.
Of course, I want to thank all the members of the
Council and their teams for their support, excellent
cooperation and constant good spirits at every level.
I am particularly pleased that we have been able to
come together to speak with one voice on so many
issues this month. I also thank other Member States
for their engagement, support and, in many cases, very
valuable contributions to the open debates that we have
had. I also thank the media and civil society for their
consistent engagement.
Finally, I want to say a huge thank-you to my
fantastic team, many of whom are here today and who
have worked very hard over the past month. As a final
comment, I know that I have the support of all members
in speaking on their behalf when I say good luck to
Ms. Pierce and her team. We feel absolutely at ease
handing the gavel over to her.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

18-24311
