22

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

ship of the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation and support for the efforts
and constructive steps taken by the Secretary-General,
especially the diplomatic process initiated by him, in the
search for a solution to the problem;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue those
efforts with a view to promoting a political solution, in
accordance with the provisions of the present resolution,
and the exploration of securing appropriate guarantees for
the non-use of force, or threat of force, against the political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict non-interference in each other's internal
affairs and with full regard for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to submit to Member States a report on the situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security".
74th plenary meeting
13 November 1985

40/13. International relief to Colombia
The General Assembly,
Deeply distressed by the loss of lives, the number of
afflicted persons and the enormous destruction wrought by
the volcanic activity ofNevado de! Ruiz, affecting areas of
the departments of Caldas, Tolima and Valle de! Cauca in
Colombia,
Noting the efforts of the Government and people of
Colombia to save lives and alleviate the sufferings of the
victims of this natural disaster,
Considering the enormous effort that will be required to
alleviate the grave situation caused by this natural disaster,
Recognizing that the magnitude of the catastrophe and
its effects will require, as a complement to the effort being
made by the people and Government of Colombia, a demonstration of international solidarity to ensure the necessary multilateral co-operation in order to meet the immediate emergency in the affected areas, as well as to
undertake the task of reconstruction,
1. Expresses its solidarity and support to the Government and people of Colombia in this tragedy;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States, international and regional agencies, non-governmental organizations and individuals providing emergency relief to
Colombia;
3. Calls upon the Governments of the Member States
to contribute generously to the relief and reconstruction
efforts in the affected areas and, to the extent possible, to
channel their assistance through the United Nations system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize
resources in order to assist in the relief and reconstruction
task of the Government of Colombia;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to co-ordinate
the multilateral assistance and, in consultation with the
24 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session. vol. I, Reso/utwns, p.
135.

Government of Colombia, to determine the emergency
and reconstruction needs of the affected areas.
79th plenary meeting
15 November 1985

40/19.

Return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of 19
November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/18 of
11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of
29 November 1979, 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December
1980, 36/64 of 27 November 1981 and 38/34 of 25
November 1983,
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, 24 adopted on 14
November 1970 by the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in co-operation with the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 25
Noting with satisfaction that following its appeal other
Member States have become parties to the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,
Aware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that they
may constitute collections representative of their cultural
heritage,
Noting with satisfaction that some countries have taken
positive steps towards the return or restitution of museum
pieces, archives and objets d'art to their countries of origin,
Reaffirming the importance of inventories as an essential tool for the understanding and protection of cultural
property and for the identification of dispersed heritage
and as a contribution to the advancement of scientific and
artistic knowledge and intercultural communication,
Deeply concerned at the clandestine excavations and the
illicit traffic in cultural property that continue to impoverish the cultural heritage of all peoples,
Supporting the solemn appeal made on 7 June 1978 by
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the return of irreplaceable cultural heritage to those who created it,
I. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of
Illicit Appropriation on the work they have accomplished,
in particular through the promotion of bilateral negotiations, for the return or restitution of cultural property, the
preparation of inventories of movable cultural property,
the reduction of illicit traffic in cultural property and the
dissemination of information to the public;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic
treasures contributes to the strengthening of international
co-operation and to the preservation and flowering of uni2.I A/40/344.
