United Nations

S/PV.4809

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4809

th meeting
Monday, 18 August 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wehbe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Syrian Arab Republic)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Trautwein
Mr. Sow
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Akram
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Letter dated 14 August 2003 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Serbia and Montenegro to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2003/815)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-46798 (E)

*0346798*

S/PV.4809

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Letter dated 14 August 2003 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Serbia and Montenegro to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2003/815)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia and Montenegro, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Nebojsa
Covic, Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia and President of the Coordination Centre for
Kosovo and Metohija.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Covic
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in response
to the request contained in a letter dated 14 August
2003 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Serbia and Montenegro to the United
Nations, document S/2003/815.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nebojsa Covic,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia and
President of the Coordination Centre for Kosovo and
Metohija.
Mr. Covic (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in
Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
would like to thank the Security Council for responding

2

positively to our initiative and for convening today’s
Council meeting on Kosovo and Metohija.
We are gathered here today because of the
hideous murder and wounding of innocent children
swimming in a river near their homes in Kosovo and
Metohija. The dead were killed only because they were
Serbs, and in order to send a message to all Serbs now
living in Kosovo and Metohija that they must leave and
that there is no chance for reconciliation and the sort of
multi-ethnic society that Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) and all of us foresee.
That massacre is by no means unique. Since
peacekeepers arrived in Kosovo and Metohija
following the bombing campaign of 1999, there have
been 6,013 attacks against Serbs and their cultural
heritage and property. One thousand and twenty-one
Serbs have been killed in those attacks. Fifty-two
sacred Christian relics have been destroyed in those
attacks, including 10 monasteries and churches dating
from the fourteenth century. Fifty-five other Orthodox
places of worship have been damaged or desecrated.
We in Serbia are determined to cooperate with the
international community, not only in Kosovo and
Metohija but also in the region as a whole. In southern
Serbia, for example, we have jointly build a model of
pacification and reconciliation. From the time I was
entrusted with the post of President of the Coordination
Centre for Kosovo and Metohija, we have tried hard to
cooperate with the international community and these
institutions in the province, in a spirit of partnership
and mutual confidence.
Through the most recent escalation of
terrorism — the wounding and murder of children — in
addition to the daily intimidation and persecution of
the remaining Serbs in the province, Albanian
extremists and terrorists are sending a message to the
new Special Representative of the Secretary- General:
every single decision he makes that does not meet their
expectations will result in fresh violence and in the
destabilization of the situation in Kosovo and Metohija.
Nevertheless, this brutal murder cannot but make
us all wonder whether this massive effort by the
international community will work, and if it can work.
Are the forces of evil and of nationalism just too strong
to be overcome? I appreciate the appointment by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General of a
special prosecutor to bring the perpetrators to justice.
We will do all we can to help him. At the same time,

S/PV.4809

we all must accept that crimes such as this one are not
unique. They are part of a pattern of activity by a
determined minority of the Albanian population, which
seeks to drive all Serbs out from Kosovo and Metohija,
and, of course, discourage any refugees and internally
displaced persons from returning, in order to bring the
ethnic cleansing of the province to completion.
Is this an overstatement? I do not think so.
Albanians who fled Kosovo and Metohija before
Milosevic’s regime returned to their homes in Kosovo
and Metohija in a flash, rescued and assisted by the
international community. The whole process was
completed in just a few days. Serbs who fled Kosovo
and Metohija have been advised not to return in groups
but individually, due to reasons of security — or, to be
more accurate — reasons of insecurity. At its current
pace, the process of the return of Serbs and other nonAlbanians to the province will take over 100 years.
Albanians,
who
suffered
terribly
under
Milosevic’s regime and who could be our key
interlocutors, are watching in silence the brutal
retaliations being carried out by their extremists
compatriots.
I strongly believe that not all Albanians approve
of this brutality and savageness. I base this belief on
the tragic fate of those Albanian leaders who paid with
their own lives for their disapproval of such crimes. It
is therefore clear to me why the majority of Albanians
have remained silent and why only a few Albanians,
mainly politicians, have faint-heartedly condemned
these crimes, while at the same time recalling Serbian
crimes of the past.
UNMIK and KFOR have not done as much as
they could have under these distorted circumstances. I
am trying to understand the inertia of the
representatives of the international community. I can
understand it, but I cannot forgive it.
An UNMIK police officer was recently
assassinated, and numerous brutal attacks have been
carried out targeting international peacekeepers. If one
reads carefully between the lines, one can discern that
the following message is being sent to the officers of
the international mission: “Think hard before you do
anything. We are watching you. Any of you can be
killed.” Thus the staff of the United Nations Mission
and all officers and personnel that are part of the
international troops in Kosovo and Metohija have
become hostages of Albanian extremism and terrorism.

This disturbing outcome might have been avoided
had the international community, immediately upon
termination of the armed conflict in Kosovo and
Metohija and of the bombing campaign against
Yugoslavia, applied the same standards in condemning
Serbian and Albanian crimes. So far, with a single
exception, only Serb perpetrators have been brought
before the judges of The Hague Tribunal. Albanian
assassins have thus been silently amnestied and
become untouchable; they have been made into
national heroes.
I believe that it is high time for the international
community to look back and to evaluate the results of
its own actions. We all must recognize, without any
prejudice or fear, that the actions of Albanian extremist
and terrorist groups represent the main threat to the
stabilization of Kosovo and Metohija and to the region
as a whole.
Is the international community committed to
justice and fairness at any cost? Is it truly determined
to succeed in Kosovo and Metohija?
The United Nations Mission, headed by Mr. Harri
Holkeri, must now either accomplish what his
predecessors have failed to achieve or acknowledge its
defeat. In this difficult endeavour, Mr. Holkeri can
count on our full support and assistance.
If we want to succeed, we must take vigorous and
decisive measures that will lead to the fulfilment of the
agreed
objectives:
the
full
and
consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), major progress in the return of internally
displaced persons, and security and freedom of
movement for all ethnic communities.
Despite the commitment shown thus far by
Belgrade and the Government of the Republic of Serbia
with regard to the establishment of a functional multiethnic society in Kosovo and Metohija, we are
legitimately concerned that Albanian extremists and
terrorists will use all available means to prevent the
fulfilment of these endeavours. Serbia has carried out
all of the measures to which it has committed itself in
order to bring the process of stabilization in Kosovo
and Metohija to completion.
The following urgent steps need to be taken to
normalize the situation in Kosovo and Metohija.
First, the international Mission must send a clear
message regarding its key objectives by implementing

3

S/PV.4809

fully resolution 1244 (1999) and by building a multiethnic and tolerant community with a solid economic
foundation and functioning provisional democratic
institutions.
Second, the international Mission has to ensure
that the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) is
equitable vis-à-vis all parties and all ethnic groups, and
that it does not favour one party or one ethnic group to
the detriment of another.
Third, the international security forces, if they are
not expanded, must at least be kept at the current level.
For purposes of prevention, their presence must have
greater visibility and be better targeted. They must be
reorganized in order more effectively to address the
problem of Albanian terrorist groups that are supported
by organized crime.
Fourth, KFOR and UNMIK must ensure, from the
side of the province, the full protection of the
administrative line between central Serbia and Kosovo
and Metohija, in full cooperation with the army and
police of Serbia and Montenegro.
Fifth, international law enforcement officials
must take the lead and be more efficient in
investigating ethnically motivated crimes and in
bringing their perpetrators to justice.
Sixth, UNMIK and KFOR should provide for the
full protection of witnesses, so that they can testify in
court against persons indicted for criminal acts and in
connection with organized crime. Citizens must be
encouraged to testify against criminals without fear or
ethnic bias.
Seventh, the thorough and energetic disarmament
of all citizens of Kosovo and Metohija must be carried
out.
Eighth, it is necessary to ensure that all countries
take the same approach to the Albanian National Army
(ANA), an organization which the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
has
proclaimed to be a terrorist organization. The ANA is
variously defined as a liberation organization and as a
terrorist organization. This could be very dangerous. It
must be placed on the list of terrorist organizations,
and international standards in the fight against
terrorism must fully be applied to it.
Ninth, in the light of the crimes committed by
individual members of the Kosovo Protection Corps, a

4

thorough investigation must be carried out, leading to
its abolishment. Time and again, its key members are
implicated in crimes such as the bombing of the
railroad bridge near Zvecan and assisting armed
insurrection in Macedonia. Their very existence shows
a certain hypocrisy: sorrow for the death of innocent
Serbs, but unwillingness to tackle some of the root
causes of the crimes. So long as that organization
exists, true reconciliation will not be possible.
Tenth, perpetrators of war crimes must be
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and extradited to the Hague,
regardless of their present positions.
Eleventh, in tackling security challenges in the
province, such as organized crime, terrorism and so on,
the security forces in Kosovo and Metohija must
cooperate more closely with the security forces in the
region, and with the security forces of Serbia and
Montenegro in particular.
Twelfth, Albanian political leaders must be urged
to implement their formal support for returns, the
democratization of society, the rule of law and interethnic reconciliation by providing all necessary
assistance to all citizens in Kosovo and Metohija,
regardless of their ethnicity.
Thirteenth, adequate measures must be taken
against all officials of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government — regardless of their ethnicity —
who do not provide full and public support for the
aforementioned measures.
And, fourteenth, officials of the international
presence in Kosovo and Metohija who refrain from
carrying out the aforementioned measures in the fight
against inter-ethnic violence, terrorism and organized
crime must be held liable for their actions and be
adequately reprimanded.
For all the proposed measures and standards, it is
necessary to develop a clear plan of set and measurable
tasks and responsibilities, specifying those in charge of
their implementation. Similarly, it is necessary to set
precise time frames, follow through on their realization
and objectively assess the results accomplished.
If the international community fails to eradicate
the instability in a powerful and surgical manner and if
the measures it undertakes are weak and insignificant,
it will be responsible before history for a resurrection
of fascism in one part of Europe and the creation of a

S/PV.4809

monstrous mono-ethnic Albanian para-State in the
territory that is legally recognized as part of Serbia —
that is, Serbia and Montenegro — by United Nations
documents. That would be to validate an act of
violence by means of an act of violence.
Let me bring this statement to closure by
admitting that hope in me has not died. Otherwise, I
certainly would have taken the floor today as the
former President of the Coordination Centre for
Kosovo and Metohija. I profoundly regret that my hope
cannot bring the children assassinated in Gorazdevac to
life, nor can it comfort the crippled ones. However,
there is one thing it can certainly do: it can keep the
door of dialogue open for a bit longer.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank Deputy Prime Minister Covic for
travelling to New York to address the Council. It was
good to see him here again. I wish it were under better
circumstances.
My authorities have condemned in the strongest
terms the attack on and the murder of the young
Kosovars on 13 August. It was a horrible crime. Our
spokesman called it an atrocity. We would like to
extend our deepest condolences to the families. We
welcome the fact that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
responded quickly and has launched an investigation
into the crime. That investigation is going on now, and
we should not draw conclusions about who is
responsible until it is complete and until those who are
responsible have been brought to justice.
We also note the statements of Kosovo Albanian
leaders, including President Rugova and Prime
Minister Rexhepi, deploring the criminal events. We
also note and welcome statements by leaders of Serbia
and Montenegro calling for a responsible reaction to
the events, such as the statement made by Defence
Minister Tadic, that Serbia and Montenegro will
address all problems in a rational way and will remain
committed to the peace process.
What we need to see is resolve and commitment
to pursuing that process. Those violent acts, which
should be punished, are damaging to the future of all
Kosovars, and the perpetrators must be brought to
justice. We are confident that UNMIK will do
everything possible to see that is done.

However, the best homage that we can pay the
victims of that violence is to redouble efforts to create
the conditions for a multi-ethnic Kosovo and for the
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). That is
an effort in which the new Special Representative, Mr.
Holkeri, is now fully engaged, and in which he has my
Government’s very firm and determined support.
Mr. Trautwein (Germany): We deeply deplore
and condemn the ruthless killing of children in Kosovo
on 13 August. We extend our sincere condolences to
the families. The perpetrators of the attack have not yet
been identified. Independent of their background, this
is another attack in a progression of violent incidents
that have taken place in Kosovo over the past weeks.
We have seen attacks against institutions, public
buildings and vehicles. We have seen revenge for the
sentences against four former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA). And now we are faced with
an attack against children. The police officer of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) who was shot in the northern part of
Kosovo two weeks ago and the Kosovo Serb children
seem to have been targeted deliberately. Today, Kosovo
Albanians were attacked when passing through a
Serbian village near Pristina. While many of those
attacks might have individual motives, together they
result in creating an atmosphere of lawlessness and of
intimidation. They poison the relations between the
ethnic groups and can damage relations with the
international presence in Kosovo.
If the perpetrators’ aim is to obstruct
reconciliation, refugee returns or the envisaged direct
dialogue or if they believe they can force the
international community into a premature status
discussion, they must know that this is totally
unacceptable and that they will not succeed.
We welcome the statements by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo condemning
the violence and urge all their representatives to exert
their influence on public opinion and to speak out for
the acceptance of the rule of law. No one is above the
law. UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia will
ensure that the perpetrators who committed the attacks
and murders of the past weeks, as well as those who
committed crimes during the time of armed conflict,
will be brought to just.

5

S/PV.4809

Concerning the future status of Kosovo, the
parties have to understand that no unilateral act can
change the status of Kosovo as laid down in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). The fact that for the
time being there is no common ground between the
parties on the future status of Kosovo is one more
reason why the international community must insist on
the policy of standards before status. There can be no
debate of the status issue before the benchmarks are
met.
One of the benchmarks is the initiation of a direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on practical
matters of common concern. This must not be confused
with the dialogue on the status question. This direct
dialogue must start immediately. The present security
situation, as well as the current internal debate about
the new Serbian Constitution, should not be taken as a
pretext by Kosovar politicians to escape from their
responsibility for a peaceful and stable Kosovo. We
urge them to concentrate on the next steps.
I would like to conclude by expressing my
Government’s full support for the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, in the challenges that lie ahead.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting of
the Security Council, which offers us the opportunity to
speak our minds about the atrocious acts recently
committed in Kosovo.
I should also like to welcome the Deputy Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Covic. I only
regret that his reason for coming here was the
assassination of two teenagers and the serious injury of
four others. Bulgaria categorically condemns the
heinous acts of 13 August in the village of Gorazdevac,
near Pec. I take this opportunity to convey the
condolences of Bulgaria and the Bulgarian people to
the bereaved families, particularly those of Ivan
Jovovic and Pantelija Dakic.
This horrendous act, following the murder of a
police officer of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) barely
more than a week earlier, clearly seeks to undermine
the efforts of all international and local actors to enable
Kosovars to return to their normal lives. Bulgaria
believes that the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo should not only categorically
condemn the violence, but also help the local police

6

and UNMIK to identify as quickly as possible the
perpetrators of these crimes and assist the organs of
justice in their work. The cooperation of the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions is, we believe, a true test of
their ability to shoulder greater responsibility in
managing the region and in the transfer of authority.
Bulgaria has followed with growing concern such
acts of inter-ethnic violence and intolerance, which
merely further delay reconciliation among the Kosovar
communities and the return of refugees to their home
towns. It is very important that the international
community, and UNMIK in particular, clearly inform
all of the local political forces and the inhabitants of
Kosovo, irrespective of their ethnic origin or their
place in society, that such acts are absolutely
intolerable to the international community.
Bulgaria also condemns the destruction of
religious monuments referred to earlier by Deputy
Prime Minister Covic. We believe that the destruction
of Orthodox churches and monasteries is totally
unacceptable. The point has been made in the past that
these acts must stop. We hope that UNMIK will be able
to take the steps necessary to deter those who commit
them.
We also believe that such acts of inter-ethnic
violence in Kosovo do nothing to improve the positions
of the various parties to the impending negotiations
between Belgrade and Pristina. They can only impede
the process. This is yet another reason why we hope
that such acts will cease immediately.
In conclusion, I should like to say that the
concerns I have just formulated are shared not only by
Bulgaria in its capacity as a member of the Security
Council, but also by all of the countries of South-East
Europe. We are duty-bound to state this on behalf of all
the inhabitants of South-East Europe, who will never
accept inter-ethnic violence.
I should also like to offer my best wishes to the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri. He has the experience and the
background necessary to confront the daunting
challenges he faces in Kosovo and we assure him of
our full support.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Like other speakers, I
would like to welcome the participation in this debate
of Deputy Prime Minister Covic of the Republic of
Serbia. We have heard his statement with great interest.

S/PV.4809

I would also wish to add my voice to express the
profound sadness of the Government and people of
Pakistan at the recent brutal murders in Gorazdevac. As
it has done in the past, Pakistan unreservedly and
unequivocally condemns all ethnically motivated
crimes in Kosovo. We have consistently called for an
end to impunity and we will continue to urge that all
those who have committed such crimes in Kosovo over
the past four years be brought to justice.
The establishment of the rule of law and security
is the most essential element in almost all post-conflict
transitional administration situations. Kosovo is no
exception in this regard. We have repeatedly stated
that, without security, there can be no freedom of
movement, no protection of minorities, no sustainable
return of refugees and no economic recovery. The rule
of law is essential to progress towards justice,
reconciliation and self-governance. These are the
essential pillars on which the success of the Provisional
Institutions and the future political stability of Kosovo
depend. We hope that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), under
the new and able leadership of Mr. Holkeri, will give
these issues the highest priority.
We believe that something must be done urgently
to put an end to such ethnically motivated crimes as
have happened recently. Pakistan is fully committed to
do all it can to assist UNMIK efforts in that regard. We
have committed over 100 police personnel to UNMIK,
including a special police unit. Our Minister for the
Interior visited Kosovo last week and reiterated
Pakistan’s resolve and commitment to the maintenance
of peace and security in Kosovo. We stand by that
commitment.
It should be recalled that in Kosovo, a province of
2 million people, there is a protection force of 17,000
troops led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
in addition to the presence of over 4,000 UNMIK
police personnel deployed there.
I believe that the Security Council, in considering
such emergency situations, must make an overall costbenefit analysis of where and how forces should be
deployed. Let us not forget that the Council waited for
weeks to be able to deploy a few thousand forces in
Liberia, where hundreds of people were dying every
day. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo we
waited three years to be able to deploy 10,800 troops.
And the most classic example is that in Jammu and

Kashmir, an area populated by 10 million people, only
45 United Nations observers were able to be deployed
to contain the situation in what has been recently called
the most dangerous place on earth.
My delegation is of the view that the brutal
murders that took place in Gorazdevac should be a
wake-up call. Our assessment is that, although this is
one in a series of incidents, it is indicative of the fact
that the underlying political issues relating to Kosovo
remain to be resolutely addressed and resolved. Of
course, the slogan “standards before status” sounds
good, and we hope that it will be fulfilled. But all the
parties concerned bear a responsibility to reach an
agreement and to resolve their differences in Kosovo.
Nationalist rhetoric — on all sides — does not help.
Hate must be discarded as a political currency in
Kosovo, as elsewhere.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia. His trip here is a reminder of the extraordinary
gravity of the act about which the Council is meeting. I
wish to express to him my delegation’s condolences.
The murder of the Kosovar children is a horrible,
despicable and almost unimaginable crime. A terrorist
act of this kind — because that is what it is, a
horrendous terrorist act — is completely unjustifiable.
It is totally condemnable, and the international
community must, and does, consider it as such. Its
perpetrators must be brought to justice to answer for
this terrible act. The international community demands
it.
Some years ago, the international community
entered the area to stop what was considered ethnic
cleansing. Today it would be incomprehensible and
totally unjust if it were to remain idle, judging that
what is now at issue are isolated acts that should not be
exaggerated. Those “isolated acts” are links in a policy
of harassment, intimidation and unspeakable violence
against a particular community. Those not-so-isolated
acts can — and in this case do — constitute terrorism.
As we have said, terrorism has no justification or
colour. Terrorism is terrorism.
I hope and wish that the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo will successfully carry out
its inquiries and that those responsible will be brought
to justice. I also trust that the political leaders will be
able to maintain calm and will sincerely seek to
achieve the objectives of resolution 1284 (1999): a

7

S/PV.4809

tolerant multi-ethnic community in which dialogue and
democracy are the rule, not the exception.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It is
very good to have Mr. Covic with us today. I would
like to pay tribute initially to the work he has done in
southern Serbia and in working with Kosovo in the
past.
I think that we have to recognize that a series of
violent incidents have been occurring over the past
month and longer. We must condemn the attack at
Gorazdevac, the killing of the Serb fisherman on 11
August and, indeed, all the acts of violence and
extremism. Every effort must be made to track down
and bring to justice those responsible.
The United Kingdom, too, would like to offer its
condolences to the families of those who have died.
We are very glad that the new Special
Representative, Mr. Holkeri, has taken up the initiative
to set up an inquiry, and we wish him every success as
he takes on his mission.
I welcome the prompt action by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), which deployed 300 men as a strengthened
and visible presence. It is vital that all Kosovo citizens
should be able to feel safe and secure. Minority
communities need and are entitled to credible,
guaranteed and full protection.
Having listened to Mr. Covic, I would, however,
like to reject any sense of inertia by the international
community. I think that charge is unfounded and unfair.
We welcome the condemnation of the attacks by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, the
Kosovo Assembly and the President. Although trust
between the two communities is at a particularly low
level, isolated acts of extremism must not be allowed to
polarize Kosovo society any further. We welcome the
statement of the Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Zivkovic,
encouraging Kosovo Serbs to stay in Kosovo. But the
rash of inter-ethnic incidents shows only too clearly the
potential for localized violence to spread. So we urge
all parties to show restraint. The extremists must be
defeated and cannot be allowed to undermine Kosovo’s
future.
We support the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in its
clamp down on terrorist activity in Kosovo. The United
Kingdom supports the reform and the development of
the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) as a civilian

8

emergency organization. We are clear too that further
action will and should be taken against any members of
the KPC who are involved in terrorism. But the United
Kingdom does not share the view that the time has
come to wrap up the KPC, because it fulfils a useful
function.
Let us be clear that the attack on terrorism and
extremism is without favour. The United Kingdom has
always emphasized that the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) must
prosecute those responsible for serious crimes, without
discrimination, and must bring to justice all those
involved.
I share with Mr. Covic the wish that we should all
bring perpetrators of war crimes indicted by ICTY and
ensure their extradition to The Hague. That applies
equally to those indicted who may happen to be living
in Serbia today.
The Thessaloniki Summit announced the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue on technical issues, and it is
important for that dialogue to continue. But let us face
it; that dialogue is not helped by a background, a
barrage of positions on Kosovo, with rounds of
accusation and counter-accusation between Belgrade
and Pristina. Public pre-positioning of this sort is only
likely to fuel violence. Those in responsible positions
must ensure that their rhetoric matches the gravity of
the situation.
The discussions now envisaged between Belgrade
and Pristina are not to be confused with the final status
negotiations set out in resolution 1244 (1999). Like
Germany, the United Kingdom strongly supports
“standards before status”. While we welcome what is
being achieved on standards, we must all acknowledge
how much still needs to be done. Our goal is a stable,
peaceful and multi-ethnic Kosovo that will reduce its
dependence upon the international community while
moving towards prosperity.
The international community has made clear its
rejection of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. The conflict in
Kosovo in 1999 was not intended to produce a monoethnic Kosovo. The goals for Kosovo are the same as
the goals for the countries of the region. Normal
European democratic standards must prevail. The road
to Europe cannot be built on terrorism and extremism.
Mr. Covic asked — rhetorically, I hope —
whether the international community was committed to

S/PV.4809

justice and determined to succeed in Kosovo. The
answer is self-evident. The commitment today, which
has already been alluded to by the Pakistani
Ambassador, in terms of the number of KFOR troops,
the involvement of the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the part played by
the European Union — all these reflect a determination
within the United Nations umbrella to produce the
outcome we seek.
Progress in Kosovo, in Serbia and Montenegro
and in the region will be driven by Europeanization and
must advance Europeanization. There can be no violent
or unilateral attempts to dictate final status. At this
stage, the parties should be prepared to tackle technical
issues in a constructive, flexible manner, showing a
willingness to listen and to argue in a rational manner.
This is now key, particularly given the escalated
tension. We must engender goodwill, show good faith
and be transparent. That entails, in part, concrete,
credible and guaranteed full protection, in law and in
practice, for minority communities.
The right of refugees and displaced persons to
return to their homes must be accepted in theory and in
practice. Political norms and human rights must be
developed in Kosovo on a par with the best European
standards. In the view of the United Kingdom, only
then can Kosovo move forward in a stable, peaceful
manner, developing coexistence on its territory and
better relations with its neighbours.

My delegation views those horrific crimes as a serious
setback for the United Nations efforts to foster multiethnicity in Kosovo and create conditions for the return
and re-integration of the Kosovo Serb minority.
We welcome the meaningful progress achieved by
the political process in Kosovo and the progress at the
institutional level towards the goals set in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework. However, the progress made at the
institutional and political levels is not matched by
similar progress in the security situation and interethnic relations, which remain matters of great
concern.
We recognize the need to deploy continued efforts
to improve the security situation, particularly through
the strengthening of the Kosovo police and law
enforcement institutions. We also recognize the need
for a determined fight against sectarian extremists and
terrorist elements and against transnational organized
crime, lively scourges of the region whose existence is
a serious threat to the entire process of rebuilding
Kosovo. We support the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and insist on the necessity of a constructive dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina that should be further
expanded to political issues in order to achieve
concrete results.

Mr. Lucas (Angola): Mr. President, I thank you
on behalf of the Angolan delegation for convening this
meeting on the situation in Kosovo. We welcome the
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia to this
meeting of the Security Council, and we took good
note of the programme of action that he formulated in
his statement.

My delegation urges the leaders of Kosovo to
show renewed commitment to the peace process and
the objectives set by the international community for
Kosovo. We reiterate that the policy of “standards
before status” remains a consistent strategy in framing
the objective of establishing a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in Kosovo, an endeavour that
requires
permanent
dialogue,
patience
and
determination.

My delegation continues to follow closely the
developments in Kosovo, and on various occasions in
Security Council meetings we have expressed our
comprehensive views on the situation.

To conclude, we would like to extend our support
to the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri. We wish him all
success in such a difficult but noble task.

In today’s meeting we would like to emphasize
the following. We join previous speakers in expressing
our great concern for the recent security incidents in
Kosovo. My delegation strongly condemns the recent
killing and wounding of young Kosovo Serbs — a
stupid and gratuitous crime. The perpetrators must be
brought, as soon as possible, to the dock. We convey
our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims.

Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation also would like to welcome the Deputy
Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic. I would like to
thank him for the views and considerations he has
conveyed to the Security Council about the most recent
events in Kosovo.

9

S/PV.4809

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to extend our support to the work being done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to try to find and bring to justice the
perpetrators of the attack of 13 August against a group
of young Serbs near the village of Gorazdevac. We
trust their efforts will be successful.
We strongly condemn that crime, which took the
life of one young person and wounded four others. In
addition, it was an attack on the very future of Kosovo
and against the very principle of building a multiethnic society in which there is respect for the rule of
law. I convey my condolences and those of my
Government to the bereaved families who are suffering
from these abhorrent crimes. My delegation regards
those events as part of a series of incidents that
includes the attack also carried out on 13 August
against a Kosovar Albanian woman, as well as later
incidents that clearly signal a trend that must be
stopped.
My delegation would also like to condemn the
killing of Major Satish Menon, a civilian police
member of UNMIK, on 3 August. We wish to convey
our deepest condolences to his family and to the
Government of India.
The fabric of Kosovar society is still very fragile
and susceptible to provocation and a chain of reprisals
and counter-reprisals. We believe that the international
community must pay special attention and exert the
necessary influence on all spheres of authority
involved so that the political leaders of both Serbia and
Montenegro and the province of Kosovo make a
serious and resolute effort to contribute to the
establishment of an understanding that would send a
very clear message to the inhabitants of Kosovo that
they must reject all forms of violence, in particular
ethnic violence. The rejection of violence must then
lead to building a truly multi-ethnic society in which
everyone can live together.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, described as a
tragedy for Kosovo the fact that violence is still
claiming innocent lives four years after the end of the
conflict. He also stated that the fact that violence is
continuing is serving to strengthen his resolve to
establish the rule of law in Kosovo to benefit all of
Kosovo’s inhabitants. We are pleased that that is the
intention of the Special Representative, who has just

10

gone to Kosovo to take up his duties. Mexico supports
the work he is doing. We also agree with his
assessment that establishing the rule of law also
includes combating organized crime and terrorist and
extremist activities, strengthening democratic and
multi-ethnic institutions, promoting dialogue and intercommunal integration and fostering economic
development, education and culture. Those activities
should continue to be priorities carried out and
promoted by the Mission. My delegation also believes
that that work should be carried out in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework.
However, we would like to emphasize that the
primary responsibility for breathing life into the
process of normalizing Kosovo rests with Kosovars
themselves, both the Albanian majority and the
minorities. Their political representatives and
community leaders should actively promote the hopes
of the people of Kosovo for a multi-ethnic society. The
ongoing political activism of local leaders is required
to establish the rule of law and to combat extremism
and violence. Those leaders must also be firmly
committed to strengthening democratic and multiethnic institutions, reconciliation and inter-communal
dialogue, and the effort for the return of refugees and
displaced persons under conditions that provide real
security.
We believe that part of the return effort includes
the Kosovo Assembly’s adoption of a resolution on the
subject of refugees, above all the amendment
specifically including those who left Kosovo after the
conflict. That sends a positive signal that we hope will
be more than a symbolic gesture. Rather, we hope that
it will truly help to create the political and legal
commitment conducive to the ultimate establishment of
a positive and enabling atmosphere for the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their communities.
The efforts being made to achieve disarmament
are also important, as is the need to take advantage of
the amnesty recently announced by UNMIK and for
people to hand over any firearms in their possession
before 30 September. It is clear that the proliferation of
weapons fosters violence, organized crime and
terrorism.
As I indicated earlier, I would like to conclude
my statement by once again emphasizing the
importance of cooperation between Belgrade and

S/PV.4809

Pristina so that the process of building a multi-ethnic
society can bear fruit. Before the question of Kosovo’s
status is resolved it is necessary not only to achieve
certain standards, the rule of law and the establishment
of the institutions necessary for genuinely
representative political life; there must also be
determined dialogue and close communication between
Belgrade and Pristina conducive to establishing the
necessary environment and conditions for reaching the
understandings necessary to knit together the fabric of
Kosovar society and to finally resolve the issue of
status.
In this connection, we are concerned over the
recent adoption by the Serbian Government of a
document on Kosovo, which, in our view, does not help
to establish a conducive atmosphere for the beginning
of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
We wish to make a very strong appeal to the
provisional authorities in the province of Kosovo to
refrain from issuing unilateral pronouncements that
only exacerbate the atmosphere of confrontation and
misunderstanding.
Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, I should like to thank you for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on the
situation in Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. I also
welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister of
the Republic of Serbia and Montenegro here today,
although we regret the events that have brought him to
New York.
We strongly condemn the events that took place
on 13 August near the village of Gorazdevac that took
the lives of two children and wounded a number of
others. The killing of children is utterly despicable.
There can be no justification for it; it is unacceptable.
Allow me to convey our condolences to the bereaved
families.
This occurrence is yet another in a series of
recent events in the region which the Security Council
has condemned. It has also expressed its concern as to
their impact on the ongoing process in Kosovo.
Every effort must be made to find those
responsible for these and other atrocities, who to date
have gone unpunished. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice. We welcome the steps taken so far
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), and it is our hope that its efforts

to find those responsible will be stepped up even
further.
Any act of violence, harassment or discrimination
on ethnic grounds is detrimental to the building of a
multi-ethnic Kosovo and goes against the spirit of
resolution 1244 (1999). The Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of Kosovo have a central role to play
in achieving reconciliation in Kosovo, so as to make
possible the building of a multi-ethnic and democratic
society that includes all inhabitants, with no
exclusions.
The events that have brought us here today must
serve as a catalyst for us to recommit ourselves to this
process. The future of Kosovo presents a major
challenge. We therefore agree with what Mr. Holkeri
said on 14 August about the urgent need to strengthen
the rule of law, step up the combat against organized
crime and promote economic development.
We urge the parties to intensify and broaden the
scope of the dialogue. In the absence of a constructive
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and between
UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly, it will be very
difficult to achieve any concrete and tangible results
with respect to the major challenge that is faced.
We reiterate once again our thanks for the efforts
and the professionalism of UNMIK personnel, and we
offer our full support to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, whom we
know from his excellent work as President of the
Assembly. We wish him well in his current work.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on the
situation in Kosovo. I should like also to bid welcome
to the Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic, and
to thank him for the statement he made earlier.
The shooting incident of 13 August that took
place in the Pec region, which resulted in the death of
two young Serbs and the hospitalization of several
others, who were seriously wounded, was a horrendous
and inadmissible act which is of great concern to my
delegation. We convey sincere condolences to the
bereaved families.
Our condemnation of this deadly incident is all
the more resolute given that it comes shortly after the
heinous murder on 3 August of Commander Satish
Menon of the United Nations Interim Administration

11

S/PV.4809

Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) police, who was killed in
cold blood while carrying out his duties in the
Mitrovica area, in the north of Kosovo. We recall also
the murder on 4 June of three people in the city of
Obilic and the many acts of vandalism carried out on
ethnic grounds. Cameroon wishes to reiterate its strong
condemnation of these acts, which run counter to the
process of normalization of the situation in Kosovo and
to the creation of the structures of a new Kosovar
society endowed with functioning democratic
institutions, in a secure and prosperous framework of
tolerance in which people accept each other’s
differences and respect one another.
On 3 July, my delegation said, in this very
Chamber, that it was pleased at the important progress
made in Kosovo in the political and institutional areas.
Unfortunately, however, the same cannot be said of
security-related issues. We fear that, if we are not
careful, such unacceptable acts could form part of a
strategy aimed at undermining the dialogue that the
international community has tirelessly been advocating
for the Kosovo parties. This would make it more
difficult, if not impossible, to restore confidence in all
its aspects.
The people there are more than ever in need of
the presence of, and an additional impetus from, the
international community, in order to help them to keep
alive the hope, and make a reality, of a peaceful
society — a unified society living in harmony with
itself and with its environment.
The process of the return of displaced persons
and of refugees — for which an appeal was launched
on 2 July, to the great satisfaction of the international
community — could be the principal victim of these
murders, which exacerbate fear, hatred, injustice and
violence. I therefore welcome the appeal made by the
Deputy Prime Minister for Serbs to remain in Kosovo.
I should like to say here also that my country is
committed to the principle of standards before status.
A few days ago, a delegation from my country
visited Kosovo and took note of the excellent work
being done there by the United Nations and by the
international community as a whole. We have read the
latest report of the Secretary-General on Kosovo, and
we have also noted the fragility of the achievements
registered in the context of the serious problems
stemming from questions of identity, which pose a

12

major obstacle to the building of a truly multi-ethnic
society.
In this context, my delegation fully agrees with
what Mr. Holkeri, the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, said on 13 August:
“We cannot allow a few extremists, of
whatever ethnicity, to undermine the secure and
hopeful future of Kosovo that so many have
worked to build here. Such incidents will only
strengthen our determination to establish the rule
of law for the sake of all people in Kosovo.”
More than 450,000 illegal arms of all calibres are
circulating today in Kosovo. This poses an ongoing
threat to peace and security in the province and to the
efforts of the international community, as is made clear
by these recent regrettable events. It is therefore with
great satisfaction that we welcomed the decision to
launch a weapons amnesty programme in Kosovo from 1
to 30 September, to enable the voluntary disarmament of
the people until the latter date, after which they will face
legal action. My delegation urgently appeals to all
sectors of Kosovo society massively to support that
programme, which has opened up a new window on the
highway to peace and reconciliation.
My delegation once again calls on political and
administrative leaders and civil society in the province
to avoid any action that could inflame emotions and
thus create new obstacles to the process of building a
multi-ethnic and multicultural civil society. They are
all responsible for the security of all the people of
Kosovo and thus have a role to play in combating that
type of incident and in combating impunity. Their firm
commitment is essential.
My delegation is convinced that direct dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade could defuse all kinds of
declared and potential tensions or at least prevent their
exacerbation. The rapprochement of the two capitals
should be encouraged and continued.
The current situation in Kosovo indicates that
much remains to be done if we wish to attain our goals.
But it is possible, as demonstrated by the success of the
civilian Kosovo Police Force, which is multi-ethnic and
incorporates gender mainstreaming. The Police Force
has the difficult task of enforcing the law in Kosovo and
combating extremism and all other forms of crime.
Initially, it is being given significant assistance from the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in

S/PV.4809

Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR). In
that context, we hope that UNMIK’s efforts will
speedily result in the perpetrators of those recent crimes
being found and brought to justice.
Only the commitment of all Kosovans to a culture
of peace will restore peace in hearts and minds and
make it possible to build a truly multi-ethnic and
multicultural
society
founded
on
universally
recognized democratic values. That is the challenge
faced by Kosovans, and by the entire international
community as well. The international community long
ago decided to meet that challenge and is patiently and
tenaciously striving to do so. Now, it is up to the
people of Kosovo to prove that they are committed to
that path.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, the participation of the
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic, in today’s
meeting of the Security Council is due to a tragic
event. Russia learned with outrage and sorrow of the
horrendous crime committed on 13 August in the Pec
area of Kosovo, where two people were killed and four
Serb children were wounded. There is no possible
justification for that incident. It deserves strong
condemnation, as well as a commensurate, robust
response. We hope that the guilty will be found and
duly punished. We express our profound condolences
to the relatives of all the victims, particularly to those
who lost their children in this tragedy. There is no
doubt whatsoever that this is another manifestation of
terrorism. And in the context of the realities of Kosovo,
it is particularly dangerous since it adds further tension
to complex inter-ethnic relations. As experience has
shown, such incidents, which clearly have an ethnic
subtext, can trigger a chain reaction, with extremely
negative consequences for the settlement in the
province.
We note the expeditious steps taken by the
international presence, inter alia, by the Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Holkeri, to apprehend the
criminals and to bring them to justice. That incident
clearly demonstrates once again the complexity of the
challenges in Kosovo facing the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, primarily in
maintaining — or rather, in restoring — the multiethnic nature of the province. That tragic episode has
proven once more the validity of the policy of the
international community to step up efforts to advance

the peace process and to prioritize the normalization of
the situation in Kosovo, primarily by ensuring equal
security and the rule of law. Meeting those challenges
is the duty not only of the international presence but
also of Kosovo politicians, who bear some of the
responsibility for the situation in the province.
Russia’s position on the processes going on in the
province is well known. Over the last four years, since
the Security Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999),
an enormous effort has been invested in the settlement,
and significant progress has been made. However,
despite the progress in providing for significant
autonomy and self-government in Kosovo, as
stipulated by resolution 1244 (1999), there are still
serious unresolved problems in the province.
The main problem remains the absence of
adequate security and the continuation of ethnically
motivated violence. So far, those persons guilty of
committing the brutal 4 June murder of a Serbian
family in Obilic have not yet been identified and
therefore have not been duly punished. Today, we are
once again witnessing a horrendous crime whose target
was children.
There are still serious difficulties in providing for
the adequate representation of minorities, particularly
of the Serbian minority, in the structures of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of the
province. As well, there are difficulties in establishing
the process for the return of refugees to the province.
Like other members of the Security Council, we are
convinced that unless there is a radical improvement in
the situation regarding those issues, the idea of
building a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo will be
further stalled, which will fuel unhealthy illusions
among the remaining extremist forces in the province.
That would create fertile ground for the continuation of
violence.
Under the leadership of Mr. Holkeri, UNMIK will
have to do painstaking work fully to implement the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and work on the
concept of “standards before status”, which provides
for the necessary basic democratic conditions to be put
in place before a final decision is taken on the future
status of Kosovo. We urge the Mission to take a more
active and more consistent position on countering any
manifestation of inter-ethnic intolerance, ethnic crime
or the growth of radical tendencies in the province, and
on establishing law and order.

13

S/PV.4809

Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
Deputy Prime Minister Covic of the Republic of Serbia
to brief the Security Council on the situation in
Kosovo. I listened attentively to his statement.
The Chinese delegation was deeply shocked by
the shooting incident that occurred in the Pec region on
13 August, resulting in the deaths of two Serb children
and the serious injury of four others. We strongly
condemn this violence and urge that efforts be made
immediately to investigate the incident and to bring the
perpetrators to justice.
Recently, the Kosovo region has been troubled by
rampant terrorist activities and a series of violent
incidents. We are deeply concerned by these
developments in the situation. The tragedy of 13
August demonstrates yet again that, although it has
been four years since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), achieving peace, stability and
multi-ethnic peaceful coexistence in Kosovo remains a
long and arduous task.
We
urge
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo
to take effective measures to strengthen the
establishment of the rule of law in Kosovo, to improve
the security situation there and thereby to prevent such
violence from reoccurring.
Resolution 1244 (1999) established the
foundations for resolving the issue of Kosovo. In order
to guarantee the legitimate rights and interests of all
ethnic groups in Kosovo and to promote the ultimate
settlement of the issue of Kosovo, it is necessary that
the Government of Serbia and Montenegro and the
Provisional Institutions of Kosovo undertake political
dialogue as soon as possible. To that end, the
international community should provide active support.
Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting,
which gives us an opportunity to assess recent
developments in Kosovo.
My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, Mr. Covic, and thanks Mr. Michael Steiner for
his excellent work during his tenure. I also wish to
congratulate Mr. Harri Holkeri on his appointment to
lead the United Nations Interim Administration

14

Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and to assure him of our
full support.
Our consideration of the current situation in
Kosovo prompts me to offer a few comments on
pending issues. The crucial issues of security and the
restoration of trust among the various ethnic groups are
among the challenges to be faced.
The murder early this month of an UNMIK police
commander and the shooting of a group of young Serbs
on 13 August near Pec, following the massacre of an
entire family in Obilic last June, demonstrate the
precariousness of the security situation in Kosovo.
Furthermore, these tragic events emphasize the need
for all communities in Kosovo to become more
involved in seeking solutions to the problems of the
province so as to restore lasting peace there.
My delegation offers its condolences to the
bereaved families and to the Indian Government and
strongly condemns these criminal actions, the
perpetrators of which must be brought to justice. We
support ongoing efforts to improve the judicial system
and police services, which are essential to the
restoration of security.
In this regard, we welcome UNMIK’s decision on
its programme to combat the proliferation and illicit
circulation of weapons in Kosovo. We urge all the
parties involved to do their utmost to ensure the
success of the programme, which is scheduled to start
on 1 September.
While the international community has a primary
role in normalizing the situation in Kosovo, it is
nonetheless true that the success of this undertaking
depends above all on the will and resolve of the
Kosovars themselves. They must demonstrate tolerance
and mutual respect in order to transcend their
differences and promote reconciliation and peace.
In the search for lasting peace, strengthening
cooperation among the various communities with
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force is an imperative need.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, in turn, to convey to Deputy Prime Minister Covic
our sincere gratitude for his presence and for his
statement, although we deeply regret the circumstances
that have brought him to the Council.
France condemned immediately and in the
strongest terms the hateful crime committed on

S/PV.4809

Wednesday 13 August against a group of Serb
teenagers in the village of Gorazdevac, which claimed
the lives of two of them. The following day, the
Security Council held consultations on this question
and the President read out a statement to the press
reiterating the condemnation of all its members of this
act.
We wish once again, here and in the presence of
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Covic, to restate France’s sympathy for the sorrow
of the families. France supports the steps that were
swiftly taken to apprehend the perpetrator or
perpetrators of this crime and hopes that they will be
arrested and brought to justice as soon as possible.
Another shooting incident involving children
apparently took place on Sunday afternoon, this time
without casualty. If the report is confirmed, this new
outbreak of violence shall elicit the same unequivocal
condemnation from us. These crimes, which are totally
unjustifiable, damage the image of Kosovo within the
international community. They must strengthen our
resolve to move forward in establishing the rule of law
in a modern, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. The
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, which
have pledged to work for inter-ethnic reconciliation,
have a special responsibility in this respect.
We listened carefully to the statement made by
Mr. Covic. Naturally, we agree with the objective of
reducing violence. It is up to the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), together with the Kosovo Force and in
consultation with local actors, to determine which new
measures will be necessary to that end. Opening direct
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, if it is
constructive, should also help reduce tension on the
ground.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm France’s full
support of and confidence in the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, in the daunting mission just entrusted to him.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
At the outset, I wish to welcome Mr. Covic,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia and
President of the Coordination Centre for Kosovo and
Metohija. We thank him for having taken the trouble to
come to New York to brief the Security Council on the
most recent developments in the situation in Kosovo.
The Syrian delegation has listened very
attentively to the positions and opinions put forward by
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia.
We have taken note, with much regret, of the events
that took the lives of two young Kosovans and caused
the injury of others. Syria condemns those acts and
reaffirms its view that all parties must comply with the
agreements reached.
We convey our sincere condolences to the
bereaved families. We call for an end to such acts and
violations, including the attacks to which a number of
Kosovo citizens were subjected today.
Syria welcomes the measures taken by the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and the investigation by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
determine the identity of the perpetrators of the attacks
and to bring them to justice.
Syria reiterates its support for UNMIK and for
the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri. We wish him
every success in discharging the tasks assigned to him,
particularly under such circumstances.
In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm once again
our conviction about the need to achieve coexistence
among all citizens of Kosovo, regardless of their
ethnic, racial or religious background. That should
ensure peace, justice and security for all.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

15
