UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/768
8 July 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 8 JULY 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 7 July 1999,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-20288 (E)

080799

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/768
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 7 July 1999 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed
to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force. I would appreciate
your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1999/768
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Monthly report to the Security Council on the operations
of the Stabilization Force

1.
On 20 June, the mission of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) was renewed with
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1247 (1999).
2.
Over the reporting period (21 May-20 June), there were approximately 31,300
troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from
all NATO allies and from 16 non-NATO countries. SFOR troops continued to
conduct surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols, with
combat aircraft flying approximately 129 hours.
3.
SFOR continued to monitor entity compliance with the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998) prohibiting the transport of weapons into the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and stepped up its efforts over the period to
discover any undisclosed weapons caches. No violations of the resolution have
been reported to date.
4.
On 7 June, SFOR troops in Multinational Division South-West, acting within
their mandate, detained an individual indicted for war crimes by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The individual,
Dragan Kulundzijain, was later transported to The Hague.
5.
Over the reporting period there were two incidents involving Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia army troops in the border area. In the first, which took
place on 26 May, near Rudo in Multinational Division South-East, members of an
SFOR reconnaissance team were taken hostage, escorted into the territory of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and interrogated for six hours before being
released early on 27 May. In the second incident, on 27 May, SFOR troops
encountered a group of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia troops near Bileca, inside
Republika Srpska territory. The troops were persuaded to return to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
6.
Although the situation in theatre remained stable overall, there were two
direct instances of threats against SFOR and the international community over
the reporting period. In the first, on 26 May, buildings belonging to the Joint
Military Commission observers and the Allied Military Intelligence Battalion in
Zvornik, in Multinational Division North, were attacked with light anti-tank
rockets. There were no injuries, despite the fact that it was clearly a planned
and coordinated attempt to threaten the security of SFOR personnel. SFOR troops
responded by conducting unannounced weapons storage site inspections in the
Zvornik area, by establishing checkpoints along the major routes into the town
to search suspicious personnel and vehicles, and by working with the local
police to gather intelligence. The investigation is still ongoing. In the
second incident, which also occurred on 26 May, SFOR received a report of a bomb
threat at the building belonging to the Office of the High Representative in
Brcko. SFOR troops evacuated the building and moved the personnel to an SFOR
base. No bomb was discovered.

/...

S/1999/768
English
Page 4

Cooperation and compliance by the parties
7.
The parties remain substantially compliant with the military aspects of the
Peace Agreement. Tension in the Republika Srpska remained high owing to the
continuing political instability there and to the NATO action in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. A significant increase in the number of returns of
refugees and displaced persons was noted, although there were also two instances
of violence in response to such returns.
8.
In the first such incident, on 21 May, a group of around 100 Bosnian Serbs
prevented a bus carrying Bosniacs from reaching the village of Vecici in
Multinational Division South-West. SFOR troops reinforced the United Nations
International Police Task Force and local police in the area, but the bus was
eventually turned back to Travnik. The International Police Task Force served
notices of non-compliance on the local mayor and on the chief of the local
police for not doing enough to remove the protestors.
9.
On 12 June a group of 40 Bosniacs were prevented by Bosnian Serbs from
house-cleaning efforts in Grapsa Gorna in Multinational Division North. The
Bosniacs were escorted from the area by SFOR troops.
10. Over the reporting period, SFOR conducted a total of 219 military weapons
storage site inspections: 84 Bosniac; 25 Bosnian Croat; 95 Bosnian Serb; and
15 Federation. No significant discrepancies were noted.
11. The general training and movement ban imposed on the Entity armed forces on
24 March was lifted on 21 June. During the ban, the armed forces were
nonetheless allowed to conduct training and movement activities for armed forces
recruits, using light arms only, and with the prior approval of SFOR. Between
21 May and 20 June, 229 such activities were monitored: 80 Bosniac; 20 Bosnian
Croat; 95 Bosnian Serb; and 34 Federation. The training and movement ban on the
Republika Srpska Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade remains in effect until further
notice.
12. Between 17 May and 13 June, 44 Entity armed forces demining teams conducted
642 mine-clearing operations, removing 3 anti-tank mines, 102 anti-personnel
mines and 41 items of unexploded ordnance from 50,344 square metres of land.
Cooperation with international organizations
13. Within capabilities, and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the International Police Task Force, the Office of the High
Representative, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
14. SFOR continues to play an active role in supporting the efforts of the
Office of the High Representative to establish joint institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this context, the Standing Committee for Military Matters met
on 4 June, for the first time since the Brcko arbitration decision and the
consequent boycott of the central institutions by the Bosnian Serbs.
Substantive progress was made, with the discussion of possible defence
/...

S/1999/768
English
Page 5

reductions and with agreement reached on rules and procedures for the Standing
Committee, including the provision of effective secretariat support. SFOR is
continuing to work closely with the Office of the High Representative to ensure
that concrete proposals for the new Standing Committee secretariat are in place
by the time of the next meeting, and to ensure an effective follow-up to the
debate on defence reductions.
15. SFOR also continues to provide support to the Office of the High
Representative in its efforts to open airfields and to expand civil air
operations. On 19 June, the airport at Tuzla was reopened.
Outlook
16. SFOR will continue to monitor the situation closely in the light of the
situation in Kosovo. Isolated incidents can be expected as a result of the
return of refugees and displaced persons.

-----
