UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1932””

MEETING:

23 JUNE 1976

\,!ij

i, if-y,-.*I’ ,;j1;
1’

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l932)

.. .. .. ... . .. ... .. ... .. .. .. .. ... .. ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of the People’s Republic of Angola for membership in
the United Nations (S/12109) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1932

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1932nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 23 June 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Rashleigh

E. JACKSON

will be invited to take a place at the Council
when it is their turn to speak.

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
(Algeria), Mr. crozev (Bulgaria), Mr. Alar&n (Cuba),
Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Jaipal
(India), Mrs. Brooks-Randolph
(Liberia), Mr. Rasolondraibe (Madagascar),
Mr. Ochirbal (Mongolia),
Mr. Galvdo Teles (Portugal) and Mr. Petrid (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/l932)

of the agenda
3. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a letter,
this afternoon, from the representatives of Benin, the
Libyan Arab Republic and the United Republic of
Tanzania [S/12121], which reads as follows:

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the Admission
of
New Members concerning the application of the
People’s Republic of Angola for membership
in the United Nations (S/12109)
The meeting

table

“We have the honour to request that in the course
of the Council’s current consideration of the application of the People’s Republic of Angola for admission
Co membership in the United Nations an opportunity
be given to the representative
of the People’s
Republic of Angola, Mr. Elisio de Figueiredo,
to
present his Government’s
views on the matter.”

was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the People’s
Republic of Angola for membership in the United
Nations (S/12109)

I therefbre propose, subject to the concurrence of the
Council, to invite the representative of the People’s
Republic of Angola to make his statement at the
appropriate stage.
It was so decided.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter dated
!l May 1976 from the representative
of Portugal in
which he requests, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 31 of the Charter and with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, an invitation to participate
in the Security Council’s discussion of the application
of the People’s Republic of Angola for admission to
membership
in the United Nations [S/12064]. Subsequently, similar requests were received from the
representatives of Algeria, Bulgaria, Cuba, the German
Democratic
Republic,
India, Liberia,
Madagascar,
Mongolia
and Yugoslavia.
In accordance with the
usual procedure, I propose to invite these representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has before it the
report of the Committee
on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the People’s
Republic of Angola for membership
in the United
Nations [S/22109]. I should like to draw attention to
the draft resolution sponsored by Benin, Guyana, the
Libyan Arab Republic, Romania, the Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics
and the United
Republic
of
Tanzania [s/121 101.
5. The first speaker on the list is the representative
of Liberia. I invite her to take a place at the Council
table and to make her statement.
6. Mrs. BROOKS-RANDOLPH
(Liberia):
Fifteen
years ago, on the initiative of the Liberian Govemment taken through its representative in the Security
Council, Ambassador George Padmore, the Council
was convened to consider the situation in Angola.

2. In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite those representatrves
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding
that they
1

It was the first time that the question of Angola
had been. brought before the Council. At the 934th
meeting of the Council, on 15 February 1961, Ambassador Padmore, in supporting the just struggle of the
Angolan people to put an end to the injustice, tyranny
and exploitation
imposed upon them and to throw off
the yoke of more than five centuries of alien rule and
domination
stated:

11. If what I read yesterday in The New York Times
is correct-that
the United States might veto Angola’s
application for membership in the United Nationsmay I recall the appeal made by my predecessor in the
Council on 10 March 1961. Ambassador
Padmore
addressed himself to the newly appointed representative of the United States as follows:
,.
“. . . I appeal for encouragement and succour from
the new representative of the United States, whose .
appearance among us has aroused such buyoant
hopes in the bosom of every African representative.
I am sure I shall not exhort him in vain to remember
President Kennedy’s
declaration
that in intemational affairs there are some things which must be
done, not because they are convenient, not because
they are advantageous, not because some rival for
world power insists on doing them, but simply
because they are right.” [943rd meeting, para. 20.1

“I believe that there is still time for us to help
to build in Angola a future of which neither the
Portuguese nor the Africans need be afraid. But we
no longer have centuries, or even decades, in which
to accomplish what should be a simple humanitarian
task. The 5 million
unenfranchised
and almost
forgotten inhabitants of this vast area cannot wait
an eternity before achieving the freedom which their
brethren to the north have already won in the
pulsating context of this present generation.

12. Finally, the Angolan people look to the Council
for added strength and encouragement in their task of
building a new nation. Any rejection of their application for membership on the part of any member of the
Council should be viewed in the light of the fact that
we are concerned here with no transient problem
which the mere passage of time will palliate. You may
seek to avoid the issue today, but the problem will
come to haunt you tomorrow and for a series of
tomorrows until eventually you are driven to take a
positive stand. Why not, then, take an a.fIirmative
stand today?

“For this once let us be bold in experiment;
let
us show courage instead of timidity,
wisdom of
foresight instead of hindsight, the ability to concede
enough and in time rather than too little and too
late-in
brief, the imagination
which may rescue a
few people from more folly than they intend and
many people from more indignity than they can
bear.” [1934th meeting, paras. 7 and 8.1
7. It is striking that, 15 years later, Liberia again
finds itself in the position of representing the African
States as a whole to support in the Council the application of Angola for membership in the United Nations,
for we are convinced that Angola meets the requirements for membership as laid down in Article 4 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
8. ‘As of this moment 112 nations, including
have recognized the Government of Angola.

13. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
14. Mr. RAHAL
(Algeria)
(interpretation
from
French): I have asked to be allowed to participate in
this meeting of the Council not only as representative
of Algeria but also as spokesman of the Group of
Non-aligned
Countries. The long-standing friendship
of Algeria and the People’s Republic of Angola is well
known, as indeed is our fraternal support for the
struggle of that country, and the sustained interest of
the non-aligned countries in Angola’s struggle for independence and the constant support that they have
given that country before and after independence
account for their desire to speak out today as the
Council considers the application for membership of
the People’s Republic of Angola. I wish to thank the
Council for having acceded to my request, thereby
giving me a chance to discharge a pleasant duty, both
as representative of Algeria and as representative of
the Group of Non-aligned Countries, by expressing our
complete support for Angola’s application
and to
appeal to the members of the Council to recommend
unanimously to the General Assembly that the People’s
Republic of Angola be admitted to our Organization.

Liberia,

9. On 13 February 1976, President William Tolbert
of Liberia sent a telegraphic message to Mr. Agostinho
Neto, President of the People’s Republic of Angola,
to the effect that his Government granted full recognition to the Angolan Government,
appealing to him
in the spirit of the utmost fraternal concern and
sincerity to exemplify that great leadership quality of
magnanimity
at that crucial moment in the history of
the young Angolan nation in order to bring about the
national
cohesion which is indispensable
to the
development of the nation.
10. I believe that the Council was wise when, at its
1930th meeting on 19 June, it adopted resolution 392
(1976) on the situation in South Africa by consensus.
The draft resolution on the admission of Angola could
be adopted in like manner, and this. would obviate
extraneous political considerations and place emphasis
on the need in our day and time to implement fully
the spirit of the Charter regarding the universality
of the Organization.

15. The attainment
of independence
by a colonial
country is a happy event for us, and one which repre2

sents a stride forward in the building of a community
of free peoples that respect one another. It is also a
source of legitimate satisfaction for our Organization,
since it represents a new stage in the policy of decolonization so actively pursued since the end of the
Second World War. But only those peoples which
have suffered from foreign domination,
which have
experienced colonial exploitation,
which know what it
means to lose their freedom and dignity-only
those
peoples can appreciate the true value of that liberation
and its importance in their historical development.
16. The long struggle that the Angolan people waged
against Portuguese colonialism
has always had the
understanding,
sympathy and support of the intemational community;
many documents of the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies reflect this unswerving attitude in
support of the liberation
of colonial peoples. The
sacrifices made by the Angolan people in waging that
unequal fight were incalculable, because, as we should
recall, it was in Angola that Portuguese colonialism
had to fight its last battle. Thus the path towards
Angola’s independence was long and difficult, and few
peoples indeed have had to pay so high a price for the
right to choose their own future.
17. While we do not wish to reawaken all too painful
memories of the past, it might perhaps be helpful
today to mention the further trials and tribulations
imposed upon the Angolan people before it could
enjoy the independence finally granted by the former
colonial Power. The confrontations which took place in
that country, sending it into mourning,
dividing its
population,
destroying its economy and ravaging its
infrastructure
are still present in everyone’s mind.
Only a few months ago, the Security Council was
discussing the aggression in Angola by South African
forces and the threats that such intervention
posed,
for the present and for the future, to that country and to
the entire region. On the very threshold of independence and after centuries of resistance to the Portuguese colonial presence, the Angolan people saw its
freedom already in jeopardy, its unity endangered,
and its wealth again coveted by others.
.18. Now that that country is finally recovering from
its long agony and a responsible
Government
is
devoting itself to reconciling
the people, restoring
the economy and forgetting the past in order to turn
towards the constructive tasks of building the future,
the People’s Republic of Angola has taken its rightful
place in the international
community.
The recognition
which Angola has spontaneously received, not only in
Africa and the entire third world, but also in the
socialist and Western countries, is more than a mere
commonplace
legal act whereby it is noted that that
country has satisfied certain conditions of international
law. That recognition is a manifestation
of fraternal
and generous sympathy with a people that has suffered
so much and has known so many misfortunes.

19. In submitting its application for United Nations
membership,
the People’s Republic of Angola has
performed an act of faith in the world community,
while at the same time expressing firm and total support
for the Charter, the obligations
of which it has
accepted. Who here could doubt for one moment the
ability of the People’s Republic of Angola to abide by
those obligations and its willingness to do so?
20. Those are the conditions which Article 4 of the
Charter imposes on all States desirous of entering our
Organization.
No other consideration should be taken
into account in the tinal recommendation
formulated
by the Council, but those which should steam from
your sense of justice and human solidarity, and from
the clear duty of the Organization to give the Angolan
people, which was so sorely tried by the tragic events
leading to its independence,
the assurance of our
solidarity and the comfort of our friendship.
21. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation
from Russian): Consideration
by the
Security Council of the application
of the People’s
Republic of Angola for admission to membership
in
the United Nations is fresh confirmation of the positive,
beneficent influence of the easing of international
tensions in improving the political climate of the world.
The Soviet Union and its delegations
in United
Nations organs have already repeatedly stated that
further detente, that is, the easing of international
tension, is in keeping with the vital interests of the
peoples of all continents,
including
the African
continent.
22. The Soviet Union, as was once again confirmed
at the recent Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, believes that the struggle
for peace and the strengthening
of international
security, the triumph of the principles of peaceful
coexistence and the development
of comprehensive
mutually advantageous co-operation among States are
some of the most important elements of its foreign
policy. The members of the Security Council and,
indeed, all States Members of the United Nations
are well aware that the Twenty-fifth Congress produced
a programme of further struggle for peace and intemational co-operation,
and for the freedom and independence of peoples. At that Congress, the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union,
Comrade
Brezhnev,
expressed confidence that these lofty aims would be
received with understanding and support from all the
peace-loving forces and all honest people on earth.
It must not be otherwise, since the issue here is that of
putting into international
practice the principles of
equality, respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity,
non-interference
in the internal affairs of States, the
non-use of force and the right of peoples of freely
to determine their own fate.
23. However, the process of the easing of international tension and the development
among States of

relations of genuinely equal co-operation on the basis
of peaceful coexistence is still meeting with stubborn
resistance from certain influential forces which do not
want to abandon the psychology of the cold war. At
times these forces pay lip service to detente, the
easing of international
tension, but in actual practice
they act otherwise and pursue only,their own selfish
purposes. These forces are capable of representing
support for any reactionary,
anti-people
regime as
legitimate action, while, at the same time, they permit
themselves to describe as interference in the internal
affairs of States what is in fact support by other States
for the just struggle of peoples against imperialist and
racist aggression and for the defence of their freedom
and independence, support that is offered at the request
of the sole legitimate Government of a given country.
The only proof of this I need is the interpretation
placed by these forces on recent events in Angola.

26. In spite of the tremendous
destruction
and
material damage caused to this State by the aggression
of hostile external forces, primarily those of the racist
regime of South Africa, the Angolan people has not
become discouraged.
Under the leadership of the
Government
and the heroic and truly patriotic party
of the Angolan
people,-the
MPLA
.[Populur
Movement
for the Liberation
of Angola]-it
has
energetically
tackled
the task of reviving
and
developing the country’s economy. There is a steady
strengthening of the position of the People’s Republic
of Angola on the international
scene. It has been
recognized by more than 100 States in all continents,
including 13 of the 15 members of the Security Council-all
except the United States and China, which
continue to maintain a hostile attitude with regard to
this young, sovereign African State. The major
success of the People’s Republic of Angola was its
acceptance into the ranks of the Organization
of
African Unity as a lawful, full member of that
extremely
important
continental
organization.
All
this fully confirms the propriety and justice of the
position of the Soviet Union, Cuba and other socialist
countries, a position which they took on the Angolan
question from the very first.

24. For the second time this year, the Security
Council is considering
a question connected with
Angola, but what striking changes have occurred in
that short space of time in the Angolan question.
While, the first time, the Council came out decisively
in defence of the independence and sovereignty of the
People’s
Republic
of Angola,
which was being
threatened with deadly danger by the racist regime of
South Africa and its two well-known allies which think
along the same lines as it does, today however, having
driven the racist occupants out of Angola and having
brought to trial the mercenary murderers sent by
imperialism,
the Government
of the sovereign and
independent People’s Republic of Angola has applied
to the Council for membership in the United Nations.
In this application,
the President of Angola has
offtcially stated that the People’s Republic of Angola
“accepts all the obligations contained in the Charter
of the United Nations and solemnly undertakes to
fulfil them”.

27. How is it that the fate of the people of Angola
is not a matter of indifference to the Soviet Union,
or, indeed, to the other socialist countries? This is an
easy question to answer. On the basis of our position
of principle, which is to support the struggle of the
peoples of the world for liberation
from colonial
oppression and for their freedom and independence,
the Soviet Union has, from the very outset, supported
the struggle of the patriotic forces of Angola for the
freedom and independence
of that country and its
people. The Soviet Union gave assistance to the
Angolan people in the course of its national liberation
struggle, and at the present time is continuing to give
it moral, political, diplomatic and other forms of aid.
This is being done on a legitimate basis and is entirely
in keeping with the anti-colonial decisions of the United
Nations and of the Organization
of African Unity.
Assistance to the People’s Republic of Angola was
granted at the request of the lawful Government
of
that country, which was the victim of imperialist
aggression. In its resolution 387 (1976) the Security
Council rightly and unreservedly
condemned
the
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola
by the racist regime of South Africa. The Council
demanded that South Africa scrupulously respect the
independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the People’s Republic of Angola. This decision was
equally binding on all other Member States.

25. Along with other countries which have recognized Angola and which have established diplomatic
relations with that country, the Soviet Union categorically and with the greatest pleasure supports the
application
of the People’s Republic of Angola for
admission to membership in the United Nations. We
do this not only because relations of friendship,
mutual understanding
and co-operation
have been
established between the Soviet Union and the People’s
Republic of Angola, but also because we are fully
convinced that this State fulfils all the necessary
conditions
for becoming
a State Member
of the
United Nations. This young sovereign State has in
actual fact proved not only its faithfulness to the
lofty principles contained in the Charter but also its
firm resolve to ensure their application in the face of
any threat. In the short history of its independent
existence, the Government of this young republic has
convincingly
demonstrated
its sovereign nature and
has skilfully and effectively led the social, economic
and cultural life of the country from the very first
day of its proclamation
of independence.

28. The assistance given to the People’s Republic
of Angola by the socialist countries is. entirely in
keeping with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 3328 (XXIX) on the implementation
of the
Declaration
on the Granting
of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. In that resolution,
the General Assembly,
on behalf of the United
4

and other countries of the socialist community
have
been very much appreciated by the Angolan people
and Government.
In this regard, permit me to remind
the Council of the words of the President of the People’s
Republic of Angola, Agostinho Neto, as follows:

Nations, urges all States to provide moral and material
assistance to all peoples under colonial and alien
domination
struggling for their freedom and independence. No one has the right to interfere in the
internal affairs of Angola or to dictate to its lawful
Government,
to tell it with whom it should co-operate
and to whom it should apply for assistance, if the need
should arise, when faced with the threat of external
aggression. That principle has been confirmed by the
Council in its resolution 387 (1976) and accordingly
is henceforth an international
legal norm.

“I would like to stress that Angola and the
Angolan people are grateful to the Soviet people
for the assistance they have given us from the very
beginning of our fight and for the contribution which
the USSR has made in the attainment
of our
victory.”

29. The opponents of the freedom and independence
of peoples and those hostile to peaceful international
co-operation
are striving to reveal what they call a
contradiction between a policy of peaceful coexistence
and a policy of support for peoples defending their
right to free and independent development,
but that
attempt is doomed to failure. The policy of peaceful
coexistence and of easing international
tension would
lose all its point if peace-loving forces were not firmly
to resist the designs of the aggressors and the attempts
of the imperialists
and pro-imperialist
reactionary
forces to prevent peoples from waging a just struggle
for their_. national liberation and social progress.
30. At the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union the General Secretary of
the
Central
Committee,
Comrade
Brezhnev,
exhaustively
and most clearly set forth the position
of principle of the Soviet Union on the question of
supporting the struggle of the People’s Republic of
Angola to strengthen its independence,
sovereignty
and social progress,
against foreign imperialist
intervention
in the affairs of that young African
republic. He stated:

Speaking on 27 February last, at the Twenty-fifth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
the head of the Angolan delegation attending the
Congress, a member of the Political Bureau of the
Central Committee
of the MPLA,
the Minister of
Internal Administration
of the People’s Republic of
Angola, Alves Batista, expressing his gratitude to the
socialist countries, made the following statement:
“We shall not attempt to name all the countries
that have given and continue to give us moral and
material support, but we should particularly like to
mention the selfless assistance of the Soviet Union
and the boId practical deeds of our Cuban brothers,
and we regret that one socialist country sided with
imperialism
against our people.”
32. At the end of May the Prime Minister of the
People’s Repubhc of Angola, Lopo do Nascimento
made an official .visit to the USSR, and his talks with
Soviet leaders were a new and important contribution
to the further deoeIopment of friendship, co-operation
and mutual understanding
between the Soviet Union
and the People’s Republic of Angola, a contribution
to the ‘strengthening
of peace throughout the world.
As a result of the Soviet-Angolan
talks, a declaration
was signed laying the foundations of friendly relations
and co-operation between the Soviet Union and the
People’s Republic of Angola, as well as a number of
agreements on the development
of co-operation
in
the economic, trade, scientific, technological,
cultural
and other fields.

“The attitude of the Soviet Union to the complicated processes taking place within the developing
countries is clear and definite. The Soviet Union
does not interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries and peoples. It is an immutable principle
of our Leninist foreign policy to respect the sacred
right of every people, every country, to choose its
own way of development.
But we do not conceal
our views. In the developing countries, as everywhere else, we are on the side of the forces of
progress, democracy and national independence,
and regard them as friends and comrades in struggle.

33. In the course of the meeting and the talks between
the Prime Minister and the General Secretary of the
Central Committee
of the Communist
Party of the
Soviet Union, Comrade Brezhnev, the envoy of the
Angolan people expressed his gratitude to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the Soviet people
for the unselfish assistance and support they had
extended to the people of Angola and its legitimate
Government in their difticult struggle for freedom and
national independence
and to repel aggression by
international
imperialists
and reactionary
forces
against the young People’s Republic
of Angola.
Comrade
Brezhnev
whole-heartedly
congratulated
the MPLA and the people of Angola on the historic
victory they had won over the forces of colonialism
and international
and internal reaction, expressed the

“Our Party supports and will continue to support
peoples fighting for their freedom. In so doing, the
Soviet Snion does not look for advantages, does
not hunt for concessions, does not seek political
domination,
and is not after military bases. We act
as were are bid by our revolutionary
conscience,
our communist convictions.”
The whole workd knows that the words of our Party
and our Government are consistent with their deeds.
31. We feel the greatest satisfaction at the fact that
the support and assistance of the Soviet Union, Cuba
5

solidarity of the Soviet people with the struggle of the
.People’s Republic of Angola for the consolidation
of their independence and the creation of the necessary
conditions for the building of a new society, and wished
the Angolan people success in the course they had
chosen.

tinent of Africa from colonial domination and oppression. That will be entirely in keeping also with one of
the most important provisions of the Programme of
Further Struggle for Peace and International
Cooperation and for the Freedom and Independence of the
Peoples, approved at the Twenty-fifth Congress of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. That provision
reads:

34. Those hostile to the freedom of Angola, however,
have not reconciled themselves to their inevitable
defeat and ignominious
collapse on the Angolan
question. They continue to threaten the People’s
Republic of Angola, and in accordance with their
usual imperialist
habits, they are issuing absurd and,
one might say, senseless demands and ultimatums
.to
that country. There must, therefore, be great vigilance
on the part of the Angolan people and its Government
and of all their friends concerning these intrigues and
dangerous designs of the opponents of the People’s
Republic of Angola which have so far not recognized
it and have not yet established diplomatic
relations
with it.

“Consider
as crucial the international
task of
completely eliminating all vestiges of the system of
colonial oppression, infringement of the equality and
independence of peoples, and all seats of colonialism
and racialism.”
The admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to
membership of the United Nations will also be a new
and important step towards the implementation
of the
principle of the universality
of the United Nations,
towards changing this Organization
into a genuinely
universal international
body.

35. I should like to take this opportunity
to assure
the representatives of the Angolan people and Govemment that the Soviet policy of support and assistance
for the People’s Republic of Angola will continue
unswervingly now that the youngest of the African
republics is to become a member of the United
Nations.

39. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (translation from Chinese):
On 11 November
1975 the Angolan people solemnly
proclaimed their independence. This was the result of
the Angolan people’s perseverance in heroic struggles
against Portuguese colonialism, particularly in arduous
armed struggle over a long period with the support of
the people of Africa and the whole world. This was
also a great victory of the entire Angolan people. In
this connexion,
the Chinese Government
extended
warm congratulations
to the Angolan people and the
liberation movements of Angola.

36. The Soviet Union supports the application of the
People’s Republic of Angola for admission to membership in the United Nations, and has joined the sponsors
of the draft resolution presented by a group of members of the Security Council which recommends the
admission
of the People’s
Republic
of Angola
[S/12110]. In the declaration that laid the basis for
friendly relations and co-operation between the Soviet
Union and the People’s Republic of Angola, signed
at the conclusion of the Soviet-Angolan
talks, it is
pointed out that both parties “will give every support
to the United Nations Organization
and will promote
the enhancement of the effectiveness of the Organization in strengthening international
peace and security
on the basis of the strict observance of the Charter”.

40. Although
Angola has won its independence,
flagrant interference in the interenal affairs of Angola
is still continuing;
the national unity of Angola and
its independence
and sovereignty
are still being
seriously encroached upon as a result of the policies
of aggression and expansion frantically
pushed by
Soviet social-imperialism.
41. Proceeding from the fundamental interests of the
people of Angola and the rest of Africa in their struggle
against imperialism and colonialism and against superPower rivalry for hegemony, we are firmly opposed
to the continued armed intervention
in Angola by
Soviet social-imperialism.
In view of the fact that
Soviet social-imperialism
is still hanging on in Angola,
the Chinese delegation is firmly against providing it
with a pretext for prolonging its acts of aggression and
interference. Based on the principled position we have
consistently held on this question, we will not participate in the vote on the draft resolution contained
in document S/121 10.

37. The delegation of the Soviet Union is firmly
convinced that with the admission to membership of
the People’s Republic of Angola, the United Nations
will find a faithful and firm supporter in the struggle
for peace, international
security, mutual understanding
and friendship among peoples and in the realization
of the lofty ideals incumbent
upon Member States
under the Charter, “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war” and “to live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours”.

42. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Angolan people in their just
struggle for national liberation. Through our common
struggle we have established a profound friendship
with the Angolan people, a friendship which will
certainly continue to develop and grow stronger in the

38. With the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to membership in the United Nations, an important new step will be taken towards the final
consummation
of the revolutionary
process of the
liberation of the peoples of the long-suffering
con6

common struggles of our two peoples against colonialism, imperialism
and hegemonism in the future.
The Chinese Government
and people deeply sympathize with the current predicament of the Angolan
people. We are firmly convinced that since the heroic
Angolan people were able to defeat the old colonialists, they will be able to do away with all foreign
aggression and interference and to build up an independent and unified new Angola of national unity.

rehabilitation
and development of their country would
contribute to strengthening
the bonds of friendship
which unite the peoples of Italy and Angola. That
statement was shortly followed by a message to Luanda
expressing my Government’s
intention of establishing
diplomatic relations with Angola. The Italian Government thereafter nominated
its first Ambassador to
Luanda, and he will shortly take up his duties in the
Angolan capital.

43. Mr. SHERER (United States of America): First
of all I should like to thank the many Council members
who have supported us publicly or privately in our
desire to postpone consideration of Angola’s application until a more propitious time. I do not have to
name the many Council members who have been
helpful; we all know who they are. Regrettably,
we
also know who on this Council has unhelpfully ignored
the interests of Angola and instead yielded to the
temptations of short-term political gains.

48. Besides formalizing
our bilateral relations, my
Government
has taken other concrete initiatives.
During the visit which the Italian Minister of Transport
made to Luanda in March, an agreement for the
development
of the Angolan Airlines was signed
between the Angolan and the Italian Governments. In
the course of that visit the two sides proceeded also
to a preliminary study of the prospects for co-operation
opened to the two countries in other fields. Financial
and technical plans are now under active consideration
for the improvement
of the economic and administrative structures of Angola. This friendly line of action
follows what by now has become a tradition of confidence placed by us in the Angolan people, since, we
held this confidence long before the conclusion of
their long struggle towards independence,
a long
struggle which has been so eloquently recalled today
by the representatives
of Liberia and Algeria. In
fact, Italy never ceased, during the years of Portuguese rule in that territory, to press the authorities
of Lisbon to meet the rightful aspirations of the people
of Angola as well as the peoples of the other Portuguese
territories.

44. The United States feels obliged to vote against
Angola’s application at this time because we remain
convinced that Angola does not yet meet the requirements for membership
set forth in Article 4 of the
Charter.
The continuing
presence and apparent
influence of Cuban troops, massive in number in the
Angolan context, is the basis of our view. There is no
justification
for such a large and armed foreign presence in a truly independent
African State: major
hostilities
have been terminated;
South Africa has
withdrawn its troops; and neighbouring African States
have begun normalizing
relations with Angola.
45. We regret that the Angolan Government has seen
fit, in an apparent spirit of confrontation,
to press its
application
now, before time and developments
in
Angola might have permitted
a resolution
of our
concerns. This is particularly
regrettable since the
application
cannot be acted upon by the General
Assembly in any event for another three months.

49. More recently, Italy took a very clear and strong
position on the events which brought about the convening of the Council meetings at the end of March.
We stated on that occasion that there was no better
way for all Member States and the world community
to help the people of Angola to build their new nation
peacefully than by abastaining from any outside interference in Angola which would negatively affect the
prospect for a peaceful development
of the Angolan
nation.

46. Mr. VINCI
(Italy): The Italian delegation welcomed the application
presented by the People’s
Republic of Angola for admission to membership
in
the United Nations and fully supports it. In our view,
this application
submitted by a new sovereign and
independent
African country is consistent not only
‘with the relevant Articles of the Charter and the
rules of procedure, but also with the principle of
universality,
which my country firmly upholds. We
shall consequently
vote in favour of the six-Power
draft resolution contained in document S/12110, which
recommends
to the General Assembly that at its
next session this friendly State be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

50. My delegation looks forward to establishing in the
near future with the delegation of Angola in this world
Organization
the same constructive and fruitful cooperation as our two countries have built up on the
bilateral plane.
51. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (inferpretution
from French): The French delegation will support the
draft resolution recommending
the admission of .the
People’s Republic of Angola to the United Nations.
France recognized the new State on 17 February last.
Since that time Angola, which has had to face the
thorny problems of an independence acquired with
some difficulty, has affirmed its international standing.
After having applied for and recently obtained admission to the World Health Organization,
it is now
asking to become a Member of the United Nations.

47. The Italian Government has officially recognized
the accession of the Angolan people to independence
on 11 November 1975. On 18 February 1976, a spokesman for the Italian Government expressed the conviction that the participation
of all Angolans in the
7

The French delegation would have liked to see every
effort made to preserve the unanimity of the Council
that was so desirable in this case, knowing as we do
that it would have been possible to obtain that result
without in practice delaying the admission of Angola.
Along with other delegations, we have made special
efforts to avoid the division in the Council which now
appears inevitable.
We deplore the fact that those
efforts were in vain.

and has established relations of close co-operation
friendship with that young African State.

and

57. We have been and always will be behind peoples
struggling
for their independence,
their national
sovereignty and their inalienable right to decide their
own destiny freely, without outside interference.
58. The Romanian delegation believes that there are
adequate political,
legal and moral reasons for the
Security Council to take a favourable decision on the
application
of the People’s Republic of Angola for
membership
in the United Nations.
I should like
very briefly to explain some of those reasons.

52. The President of the People’s Republic of Angola,
Mr. Agostinho Neto, solemnly announced, in his letter
of 22 April to the Secretary-General,
the intention of
his country to fulfil the obligations incumbent upon all
States seeking admission to the United Nations. This
reference to Article 4 of the Charter, pursuant to which
membership in the United Nations is open to all peaceloving States which accept the obligations contained in
the Charter and, in the judgement of the Organization,
are able and willing to carry out these obligations,
meets with the concerns of countries which, like
France, attach the greatest importance to respect for,
the principles of international law, whether they relate
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States or
to non-intervention
in the internal affairs of each
country. Since all the necessary conditions laid down
by the Charter had been met for the admission of
Angola, the French delegation, faithful to the principle
of universality, to which we should like to reaffirm our
attachment, could not but support the application of
Angola.

59. First, Angola fulfils all the conditions laid down
by the Charter for the admission of new Members.
By the declaration bearing the signature of its President, Mr. Agostinho Neto, Angola has shown itself
ready to assume the obligations
flowing from the
Charter which are incumbent on all Member States and
has solemnly undertaken to fulfil those obligations.
60. Secondly, it seems to us that there can be no
doubt that the admission of Angola would constitute an
act of justice to the Angolan people, which won its
independence
after a long heroic struggle, marked
by heavy sacrifices, against the policy of domination
and colonial
oppression.
In recovering
its independence, the Angolan people has at the same time
obtained the right which properly belonged to it in this
universal Organization.

53. When the Security Council met last March, the
French delegation noted with interest that the special
envoy of the Angolan Government
informed
the
Council that his country was determined to establish
relations of friendship
and co-operation
with all
Member States and to observe the fundamental principles of non-alignment.
My delegation has no doubt
that a country with the great human and economic
potential of Angola, after having won its independence
following a long struggle, will make its mark in the
international
community
and determine
its own
destiny,
free from all intervention,
in the full
exercise of its sovereignty.

61. Thirdly, it should be stressed that Angola’s independence, its admission to the United Nations and its
participation
in the work of this Organization
are all
factors which will have a positive effect on the
development
of the situation in southern Africa. In
recommending
Angola’s
admission,
the Security
Council would thus be reiterating determination
to
continue to support the struggle of peoples against
foreign domination
and oppression, their struggle to
recover and keep their freedom and independence.
62. Fourthly, the decision to recommend
Angola’s
admission to-the United Nations would be in keeping
with the right of all peoples to be represented in this
international forum, and in this way a new step would
be taken towards the total universality of this Grganization-something
which, in our view, is one of the most
important conditions for its effective functioning.

54. Finally, I should like to state that the French
delegation has no doubt that the People’s Republic of
Angola will make the same warm and generous contribution to our Organization as we have been accustomed to receiving from other countries of the African
continent.

63. Finally, by acceding to Angola’s request for
admission we would be giving that country the opportunity
to enjoy the fruits of international
cooperation and the support from our Organization.
Furthermore,
the very fact that all newly independent
States immediately
apply for membership
in the
United Nations is the most striking proof, if that
were needed, of the fact that the United Nations
represents a vital, irreplaceable instrument of intemational co-operation.
We think that the international

55. Mr. DATCU
(Romania)
(interpretation
from
French): In a spirit of solidarity with the peoples
engaged in the national liberation
struggle against
colonialism and neo-colonialism,
the Romanian people
have supported from the very beginning the just
struggle of the Angolan people for the triumph of their
ideals of liberty and national independence.
56. Socialist Romania welcomed with great satisfaction the proclamation
of the independence of Angola
8

69. My own Government
recognized the People’s
Republic of Angola on 18 February. As I said in debate
before the Council on 31 March [1906th meeting],
we wish President Neto and his Government well. We
recognize the enormous difftculties they face in trying
to transform a nation which has just emerged from
colonial status, one which has been ravaged by fighting.
They deserve our understanding and our help. But that
period of turmoil is over. Peace has been restored and
the great majority of the international
community has
recognized the Government of the People’s Republic
of Angola. It would therefore be only fitting, in the
view of my delegation, that Angola should now take its
place in our Organization.

community,
which has assisted the national liberation
struggle of the Angolan people, has a duty to lend
its assistance to the consolidation of the national independence of that country and to back its efforts at
peaceful reconstruction.
For this our Organization
must first of all admit to membership the independent
State of Angola.
64. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of Kenya in which he asks to
be invited to participate in the discussion. Accordingly,
I propose, if the Council agrees, in accordance with
the usual practice to invite the representative
of
Kenya to participate in the discussions without the
right to vote.

70. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation considers it a privilege to speak forcefully
in support of the admission to membership
in the
United Nations of the People’s Republic of Angola.
This morning Tanzania supported the Angolan application in the Committee
on the Admission
of New
Members.
In supporting Angola’s candidature,
my
delegation
believes that the People’s Republic
of
Angola fully meets the requirements
for admission
as laid down in Article 4 of the Charter.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Maina
(Kenya), took the place resewed for him at the side of
the Council chamber.
65. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
We have
before us this afternoon the report of the Committee
on the Admission of New Members and a draft resolution formally recommending
to the General Assembly
the admission of Angola to the United Nations.

71. Our support for the Angolan cause is a further
recognition of the tremendous sacrifices made by the
heroic Angolan people in their struggle for national
liberation and against foreign aggression. During the
years of the liberation struggle, Tanzania, like other
African States, has unflinchingly
rendered support to
the struggle led by the MPLA.
The success of the
Angolan people islthus the success of the Tanzanian
people, as well as of the African people. For, as we
have said all along, Tanzania is not free so long as
a part of Africa is not free. So Angola’s independence
and freedom have extended our own country’s
freedom.

66. The report sets out clearly, though in summary
form, an account of the discussion the Committee had
this morning. It records that the United Kingdom
delegation saw merit in the suggestion made by the
United States for a deferral. I must make it clear that
we came to that conclusion not because we wished to
delay by a single day the entry of Angola into this
Organization.
On the contrary, we did so because a
deferral of the kind indicated by the United States
would not in fact have delayed the actual entry of
Angola into the United Nations and because an
unequivocal
sign was given by the United States
delegation that to defer would in fact maximize the
chances of a favourable outcome.

72. In this respect, we wish to pay a tribute to the
Angolan people for their victories over Portuguese
colonialism and South African aggression. For 15 years
the people of Angola made sacrifices, both human
and material, so that Angolans might live in dignity.
Against many odds the Angolan freedom fighters,
under the leadership of MPLA, successfully defeated
Portuguese colonialism
and effectively thwarted the
attempts of those who wished to see the Angolans
continue to suffer humiliation
and degradation in a
new form. MPLA,
the vanguard of the Angolan
people, under the leadership of its heroic leader,
President Agostinho Neto, has clearly demonstrated
its determination
to lead Angola as a genuinely free,
sovereign
and non-aligned
State. We are now
witnessing that moment of triumph culminating in the
recommendation
for the admission of Angola to the
community of nations.

67. So far as concerns the draft resolution
now
before the Council, my delegation will vote for it. This
will come as no surprise. The United Kingdom is a
firm believer in the universality of this Organization;
we are therefore happy when a new Member
is
enabled to join us, since this constitutes a further step
towards the fulfilment of our common ambition. Members of the Council will recall that last August we voted
to admit three other former Portuguese colonies: the
Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of
SZio Tome and Principe, and the People’s Republic
of Mozambique.
We had earlier welcomed the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau as a Member.
68. Of the territories which once formed the Portuguese empire in Africa only Angola remains outside
this Organization.
In my delegation’s view, it is right
that Angola, the largest in area of those territories,
should now become a Member too.

73. It gives my delegation
great satisfaction
to
commend the admission of the brother African, nonaligned State of Angola. It is a shining example of a
9

78. Before concluding
my statement, may I take
this opportunity to extend warm, cordial and fraternal
greetings to the representative
of Angola who is
present in this chamber. I wish to assure him of
Tanzania’s continued support in the greater struggle for
the rebuilding of his country and the consolidation
of
Angola’s independence
after the ravages of war.
We salute the people of Angola for the gallant way
they have defended Angola’s,
and thus Africa’s,
freedom and dignity. Indeed, it gives me great pride
to thank them by saying that their victory is our own
victory. It is indeed a major contribution
to the restoration of the honour and dignity of the African
continent.

people determined to guard jealously its sovereignty
and independence. Its recent riumph over the criminal
aggression by South Africa is a case in point. By
condemning that aggression in its resolution 387 (1976),
the Security Council endorsed Angola’s just cause.
74:. By acceding to independence Angola has changed
the geo-political
setting of southern Africa. The torch
of its independence is now shining beyond its borders.
The so-called buffer zone which used to separate free
Africa from apartheid South Africa and the intemational Territory of Namibia has gone. The freedom
fighters of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) now have a rear base from which they
can consolidate their efforts to end the illegal occupation of Namibia. This victory of Angola will spur on
the freedom fighters in Nambia and indeed in South
Africa proper. It is a warning to the minority regimes
that the time for reckoning has come.

79. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): When the People’sRepublic of Angola is admitted as a Member of the
United Nations, this will signify the closing of one
of the most dramatic and also one of the most decisive
chapters in the history of the liberation of Africa from
foreign domination.
The long history of Portugal’s
colonial presence in Africa will then have come to
a definite end after the more than 10 years of intensive
struggle and human sacrifice. The liberation struggle
against the colonial Power in Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique and Angola, after many setbacks, will have
been crowned with ultimate success.
80. Guinea-Bissau was the first of the former Portuguese colonies in Africa to be admitted to membership
in the United Nations. Last year, the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
the Republic of Cape Verde and the
Democratic Republic of SBo Tome and Principe were
accepted as Members of the United Nations. Angola
was the last of the former Portuguese colonies in
Africa to have attained independence.

75. After very many years of suffering, the valiant
people of Angola are now witnessing peace in their
country.
Through
their indomitable
courage and
boundless determination,
the Angolan people have
made a tremendous contribution in pursuit of freedom,
justice and peace-something
for future generations to
learn from. Their victory is a victory for peace,
a victory for economic and social development.
The
world has expressed solidarity with and admiration
for the noble Angolan cause of peace and liberty.
76. ‘it is with this consideration
in mind that my
delegation has the honour and privilege to introduce
formally, .on behalf of the delegations
of Benin,
Guyana, the Libyan. Arab Republic,
Romania,
the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
and my own
delegation, the draft resolution contained in document
S/12110. It is a very simple and straightforward draft
resolution,
which takes as its guidelines previous
precedents by which the Council has decided to make
recommendations
on the question of admission.

81. Now, after a difficult period fraught with conflict,
the Angolan people is enjoying peace. The independence of Angola underlines the isolation and the
ever more desperate situation of the remaining forces
and interests trying to dominate the peoples in southern
Africa. Time is running out for the white minority rule
in Rhodesia and Namibia.
In the very bastion of
racist domination,
South Africa itself, the stability of
a system of injustice, apartheid,
is coming under
severe strain. The process of liberation
today, as
exemplified by Angola, is gaining force.

77. It is the expectation of the Tanzanian delegation, as well as the expectation of the other sponsors of
the draft resolution, that the Security Council will take
a ,decision in keeping with its wisdom and authority.
Such a positive decision will symbolize a recognition
of the inalienable
right of the Angolan people to
contribute to international co-operation after their long
and glorious armed struggle against the forces of evil
and injustice. Such a decision will furhter contribute
to the realization of universality in the United Nations.
My delegation, like the other sponsors, is convinced
that the admission of Angola to the United Nations
will enhance the climate for international
understanding. We are therefore deeply moved in commending the admission
of Angola. Through their
sacred struggle and willingness to accept the obligations of the Charter, the Angolan people and their
Government have more than earned their right to full
membership in the United Nations.

82. The Government
of the People’s Republic of
Angola has now applied for membership in the United
Nations, and it is for the Security Council to consider
that application and make its recommendation
to the
General Assembly. The Swedish Government,
having
recognized the People’s Republic of Angola on 18 February 1976, unreservedly
supports the application
before us, all the more, since Sweden, for the many
years that preceded Angolan independence,
gave,
support to the liberation struggle in Angola through
humanitarian and educational assistance. The relations
now established between Sweden and the People’s
Republic
of Angola have from the outset been
characterized by friendliness and by increasing cooperation in a great number of fields.
10

-

.‘

83. The Swedish delegation is fully aware of the
problems facing some members of the Security Council
in connexion with the immediate consideration of the
Angolan application and conscious of their reasons for
desiring a deferment of the consideration of its application. We would nevertheless have hoped that the votes
required for a positive recommendation
of the Council today would not be withheld. The Swedish delegation looks forward to the moment when we shall be
able to welcome the People’s Republic of Angola
as an esteemed Member of the Organization,
and we
still hope that this will be possible this year. We are
convinced that the People’s Republic of Angola will
make positive contributions
to the achievement of the
purposes and principles of the Charter. The implementation of the principle of universality, to which my
Government
attaches vital importance,
also requires
the presence of Angola in our midst.

tion and can play an effective role in the United
Nations in the struggle against colonialism and racism
and for the complete liberation of the African continent, to which Angolan independence
has made a
significant contribution.

84. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Portugal, whom I invite to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

90. In our constantly changing world, particularly
in this Organization
which only recently adopted the
fundamental principles relating to a new international
economic order and which is also involved in the
overhaul of its machinery so that it may better meet
the needs of our times, it would be of great interest
and, indeed, would be very helpful if we could enjoy
the full participation
of all peoples in the building of a
new order and in formulating a more precise definition
of what institutions
that new order should be based
on. With these thoughts in mind, I am convinced that
Angola, having benefited from the experience of a
struggle for the freedom of peoples and the dignity of
men, and with the natural enthusiasm of a country
which has just joined the community
of independent
and sovereign States, could make a very positive
contribution
to this collective undertaking.

89. The Security Council has considered on many
occasions in the past the problem of territories under
Portuguese administration
and has condemned unjust
coIonia1 situations and adopted many decisions of
great historic significance in the struggle of colonial
peoples, a struggle to which Portugal, correcting the
errors of a recent past, has made a positive and
important
contribution.
The question
before the
Security Council today is a matter of great importance
because of its symbolic value. It is also of great
importance because of the future prospects which are
thereby opened up.

85. Mr. GALVAO TELES (Portugal) (inrerpretarion
from French): Mr. President, first of all, I should like
to convey to you the thanks of my delegation for
being allowed to speak in the Council on the application of the People’s Republic of Angola for United
Nations membership.
I also wish to say that the
Portuguese delegation
is very pleased to see you
presiding over this meeting. I am. sure that your
experience and your devotion to the cause of intemational peace and justice will serve you in good stead
as you carry out the important tasks assigned to the
Council during the month of June.
86. The admission of Angola if approved, will represent the last page of the record of decolonization
of
the African territories under Portuguese administration, which, after a long and painful struggle for
liberation,
during the last few years, have obtained
their independence and their right to be admitted to
the United Nations as full members of the international
community.

91. Portugal, which is also committed to the building
of a better world, is convinced that its kinship with
countries to which it is bound by a common language
and by feelings of friendship and solidarity that are
more important
than the passing events of history
will bring about conditions that will promote close
co-operation
and a deep understanding
among our
respective peoples. In the circumstances,
the Portuguese delegation expresses the hope that among
those countries there may be fruitful co-operation,
based on mutual respect for the independence
of
each State and directed towards the promotion of the
well-being of our respective peoples and of the intemational community as a whole.

87. Following
Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique,
Cape
Verde and S5o Tome and Principe, which are already
Members, the time has come to open wide the doors of
our Organization to Angola and give it a chance to take
part in the work of the United Nations, thereby contributing to the universality of the Organization and to
its greater effectiveness as it pursues its objectives
of peace, justice and international
co-operation.

92. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. Accordingly,
I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

88. As the delegation of Portugal has already done
in the Council in connexion with the application for
membership
of the other African countries I have
already mentioned, we should like to say that we also
feel that it is a matter of great importance for Angola,
as a sovereign, independent State, to take this step
towards full and constructive participation
in intemational affairs. Today Angola is free of colonial domina-

93. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): At a recent meeting
of the Council when we dealt with,and condemned the
aggression of the racist regime of South Africa against
Angola, I had the honour to express the satisfaction of
my delegation at the presence of the representative of
11

national liberation and of the aggression committed
against it by South Africa in the first days of its independence.

the People’s Republic of Angola, considering it a good
omen for the full involvement
of that country in the
work and activities of the United Nations, in the
capacity of a full Member. The fact that the Council
has now taken up the question of the admission of the
People’s Republic of Angola offers us the opportunity
fully to support the admission of an African country
with which we are linked by ties of sincere friendship
and co-operation.

97. The admission
of the People’s
Republic
of
Angola, which would make possible its involvement in
the activities of all the programmes and projects of the
Organization, is the only proper response that the world
Organization-all
of us-can now make. The admission
of Angola would not only be a gesture of the intemational community
aimed at encouraging the People’s
Republic of Angola to persevere along the road it has
chosen, but it would also contribute to the achievement
of universality by the United Nations.

94. My delegation feels that the People’s Republic of
Angola deserves to be admitted to the United Nations,
as it fulfils all the conditions set out in Article 4 of
the Charter and, as an independent
and sovereign
State, accepts all the obligations
laid down by the
Charter. The proclaimed objectives and principles of
its policy are in harmony with ‘the objectives and
principles of the Charter, as Angola has opted for the
strengthening of peace and international
security and
as it supports the process of decolonization.

98. Let me also, as we must, stress the other side of
the matter-namely,
that Angola’s decision to become
a Member of the United Nations constitutes a contribution
on its part to the strength, prestige and
effectiveness of the Organization. It is indeed a positive
characteristic of our times that the desire of countries
to become Members of the United Nations is now taken
as being in the nature of things. That this is so is the
best answer to all those who would denigrate the
world Organization
despite all the overwhelming
evidence against their position. It is in that context also
that we must recognize and appreciate the contribution
that the newly liberated and independent countries are
making by joining our ranks.

95. My country has, from the very outset, lent full
support and assistance to the national
liberation
struggle of the Angolan people, and it .recognized
the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola,
headed by Mr. Agostinho Neto, immediately
after the ’
proclamation
of Angola’s independence, in November
1975. In so acting, my Government was aware of the
fact that the victory of the Angolan people not only
meant the liberation of a country but also constituted
a significant contribution
to the fight of the African
and other peoples against colonialism,
neo-colonialism
and all other forms of foreign domination
and
hegemony. The victory of the Angolan people has
also provided a strong incentive to the struggle of
African peoples against racism and against the racist
regimes in southern Africa, those most sinister
anachronisms of this century whose criminal nature
is being demonstrated again in all its fury these days
in South Africa. As we all know, the People’s Republic of Angola has incorporated
its adherence to the
policy and posture of non-alignment
in its Constitution
as one of its fundamental
principles. That is a great
contribution to world peace and security that Angola is
making together with all the newly-liberated
countries
which, as a rule, opt for the non-aligned movement.
It means a further extension of non-alignment.
To
this, Africa has made a particularly notable and historic
contribution
by having all members of the Organization of African Unity adhere to the policy of non-alignment, thereby opting for the liberation of practically
the whole vast African continent from great-Power
blocs, their rivalry, spheres of influence and so forth.

99. Proceeding from the aforesaid, and bearing in
mind the strong support of the member States of the
Organization of African Unity and of non-aligned countries, my delegation
had hoped that the Security
Council would be in a position to vote in favour of
Angola’s admission to the United Nations. We expect,
however, that the position of the United States will
be reversed in the very near future and a positive
stand will be taken so that the Council may recommend
the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
100. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make a
statement.
101.

Mr.

FLORIN

Democratic
Republic)
I am grateful to the members of the Council for the opportunity
afforded the
delegation
of the German Democratic
Republic to
address the Council on the question on its agenda.
(interpretationfrom

(German

Russian):

102. The Council has before it an application from
one more independent
African State, the young
People’s Republic of Angola, for admission as an equal
Member to the world Organization.
The statement
signed by the President of the People’s Republic of
Angola is entirely in keeping with the Charter. The
People’s Republic of Angola is pursuing a policy of
peace, as is required by the principles and purposes
of the United Nations.
It intends and is able to

96. My delegation believes that the United Nations
and the international
community
have a duty to help
Angola to strengthen and consolidate its independence
and national sovereignty and to ensure its unhampered
economic development
so as to eliminate as soon as
possible the heavy legacy of age-long political subjection and colonial
exploitation,
of a long war of
12

..

discharge the obligations
the United Nations.

incumbent

upon Members

.s’

of

against violations
of the
sovereighty of States.

103. The people of the People’s Republic of Angola
have been forced to wage a difficult struggle, in which
they have had to make many sacrifices, against the
colonial domination
of the Portuguese
regime of
Salazar so as to be able, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), to exercise its right to
independence and self-determination.

territorial

integrity

and

107. The heroic struggle of the young State against
the aggressor, South Africa, a struggle which required
so much sacrifice, has won recognition, but to this very
day Angola, like other independent African States, is
the target of threats from the racist regime of South
Africa and those which egg it on.
108. The People’s Republic of Angola is today a
recognized member of the Organization
of African
Unity. The recently concluded Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
States in Algiers
made a high assessment of the role of the People’s
Republic of Angola in the struggle of the peoples of
Africa. Today the People’s Republic of Angola has
diplomatic relations with more than 100 States. Delegations of the young People’s Republic
of Angola
have already taken part in many international
conferences on an equal footing with other States.

104. The proclamation
of the People’s Republic of
Angola of 11 November 1975 was a further important
step towards the final elimination
of the vestiges of
colonialism and racism for which the world Organization also strives, as is reflected in numerous decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Being from its very inception the reflection of the free
exercise of the right to self-determination,
the young
People’s Republic of Angola was the target of open
armed aggression from that bulwark of racism and
colonialism
in South Africa, the illegal apartheid
regime. That disturber of the peace, which openly
violated and is still violating the peace and security
of that part of the world, found support from those
forces which want to break the wheel of history and
which are denying the peoples of southern Africa
the right to self-determination
and fundamental human
rights, forces doing everything they can to continue
oppressing and exploiting those peoples by means of
racism, colonialism and neo-colonialism.

109. There exist close ties of friendship between the
German Democratic Republic and the People’s Republic of Angola. At the recently held Ninth Congress
of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany, the General
Secretary of the Central Committee,
Erich Honecker,
stated:
“We categorically condemn any imperialist policy
of aggression and we resolutely favour the political
settlement of all conflicts in the interests of peace
and the right of the peoples of the world to selfdetermination.
!The sacred right of the peoples has
always been and remains the right to offer resistance
to imperialist
aggression and to do everything in
their-power to fight for national and social liberation
and to decide their own fate. We support all peoples
waging a struggle for their national independence,
for equality in international
relations, for economic
development and for social progress...

105. . The .trial in Luanda of the mercenaries
of
certain imperialistic
States, and the fact that arms
were delivered there from North America, Western
Europe and one Far Eastern country, arms which
were used by gangs of mercenaries, racists and neocolonialists who murdered and burned-all
indicate
the scope and also the monstrousness of the crimes
committed against the peoples of Angola.
106. The German Democratic Republic noted with
satisfaction Security Council resolution 387 (1976),
which condemns the aggression of South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola. In that resolution,
the Council

“Along with the other progressive forces of the
entire world, we support the struggle of the people
of Angola for their independence.
We support all
the peoples of Africa fighting against racism, neocolonialism and imperialist
aggression and thereby
defending their right to national sovereignty and
social progress.”

“‘Demands that South Africa scrupulously respect
the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola”

110. More than 15 years have passed since the
adoption, on the initiative
of the Soviet Union, of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. In that time many
colonial peoples have achieved independence and, in
implementation
of the right of self-determination,
have set up their own States. They have all been
admitted to membership in the United Nations. Thus,
we were able at the last session of the General Assembly to welcome the former Portuguese colonies of
Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe, and Mozambique.
There

and
“CulZs upon the Government of South Africa to
meet the just claims of the People’s Republic of
Angola for a full compensation for the damage and
destruction inflicted on its State and for the restoration of the equipment
and materials
which its
invading forces seized.”
The Security Council was thus acting in accordance
with the Charter, which calls for action to be taken
13

.

is no basis for refusing to give the People’s
of Angola the same right.

Republic

the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola that
it has been stated in the American press itself that
United States troops are stationed on the territory of
many Member States. This is a fact which has been
emphasized here by the representatives of two of the
permanent members of the Council.

111. My country, the socialist German Democratic
Republic,
is still a young Member of the United
Nations. The decision of the General Assembly to
admit the German Democratic Republic to the United
Nations was of significance to the strengthening
of
peace in Europe and for the further implementation
of the principles and purposes of the United Nations;
that is universally acknowledged today. There can be
no doubt that the admission of the People’s Republic
of Angola will also serve to strengthen international
peace and security and will, at the same time, enhance
the authority of our Organization
and promote its
universality.
The admission of the People’s Republic
of Angola will be an expression of the recognition of
the political facts in Africa. The history of the United
Nations teaches us that attempts, in contravention
of
the Charter, to deny the right of membership to any
State are in the final analysis doomed to failure.

115. Any attempt to delay the admission of the
People’s
Republic
of Angola is entirely without
foundation
and is entirely unjustified.
To link the
admission of the People’s Republic of Angola with
problems
having nothing whatsoever to do with
the criteria applicable to admission to membership in
the United Nations is illogical and contrary to both the
spirit and the letter of the Charter. The admission of
the People’s Republic of Angola is a moral, political
and juridical necessity and is entirely in keeping with
the facts of today. It is also called for by world public
opinion.
116. The delegation
of the German Democratic
Republic is convinced that an appropriate
recommendation
by the Security Council to admit the
People’s Republic
of Angola will meet with the
approval of the overwhelming majority of the General
Assembly.

112. Certain elements of the press in the United
States have disseminated the idea that the assistance
granted in solidarity by Cuba to the People’s Republic
of Angola to resist the armed intervention
of South
Africa and ensure its sovereignty could be a stumbling
block to the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola. But if they look at the Charter: they will
see that Article 51, for example, gives the People’s
Republic of Angola the right to request disinterested
assistance from any State. I should, incidentally,
like
to remind the Council that those who drafted the
Charter and founded the Organization
had in mind
the fundamental
idea of preventing a repetition
of
the fascist policies of expansion and aggression along
the lines of German fascism.

117. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of India. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
118. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to you and to the other members of
the Council for giving us this opportunity
to express
our views on the question of the admission of Angola
to membership in United Nations.
119. The criteria for the admission of new Members
are set out in Article 4 of the Charter. First, the
applicant must be a peace-loving State. Secondly, it
must accept the obligations contained in the Charter.
Thirdly, it must be able and willing to carry out those
obligations.
In our judgement,
Angola fulfils those
three conditions and is therefore eligible for admission
to the United Nations.

113. Mr. Vorster himself went to the Federal Republic of Germany and, as he had done during his visit
to Israel, made himself out to be in favour of a policy
of what he calls “dialogue’*.
But that same Mr. Vorster,
who so bloodily oppresses the non-white population
of his own country and is striving to expand nuclear
co-operation with the Western European monopolies,
was, as we are all aware, arrested during the Second
World War for his active work for fascist Hitler-he
Germany and its racist, fascist theories. At the present
time, Mr. Vorster, as the Head of Government,
is
among those primarily
responsible for the armed
aggression against a peace-loving
African State, an
aggression that has been condemned by the Security
Council. Since the apartheid regime is still clinging
to its principle of arms and expansion--and
this is
evident from the debates in Parliament
and the bills
drafted there-the
People’s Republic of Angola has
every right to take measures that it deems necessary
to defend its sovereignty and its territorial integrity;
that is particularly
true because it is a neighbour of
Namibia, which is illegally occupied by South Africa.

120. We feel that each application
for admission
should be considered and decided on its own intrinsic
merits and that extraneous considerations should not
be brought in, however important they may appear to
be at the moment.
121. In Angola we have a country whose people at
immense sacrifice liberated themselves from colonial
rule after a prolonged and bitter struggle. They desire
now to seek the protective shelter of membership,
to
subscribe to the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, to carry out the obliga?ions~f
membership
and to join the mainstream of the movement for the
maintenance
of international
peace and security.
Membership
in the United Nations is as much in the
interests of Angola’s consolidation
of its own inde-

114. I should like at the same time to remind those
who are laying down certain additional conditions for
14

. :_.

present application
to the Security Council today
represents the culmination
of an enterprise in the
execution of which the Angolan people demonstrated
its spirit of sacrifice and its abnegation. Today we
see an Angolan nation which is independent and free
and which wishes to exercise its right to become a
Member of the United Nations. The exercise of that
right depends on the sovereignty of the new State
and it is not for others to determine what is the best
time to implement it.

pendence and sovereignty as it is in the broader
interests of promoting the-principles
and purposes of
the United Nations in southern Africa.
122. The fact that on Angola’s southern border there
is an international
Territory called Namibia,
which
continues to be under the illegal military occupation of
the white minority Pretoria regime and that that regime,
after invading Angola, has withdrawn its forces and
maintains them still in Namibia, entitles Angola surely
to seek such security as is available to it through
membership in the United Nations.

130. As I indicated, the victory of the MPLA and of
the Angolan people is also, in a way, a victory for
the United Nations and for all the forces which struggle
for the benefit of peoples still subject to colonial and
foreign domination.
In saying this, I intend simply to
place that victory within the global context of the
purposes, objectives and principles of our .Organization, and to emphasize the significant contribution
made by the Angolan people to the structure of peace,
freedom and international justice, which it is the task
of the United Nations to build. Any victory won against
the common
enemy, represented
by colonialism,
racism, apartheid and imperialism,
can only strengthen
the entire international
community,
whose ideals are
defined in the Charter.

123. The fact that Angola is a member of the
Organization of African Unity and has been recognized
by a very large number of Members of the United
Nations is proof enough of its sovereign equality. It is
clearly entitled to the rights and benefits resulting
from United Nations membership, one of which is the
protection
of its territorial
integrity and the safeguarding of its political independence from external
interference. In these circumstances, denial of United
Nations membership would be denial of the legitimate
expectations of the people of Angola, whose aspirations naturally
derive from the fulfilment
of the
objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter.

131. There is, of course, a concomitant duty which
consists of doing everything within and outside the
Organization,
but particularly within it, to strengthen
the opposition to the forces of reaction whose determination to hold on to a decadent system of domination
and exploitation
has been denounced in this forum
more than once. The efforts we are making for
decolonization
and against discrimination
of every
kind would be meaningless were we to lose sight of
that objective and to fail to admit into our ranks countries like Angola and Viet-Nam, which wish to defend
peace, promote freedom and establish justice among
nations in a realistic and constructive manner.

124. Angola obviously considers its admission to
the United Nations to be necessary in its own national
interests. It will also help the promotion of the purposes
of the United Nations in southern Africa. We would
therefore
strongly
support
its application
for
membership.
125. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
126. Mr. RASOLONDRAIBE
(Madagascar) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, I should like
to thank you and the other members of the Council
who have been so good as to allow my delegation to
participate in this debate.

132. In the case of Angola, we are convinced that that
country, which has accepted the obligations under the
Charter and undertaken to fulfil them, is likely to
bring a rich contribution
to our work on the basis of
its experience in fighting and of the choices it has made
in accordance with the principles of non-alignment.
How many countries attach more importance than does
Angola, a recent victim of aggression, to non-interference in the affairs of others? Who can better
appreciate the price of an independence so dearly won?

127. Nothing could better demonstrate the aspiration
to universality of our Organization and nothing could
do more honour to it than for it to admit a Member
whose anti-colonialist
movement it has supported and
whose independence
it has always unequivocally
favoured.
128. The history of Angola is too well known to all
for me to need to recall it here. Only last March the
Council had to take a decision on the latest developments in the long struggle for liberation
waged by
the Angolan people, first against Portuguese colonialism and then against international imperialism
and
the South African racists later.

133. It seems to us that those are guarantees which
warrant our admitting
to our Organization
the
People’s Republic of Angola. It will then become
an enthusiastic
and enlightened
advocate of cooperation based on the sovereign equality of States,
with no ulterior motives, and directed only towards
common advantages for the partners. In a word, the
participation
of Angola in the life of the United
Nations will strengthen our Organisation’s
universality and representativeness,
while at the same time
increasing its effectiveness.

129. In contrast to the efforts made earlier to
achieve, consolidate and defend the independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola, the
15

dent, and the members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to explain the position of the Government
of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria on the question
of the application of the People’s Republic of Angola
for membership in the United Nations.

134. It is moreover in the nature of things that Angola
should seek within the United Nations the broadest
and most fruitful co-operation possible. Barely three
months ago the Council heard an official representative
of People’s Republic of Angola give a description of
the economic and other difliculties which that country
was facing. At that time we learned that the foundations necessary to enable the Angolan economy to
start on a process of rapid expansion without major
difficulties
had been destroyed, annihilated
by the
concerted intervention
of imperialists
and South
African racists. Thus a situation was created in Angola
that imposed on the governmental
authorities of that
country the need to seek from abroad, and in particular
from the specialized agencies of the United Nations,
the assistance needed to enable them to develop the
natural resources of their country.

141. The youngest African
State, the ‘People’s
Republic of Angola, has submitted to the Security
Council its application for admission to membership
of the Organization,
and this is perfectly normal and
logical. In that context, the Government
of that
Republic has repeatedly stressed that it will adhere
to the principles of the Charter; that it will fight for
their implementation
and for respect for them. And
it has declared that it is prepared to initiate relations
of friendship and co-operation with all States on the
basis of common respect ,for the principles of national
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity,
equality,
mutual
benefit and non-interference
in each other’s domestic
affairs.

135. Be that as it may, for young countries such
as ours, beyond material considerations and economic
and other factors, it is to the image of the United
Nations,
which guarantees our independence
and
security, that we are most attached. We are certain
that the same holds true for the Angolan authorities,
one of whose first acts after independence
was to
submit to the Security Council the problem of South
African aggression.

142. The Government
of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria,
which recognized
the independent
and
sovereign People’s Republic of Angola from the very
outset, having established full diplomatic
relations
with that Republic, definitely feels that the People’s
Republic of Angola and its Government fully meet all
the normal requirements
for admission to membership in the United Nations. The Government
of the
People’s Republic of Angola exercises effective control
and government over the whole expanse of the country.
It has set in motion a programme of national reforms
and new and successful policies for the economic,
social and cultural life of the country. The foundations
are being laid for a young African State which has
deservedly taken its place among other African countries which have already acquired their freedom and
independence. The People’s Republic of Angola is one
of the most shining examples of the implementation
of one of the most important
principles
of our
Organization:
the principle
of recognition
of the
legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples for the
implementation
of their right to self-determination
and
independence
by all the means and with all the
resources at their disposal, as provided in the historic
Declaration
on the Granting
of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

136. Having been among the first to recognize and
establish diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of Angola, my Government
feels most honoured
to be able to lend its support to the just And legitimate
request which has been submitted to the Council for
its consideration today. We believe that this application
is in accordance with the law since Angola, beyond
any doubt, complies with the restrictive conditions
provided for in Article 4 of the Charter.
137. We also believe that this application corresponds
to reality, because the People’s Republic of Angola
has been recognized by the vast majority of Member
States and has been admitted as a full member to the
Organization of African Unity; it is also a member of
the World Health Organization, where it was admitted
by acclamation.
The United Nations itself cannot
ignore those facts without transgressing the spirit and
letter of its Charter.
138. Above all, we believe that the admission of
Angola would constitute a political act which would
benefit both that country and the United Nations
itself. In these circumstances,
we consider that any
obstacle placed in the way of its admission at this
stage constitutes
an unjustifiable
and unjustified
political expedient over which the rights of the Angolan
people will finally triumph.

143. For all these reasons, the Government
of the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria is convinced that the
People’s Republic
of Angola, beyond any doubt,
deserves to be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. Despite the fact that it has existed for a very
short time as an independent
State, the People’s
Republic of Angola has already proved its vitality by
the soundness of its policies, both domestic and
foreign. The international
authority which it enjoys,
based on the principles and policies followed unswervingly by the MPLA from the beginning of its heroic
struggle, has grown to meet new conditions
in a
constant process of consolidation.
And now the
People’s Republic of Angola is a full member of the

139. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
140. Mr. GROZEV
(Bulgaria) (interpretation
from
Russian): First of all, I want to thank you, Mr. Presi16

imperialism and colonialism directed against the MPLA
and the Government which it had set up.

Organization of African Unity. More than 100 States
from every continent have recognized this young State;
and such important international
organizations of the
United Nations system as the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
the International
Labour Organisation
and the World Health Organization have already admitted the new Republic to
membership.
On the one hand, that is proof of the
eligibility
of this new State to become a Member of
the international
Organization;
on the other hand, it
shows it is essential for the United Nations to have
among its Members the People’s Republic of Angola
so as to be able to benefit from the constructive
contribution
which that country can make.

148. Not only the existence of the new Republic
but even the achievements
of the Angolan people
in their struggle for a free and independent existence
were thus threatened.
By their aggression against
Angola, colonialism
and imperialism
were endeavouring to preserve colonial domination
over the
people of Angola-the
same kind of domination
to
which the peoples of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South
Africa are still subjected.
149. Recent events in Soweto and other areas of
South Africa have shown once again to the whole world
the true face of the racists of Pretoria, who did not
hesitate to perpetrate a massive massacre of schoolchildren, students and young Africans so to halt any
attempt to oppose apartheid and colonial slavery. The
Security Council’s unanimous condemnation
of this
fascist act of terrorism by the South African authorities
must finally convince those who have not yet recognized that the practices and policies of the South
African regime constitute a crime against humanity
and, as such, a grave threat to peace not only in the
region but in the whole world.

144. No one can deny that right to this young
State, which has shown such iron will, so much courage
and so much self-denial, and which, under the leadership of the MPLA, has borne so many painful sacrifices during the long years of its national liberation
struggle against Portuguese colonialism
and has thus
written one of the most glorious pages in the history
of the national liberation
struggle of the African
peoples.
145. The militant union of the people of Angola with
the MPLA,
which came into existence during the
national liberation
struggle against colonialism
and
imperialism,
had as its logical sequel the creation of
the independent State which is the People’s Republic
of Angola. The struggle of the Angolan people and of
the MPLA was part and parcel of the struggle of
other African peoples, such as those of Guinea-Bissau,
Cape Verde and Mozambique,
and of others which
also suffered under the colonial yoke of the Portuguese
empire; and they certainly have made a very important
contribution
to the elimination
of Portuguese fascism.

150. The allies and protectors of the Pretoria regime
actively support it and, in particular, by strengthening
its military capacity so as to enable it to commit its
acts of aggression against the African peoples. Thus,
for example, in its aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola, South Africa used the Territory of
Namibia,
which it continues to occupy illegally in
flagrant violation of every United Nations decision
on the subject.
151. The victory over imperialist
aggression was
made possible by the alliance of the people of Angola
and the MPLA. The strong and consistent position
taken by the MPLA in the national liberation struggle
determined, in the final analysis, the broad support it
received and is still receiving from all strata of the
Angolan people. As a result, colonialism
and imperialism were forced to yield before the heroic onslaught
of the Angolan people, a people which knows the
price of its freedom and independence, has true friends
in the struggle and believes in its own future.

146. The liberation struggle of these peoples was, and
continues to be, part of the common struggle of the
progressive and democratic
forces throughout
the
world, the countries of the socialist community and the
non-aligned countries to achieve the complete and final
elimination
of colonialism,
racial discrimination
and
apartheid, as well as to combat neo-colonialism
and
imperialism. That struggle derives its inspiration and its
strength from the continuously
expanding process of
the strengthening of co-operation between States with
different social systems and from the general detente
and the strengthening
of international
peace and
security.

152. From the very outset, the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria, side by side with the Soviet Union, Cuba
and other socialist countries and hand in hand with all
progressive and democratic
forces throughout
the
world, has unreservedly assisted and supported the
struggle for national liberation waged by the Angolan
people under the leadership of the MPLA. We shall
continue to provide such assistance and support, thus
carrying out our international
duty of solidarity with
the national liberation
movements
of the colonial
peoples of Africa.

147. Angola’s path to independence was hard-won
and it proved to be equally hard after the establishment of the People’s Republic of Angola. Recognizing
that the emergence of the People’s Republic of Angola
had considerably weakened the position of colonialism
in Africa, the colonial and racist regime in South
Africa extended the armed aggression it had undertaken even before Angola had proclaimed
its independence. As is evident from so many facts, this was
a well-prepared
act of aggression on the part of

153. This is our constructive policy of principle and
it was once more expressed and duly appreciated
17

during the official visit to the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria by the Prime Minister
and Second VicePresident
of the United
Republic
of Tanzania,
Mr. Rashidi Kawawa, at the end of May last. In a
joint communique,
the Governments of our two countries made the following declaration:

assistance to the People’s Republic of Angola, and to
declare that it will not participate in the vote. In so
doing, it is expressing the wish that the People’s
Republic of Angola will not be admitted to membership in the Organization.
This is tantamount to giving
direct assistance to another member of the Council
which has, on the one hand, declared that it will
institute a new policy towards Africa and, on the
other, being guided as before by various considerations
of domestic policy, has openly stated that it will veto
the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to
membership in the United Nations.

“The People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the
United Republic of Tanzania warmly congratulate
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique,
GuineaBissau and the Cape Verde, which have won their
freedom
and national
independence
and have
followed the path of economic, social and political
development.

157. We believe that these two countries,
both
permanent members of the Council, are ,taking on a
very heavy responsibility,
not only vis-ri-vis the
Angolan and the other African peoples but also in the
eyes of the democratic world community.
Let us hope
nevertheless that good sense and a sound understanding of the interests of the peoples of those two
countries and also of the general interests of peace
and international
co-operation
throughout the world
will triumph and make it possible for us to welcome
here in our ranks, in the very near future, the representatives of the heroic people of the People’s
Republic of Angola.

“Both countries have a high estimation of the
effective assistance given by the Soviet Union and
Cuba, which facilitated the victory of the Angolan
people over imperialist
aggression. They express
full support for the peoples of Namibia, Zimbabwe
and. South Africa in their struggle against colonialism and racial discrimination
and for the free
national and social development of those countries;
they confirm their determination
and their readiness
to continue to give support to the national liberation
movements
in Africa, as both countries
have
categorically
condemned the racist regimes of the
Republic
of South
Africa
and of Southern
Rhodesia.”

158. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

154. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria will continue to provide disinterested assistance to the People’s
Republic of Angola to enable it to heal the wounds
inflicted by Portuguese domination
and imperialist
aggression and to build its future in an atmosphere of
peace and independent
development.
We are convinced that the links of friendship and co-operation
forged between our two countries and our two peoples
during the freedom struggle of the Angolan people will
continue to grow and to gain strength, thus serving our
common interests.

159. Mr. ALAR&N
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, may I express to you and,
through you, to the members of the Council our gratitude for having invited Cuba to participate
in this
important debate. I should also like to welcome the
presence of the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola, Ambassador de Figueiredo.
160. The admission of a new Member should always
be an occasion for rejoicing and unanimity
in the
United Nations. The fact that new sovereign States
have emerged from colonial oppression, become independent and joined the United Nations as Members
should be a reason for happiness because it confirms
the irreversible
movement
towards decolonization
and the trend towards the universality
of the Organization.

155. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria wishes’ to
declare before this most responsible and most important body of the international
Organization
its
unshakable belief in the desire of the Government of
the People’s Republic of Angola to exert every effort,
under the guidance of the MPLA, to attain the ideals
of the United Nations and to strengthen universal
peace and security. Our Organization
must accept
the People’s Republic of Angola as one of its members.
We urge the Security Council to make a positive
recommendation
to that effect.

161. When, as in the case of Angola, the people
which now comes knocking at our door is one that
has travelled a long road full of troubles and sacrifices before attaining its independence,
the Organization has before it an opportunity
to do itself credit
by receiving those- who, with va&r and~dign~y~&e’
embodied and defended the purposes and principles
of the Charter.

156. Judging from today’s discussion, most of the
members of the Council are in favour of admitting the
People’s Republic of Angola to membership
in the
United Nations. We cannot but regret that one of the
members of the Council, taking a very dish stand,
and under cover of its trite phrases and slogans, has
seen fit to attack, without any justification,
the countries which have given and continue to give effective

162. The entry of the People’s Republic of Angola
into the United Nations will make the Organization
stronger, more representative
of the peoples of the
world, more sensitive to the clamour of the exploited
masses of an Africa that is still awaiting liberation.
18

163. The People’s Republic of Angola, which possesses a wealth of experience in the struggle for freedom, is capable of making a highly constructive contribution to the work of the United Nations. Strictly
speaking, by admitting Angola we would be paying
off an old debt which the Organization
owes the
Angolan people, whose legitimate place in the intemational community
was usurped for three decades by
the Portuguese colonialists.

167. If we understand the words “in the judgement
of the Organization”
in Article 4 to mean, as the most
elementary logic dictates, the judgement of the vast
majority of the Members ofthe Organization and not
the caprice or whim of one or two of them, then,
obviously, the Organization has given its judgement in
favour of the People’s Republic of Angola.

164. The Council is today being invited to recommend
to the General Assembly that it admit the People’s
Republic of Angola. The criteria to be taken into
consideration by the Security Council and the General
Assembly when adopting the relevant decisions are
clearly defined in Article 4 of the Charter, which
makes three points: first, that the applicant must be a
peace-loving State; second, that it must accept the
obligations contained in the Charter; and, third, that in
the judgement of the Organization, it is able and willing
to carry out those obligations. And let it be noted that
the Charter reserves the authority to judge the capacity
of a State for the Organization
alone and not for any
of its individual members. It follows from this that the
Council must consider whether the State is peaceloving and whether it accepts the obligations
contained in the Charter, and, above all, that the Council
must take into account the opinion of the Members
of the Organization which, according to the Charter,
are those which are authorized to pass judgement on
the State that wishes to become a Member.

168. As regards the status of the People’s Republic
of Angola as a peace-loving
State, obviously
the
decision can only be in favour of admitting
that
country. The People’s Republic of Angola threatens
no one. Its foreign policy is peaceful and based on the
principles
of peaceful coexistence,
non-alignment
and solidarity with national liberation movements and
revolutionary
peoples. Its entry into the Organization
of African Unity and the non-aligned movement confirms all this and also indicates that that is how independent, sovereign Angola is viewed by the peoples
of Asia, African and Latin America. The People’s
Republic of Angola represents a people which loves
peace based on freedom and justice. It has struggled
for freedom many centuries. It overcame Portuguese
colonialism
at the cost of countless sacrifices. It
resisted and defeated the criminal aggression of the
racist regime of South Africa. Through its heroic
struggle, the people of Angola won independence and
the right to build a peaceful future. Thus, also, it made
an invaluable contribution
to the cause of peace and
security on the African continent and throughout the
world.

165. The Government
of the People’s Republic of
Angola has solemnly expressed its acceptance of the
obligations contained in the Charter and its willingness
to carry them out. This is apparent in the letter
from Comrade Agostinho
Neto, President
of the
People’s Republic of Angola to the Secretary-General.
In the Constitution of the People’s Republic of Angola
and in other important documents submitted by the
Angolan authorities,
the attachment of that country
and its Government
and people to the ideals and
purposes of the United Nations is confirmed.

169. Neither Article 4 nor any other Article of the
Charter prescribes other requirements
for admission
to the United Nations. To attempt to impose other
conditions would be completely illegal and discriminatory and would violate the Charter itself. To use the
power of the veto for this purpose -is tantamount to
an abuse of the prerogatives accorded certain Powers
whose special responsibilities
are recognized in the
Charter. Such conduct by a permanent member of
the Security Council would be proof of its inability
to exercise its privileges responsibly.

166. The members of the Council have, furthermore,
abundant proof of the opinion of the quasi-totality
of
the international
community
in regard to the peaceloving character of the People’s Republic of Angola
and its ability and willingness to comply with the
obligations-laid
down in the Charter. This is a State
that has been recognized by and maintains diplomatic
relations with more than 100 States in every area of
the world; it is a full member of the Organization of
African Unity and the non-aligned movement. Furthermore, the People’s Republic of Angola has just been
admitted to the International
Labour Organisation and
to the World Health Organization.
At the United
Nations Conference for Human Settlements, in which
130 States participated
and which recently ended in
Vancouver, the presence of the People’s Republic of
Angola was enthusiastically
welcomed by the vast
majority of delegations present.

170. The admission of new Members is too important
to be governed by petty interests or political shortsightedness. The interests of peace and international
security, because they are universal, should be protected from chauvinistic
influences or the effect of
electoral setbacks.
171. On behalf of the Revolutionary
Government of
Cuba, I wish to place on record our total support
for the application
for admission of the People’s
Republic of Angola. Between the peoples of Angola
and Cuba there is a deep solidarity rooted in the
struggle of the slaves brought to the lands of the
American continent by European colonists. The bonds
were further strengthened by our joint struggle against
foreign opression and for independence and were for
ever sealed in the blood shed by Cubans and Angolans
fighting side by side against the South African racists
19

and the mercenaries who, under the orders of imperialism, tried to snatch from Angola the freedom it
had won by so many years of heroic deeds and sacrifice. The bonds of brotherhood
between the two
peoples have been developed and deepened in our
common endeavour to press forward on our revolutionary course and to pursue our struggle against
colonialism,
imperialism
and racism.

and how we have agreed on the question with the
People’s Republic of Angola: it will take the time
that is strictly required to support the people of
Angola in defending themselves against any external
aggression while the People’s Army of Angola is
being organized, trained and equipped.”
Later, Comrade

172. Prompted by the spirit of solidarity with the
Angolan people, my delegation urges the Council to
respond favourably
to Angola’s
application
for
admission to the United Nations; We urge this, as do
many States of Africa, Asia and Latin America which
are also solidly behind the just cause of the Angolan
people. In this respect I should like to quote the
relevant part of the final communique
adopted at the
beginning of this month in Algeria by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the non-aligned countries at ,its ministerial
meeting. It reads as follows:

Fidel Castro said:

“But let our enemies not be deceived. The withdrawal will take all the time necessary to comply
with those requirements; it will be gradual. We issue
the warning that the men and the essential equipment
to guarantee, together with the Angolan people,
that country’s external security will remain in Angola
for as long as they may be needed. “ ‘How long? ’
the imperialists ask although they have no right to
ask that question. The answer we give our people
is this: as long as they may be needed while the
People’s
Army of Angola is being organized,
equipped and trained-not
a day more and not a day
less.”

“The Bureau emphasizes the historic significance
of resolution 387 (1976), adopted by the Security
Council on 31 March 1976 condemning
South
African aggression against Angola, and fully supports the application
of the People’s Republic of
Angola for admittance to the United Nations.“’

176. Frankly,
it seems very cynical for certain
delegations to try to use as an excuse for vetoing the
admission of the People’s Republic of Angola the
military co-operation agreements which that country’s
legitimate Government has signed, in the exercise of
its sovereign rights and prerogatives, with the Govemment of Cuba or the Government of any other sovereign
State. It seems particularly cynical when such allegations are made by the North American representative,
and- .a11the .more .so .when we remember .something
which must be in the mind of all the members of the
Council-that
is, that the North American Govemment has troops and military installations
from the
Caribbean to the Pacific, from the Far East to Western
Europe. In some cases, those troops are in those countries on the basis of agreements with the Govemments concerned; in other cases, they are there
against the will of the peoples and Governments concerned. If there were any logic in the North American
reasoning, then we should have to question the legitimacy of the presence in this Organization of some of
its Members.

173. At the time of voting, Council members should
bear in mind that outside the Council chamber intemational public opinion is awaiting the Council’s decision
and that beyond this meeting, history will judge the
Councilon
the,basis of how it acts today...;. , .. . .. is _.
174. That is as far as I had intended to go in my
statement this afternoon. The Council will, however,
realize that, after having listened to some Council
members, I should perhaps add a few additional
comments.
175. First of all, I wish the record of the Security
Council to reflect the position of the Revolutionary
Government
of Cuba in connexion with the military
assistance we gave our brothers, the people of Angola.
In this respect I should like to quote what the Prime
Minister of the Revolutionary
Government
of Cuba,
Commander Fidel Castro, said only two weeks ago:

177. The United States has had millions of soldiers
stationed abroad. It has sent tens of thousands of
soldiers to Indo-China, to Europe, to Korea, to Taiwan
and to many other countries, not to defend the sovereignty or territorial
integrity of a young and weak
State-as
was the case of Angola at the time of its
accession to independence-but
to extend the application of its imperialist
policy. The United States has
entered into pacts of aggression all over the planet.
The United States was the first country in history to
export troops. It has been the largest builder of
offensive bases and it has been the mainstay of all
forces of aggression, oppression,
colonialism
and
racism. It has been the prime interferer, the master of
internal subversion. How dare it give lessons about the
right of a small State that has been the victim of

“It is absurd to think that our fighters went to
Angola with the idea of staying in the country
indefinitely.
Our fighters went there with the intention of remaining in the People’s Republic of Angola,
at the request of its Government,
so long as an
invader remained on the soil of the fraternal Angolan
people. As that task ends, in accordance with the
agreements signed between the Governments of the
People’s Republic of Angola and Cuba, our military
personnel in Angola is gradually being withdrawn.
Let this be understood: gradually being withdrawn.
“Now, how long will it take for our forces to be
withdrawn? This is how we describe the situation
20

foreign aggression to seek and obtain the necessary
assistance in resisting aggression? Clearly,
these
accusations are merely an excuse for a veto. But I do
not think the United States can justify its policy of
making admission to the United Nations conditional
on that alleged criterion.
178. I wish to point out, furthermore,
that when
I spoke in the Council in March this year in connexion
with the South African aggression against Angola
[1902nd and 1906th meetings],
I referred to the
activities of foreign mercenaries, the white mercenaries
recruited in the United States and in other Western
countries who went to sow destruction and crime on
Angolan soil. At that time I showed the Council a
publication
which was circulating
in this country
and which was openly aimed at recruiting mercenaries
to fight against the Angolan people. A few moments
before coming to this meeting I obtained a copy of
another number of this publication, which seems to be
last year’s summer issue. The cover of the publication
bears the words “American
mercenaries in Africa”,
and in smaller type, it mentions the attempts of “Colonel Mike Hoare and his mercenaries” to invade Angola.
An article in the publication
gives abundant details
showing that not only in March but also in June there
was open encouragement
in this country of activities
by mercenaries against African peoples. In that article,
referring to mercenary activities against Angola, the
author seems to indicate that it is no longer so easy
to organize these disgraceful activities against the
Angolan people. This does not mean, however, that
these wretched activities
against the peoples of
Africa have been completely abandoned. The author
mentions the so-called Wild Geese group, a group of
mercenary commandos with long experience from the
Congo to Angola over the past decade and a half
in connexion with attempts to organize activities
against the People’s Republic of Angola. The attempts
appear to have come rather late in the day but the
intention was the same as before. The article ends
with these words: “Will the ‘Wild Geese’ fly again?
The mercenaries feel IIthat it is not ‘if but ‘when’
and ‘where’.“*

cil and to the delegation of China some quotations from
official Chinese publications,
including
quotations
made by President Mao Tse-tung some decades ago,
in which the leader of the Communist Party of China
taught his followers and militants always to try to
maintain a line of action which did not put them in the
imperialist
enemy camp, and which always opposed
the imperialists’
policy.
181. Events in Angola certainly indicate that that is
not the thinking that now governs the foreign policy
of the Chinese leadership. It is interesting to note in
these articles on mercenaries I have mentioned how,
15 years ago, according to the account published in this
issue of the magazine, Colonel Hoare’s mercenaries
in the Congo captured Chinese weapons held by
Congolese patriots. Now in Angola, Colonel Hoare
and his henchmen did not have to fight to obtain
Chinese weapons. This time they were on the same
‘side. How has this 180-degree volte-face come about
over a period of 15 years? That is something the
Chinese delegation should consider before preaching
revolutionary
action.
182. It seems that the statements of President Mao
that I quoted are no longer valid today and that the
conduct of the delegation of China is governed by a
new book which is unknown to me and which I
therefore
cannot! quote: it is probably
entitled
“Thoughts of Chairman Kissinger”.
183. I conclude my statement by repeating that we
support the application
of the People’s Republic of
Angola for admission to the United Nations, and that
we are convinced that, despite the new American veto
we are about to witness some day-and
we think it
will be soon-the
People’s Republic of Angola will
occupy its lawful place in this Organization.
184. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Kenya. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
185. Mr. MAINA
(Kenya): Mr. President, I thank
you and the other members of the Council for making
it possible for me to address the Council on the question
of the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to
the United Nations.

179. The Government
of the Unitd States, which
encourages the racists and colonialists in Africa and
openly tolerates the scandalous recruitment
of hired
assassins to interfere in the life of African States and
to organize aggression such as that suffered by the
Angolan people, obviously has no right to speak in the
manner in which its representative
has spoken this
afternoon.

186. When I examined
the report contained
in
document S/12109, I did not feel inclined to address
the Council because I thought there was a misunderstanding only on the procedure for the admission of
Angola. The report gave the impression that simply
by its postponement
for approximately
50 days,
Angola’s application for admission would receive the
unanimous support of the Council. However, when
I listened to the debate as it progressed, I felt that
I ought to add the voice of my delegation in support
of the application,
because issues that I thought had
been cleared before were raised anew. My delegation

180. Turning to another point, I should like to make
a brief comment on the statement made by the representative of China. In March we had to refer to the
allegations of the delegation of China concerning the
co-operation of Cuba and the Soviet Union with the
Angolan people. At that time I presented to the Coun* Quoted in English by the speaker.

21

wpuld have liked to say that the admission of Angola
would be a simple matter. We therefore expected the
Council to raise no difftculties in the way of admitting
Angola to the international
community.

192. I recall October 1974, when the veto was
similarly used to support the continued membership
of a delinquent Member, South Africa, and we were
told by the representative of the same country that the
United Nations was not founded simply to be a league
of the just. We would like to add that the United
Nations was not founded for Members which are mere
images of others. We insisted then that the Charter
provided for the expulsion of Members which had
persistently violated the principles of the Charter. We
insist now that the Member should tell this Organization the grounds on which it relies in blocking the
admission of Angola; otherwise that Member is guilty
of applying double standards. We would like to be told
which obligations imposed by the Charter Angola is
unable to fulfil. Surely no Member of this Organization
qualifies to be the sole guardian of the United Nations
on whatever grounds. Any Member can act only as a
joint guardian with all the others.

187. In urging this Council to recommend the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola, my delegation
wishes to salute the people of Angola for the determined struggle that they waged against Portuguese
colonialism.
We are all familiar with the cruel colonial
wars that the Portuguese carried on for more than
13 years against the people of Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and
Angola. In the end, and after a bitter struggle against
imperialism
and colonialism,
the Portuguese misrule
in Africa collapsed. Those States are now independent
and have joined the United Nations to promote the
principles
of freedom and peace enshrined in the
Charter.
188. Angola is now free and has a Government that
exercises control over all its territory. It is a member
of the Organization of African Unity and it has been
recognized by the majority of Member States of the
United Nations. The People’s Republic of Angola
qualifies for admission to the United Nations under
Article 4 of the Charter. It fulfils all the conditions of
a sovereign State. Its application to become a Member
of this Organization is vivid testimony of its willingness
to accept the purposes and principles of the United
Nations as contained in its Charter.

193. On those grounds, I appeal to all the members
of the Council to consider the application
without
any unnecessary prejudice based on domestic political
considerations or any other extraneous considerations.
194. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make a
statement
in my capacity
as representative
of
GUYANA.
195. The issue of which the Council is seized
today-the
application
of the People’s Republic of
Angola for admission to membership
in the United
Nations-is
of special importance,
not only to the
Angolan people but to the entire international
community, for this application
symbolizes the onward
march of the forces of freedom in Africa. The victory
of the heroic Angolan people after a long, arduous
struggle signalled the virtual end of one of the oldest
colonial empires of modem times and, as some have
said elsewhere, significantly contributed towards the
introduction
of a breath of freedom into the metropolitan country itself, Portugal.

189.. I should like to emphasize that the admission of
Angola should not be blocked on spurious grounds.
We have heard some say that Angola should not be
admitted as long as there are foreign troops in its territory. To this we say: Angola is an independent
country. It has the right, like any other sovereign
State, to invite its friends to its territory.
190. No Member State has any right to determine who
should be the friends of Angola. Angola alone, as a
sovereign State, should decide on its own affairs.
If one of the criteria for membership of this Organization were the absence of foreign troops in sovereign
States, then indeed the present membership
of the
Organization
would have to be reviewed. Therefore,
let us not apply any special conditions for the admission of Angola; let us admit Angola solely on the
criteria that have been applicable to other States in the
past.

196. The people of Angola have endured a long
nightmare.
Like other former colonial Territories,
Angola was subjected to ruthless exploitation,
to
cultural suppression and to processes and practices
which debase the human personality.
Yet, when
on the threshold of independence the people of Angola
were called upon to resist a fierce onslaught by the
racist forces of South Africa which sought to make
nugatory the fruits of the successful struggle of the
Angolans against Portuguese colonialism,
that fascist
attempt to stem the tide of progress in Angola was of
course completely smashed. Now the people of Angola
are faced with the difficult task of rebuilding
their
society and of fashioning it in a manner which would
be consistent with their true aspirations. The intemational community
has a responsibility
to support the
people of Angola in those efforts.

191. Angola is already a member of the Organization
of African Unity, an organization which my country
supports fully. If Angola is good enough to associate
with in that organization,
surely it cannot be anything
else at the United Nations. .A11 the members of the
Organization
of African Unity support this application. But we understand that this application will be
turned down, possibly by the use of the veto by one of
the members of the Council. We would ask to be
told the basis for that irresponsible
use of the veto
on this occasion.

197. Guyana is committed to the goal of universality
of membership
of the United Nations. We believe
22

future, when Angola will triumphantly
ful place in the United Nations.

that through the full participation
of all States in the
deliberations
of the United. Nations the international
community can best attain those goals which the overwhelming majority of nations justly strive for-peace,
justice, prosperity-,
goals which should be the cornerstone of all human endeavour. My delegation therefore
fully supports the application of the People’s Republic
of Angola for membership and stands ready warmly to
welcome it among us.

take its right-

203. Mr. SHERER (United States of America): The
Cuban representative
and I had the opportunity
to
engage in debate last March and I do not want to take
up more of the Council’s valuable time with a repetition
of such an exchange. I would, however, like to note
with pleasure his statement that Cuban troops will
remain in Angola only so long as there is an invader
in that country. My delegation is not aware that any
invaders are now in Angola-unless,
of course, the
“golden geese” or other such science-fiction characters can be so described.

198. We are fully satisfied that the application of the
People’s Republic of Angola conforms with the requirements of Article 4 of the Charter. Angola’s membership in the Organization of African Unity, its impending
entry into the fold of the non-aligned movement and
its recognition by so many Members of the United
Nations are factors which without a doubt enhance its
suitability for membership in the United Nations.

204. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Cuba
has asked to be allowed to make a further statement.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

199. We should not allow the strategic defence
perceptions
and the global military
and political
outreach of some States to lead us to adopt a selective
approach to the question of membership in the United
Nations. We should not confer any semblance of
legitimacy on postures which question the undiluted
application of the fundamental principle of sovereignty.
Such postures, or indeed any others, which go beyond
the provisions of Article 4 of the Charter should not be
imposed upon our consideration of the application of
any State for membership
and certainly
not on
Angola’s.
.

205. Mr. ALAR&N
(Cuba) (inferpretation
from
Spanish): I wish only to say that my quotations of the
words of the Prime Minister of the Revolutionary
Government
of Cuba will no doubt appear in the
verbatim records, and I adhere to the text I quoted.
206. I do not wish at this stage to reopen polemics
with the representative
of the United States with
regard to his attitude towards the right of the people
of Angola to receive assistance from abroad in
exercise of its sovereign will. I said that in March,
and that is all I shall repeat here now. The United
States Government
recognizes that right to other
Governments which are its allies and which as a rule
are located in the developed capitalist white part of the
world. The only basis for denying the Government
of the People’s Republic of Angola the sovereign
right to request the military assistance it needs from
another sovereign State is a racist one; it can be
explained only by racist attitudes.

200. The Government
and people of Guyana salute
the Government
and people of the heroic nation of
Angola. My delegation looks forwards to working in
close co-operation
with the delegation of that sister
Republic as we seek to grapple with the problems
which confront today’s troubled world. It is our firm
hope that the bonds of friendship which bind us will
be further strengthened by that co-operation.

207. I cannot accept that what the United States
considers protected by international
law in the case’of
a Western European State, let us say, should not apply
equally to an African State, for the simple reason that
its rulers do not have as white a skin as the illustrious
representative of Washington. This racist conception ’
is not consonant with international
law, nor is it
accepted by the majority of mankind.

201. I could not close without noting that the victory
of the Angolan people over the forces of colonialism
and fascism provides a source of strength for the
valiant freedom fighters in Zimbabwe, Namibia and
South Africa. My delegation is acutely conscious of
the gathering of the storm clouds over the remaining
bastions of racism and colonialism in southern Africa.
We urge all Governments, indeed all Governments and
peoples, to join fully in the struggle which will put an
end to human degradation
and injustice in the remaining colonial territories.

208. The PRESIDENT:
If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this stage, may I take it that
the Council is ready to vote on the six-Power draft
resolution contained in document S/12110? As there
has been no objection, I now put the draft resolution
to the vote.

202. My delegation is happy to be among the sponsors
of the draft resolution contained in document S/12110,
which seeks to have the Council recommend to the
General Assembly that the People’s Republic of
Angola be admitted
as a Member of the United
Nations. We deeply regret that it does not now appear
possible that the draft resolution will be adopted. We
none the less look forward to the day, in the near

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Benin, France, Guyana,. Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
23

Kingdom
of Great Britain
United Republic of Tanzania
Against:

United

The result
1 against.

and Northern

Ireland,

212. That being so, what is the meaning of saying
that Angola’s application
is not in accordance with
Article 4 of the Charter? In any case, my delegation
does not dare to believe that this is an allusion to
the categorical refusal of the Angolan authorities to
negotiate with the apartheid regime of South Africa,
which has no common frontier with Angola; but has
used Namibia
to perpetrate
its shameful acts of
aggression against the young Angolan republic.

States of America.

of the vote was 13 in favour

and

The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative
vote being that of a permanent member of the Council.
One member
voting.

(China)

did not participate

213. Everyone here knows the vicissitudes
that
preceded the birth of the Angolan State. We all know
that the existence of that State is the fruit of the
unshakable will of the overwhelming
majority of the
Angolan people, united behind President Agostinho
Neto within the MPLA
in order to oppose the
manoeuvres of international imperialism,
which had no
desire to see the large Angolan State, so recently
liberated from the colonial yoke, become unified,
independent and free.

in the

209. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
delegations wishing to speak in explanation
of their
vote after the voting.
210. Mr.
PAQUI
(Benin)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, you have just announced the
result of the voting: 13 in favour, 1 against, and no
abstentions.
Thus, a draft resolution
which was
sponsored by Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab
Republic,
Romania,
the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics
and the United
Republic
of Tanzania
[S/12110] has been rejected. Thus, once again the
Council is compelled to bow to the dictatorship-that
is indeed the appropriate word-of
a minority which
enjoys the inestimable privilege of the veto. And thus,
contrary to the wish of the overwhelming majority of
the members of the Council, it will not be possible
to admit a sister country of ours, Angola, to the
United Nations because of the ill will shown by one
of the permanent members of the Council. At least,
let us hope that its admission is simply postponed to
a later date.

214. The sufferings of the people of Angola during
its struggle for liberation and its civil war-a war which
was also unjustly imposed on them by the imperialists-should
be a major argument in favour of
the admission of the new People’s Republic of Angola.
Instead of the criteria laid down in Article 4 of the
Charter and the specific conditions in this country,
whose long and bloody struggle cannot but arouse the
admiration
of the international
community,
what
arguments are being put forward to justify a decision
which is as nonsensical as it is unacceptable? It is said
that this decision would be in conformity
with the
interests of the Angolan people; but who can arrogate
to himself the right to decide what the interests of the
Angolans are better than the Angolan people themselves? Then the alleged presence of foreign troops
was used as an argument also. In other words, the idea
seemed to be that the Angolan authorities should take
certain measures if the doors of the United Nations
were not to remain closed to them. What does that
mean, other than an inadmissible
interference in the
internal affairs of a State?

211. But why then this incomprehensible
act of
injustice? Because this new country does not meet the
requirements
of Article 4 of the Charter? Certainly
not. Many delegations have very eloquently explained
this, and we all know that when the young Angolan
State applied for admission the authorities of Angola
solemnly declared their acceptance of the provisions
of the Charter. The representative of France and the
representative of Cuba were kind enough to read out
to the Council the provisions of Article 4. My delegation will not go into detail as regards the conditions
which must be met under that Article by a prospective
Member of this Organization;
we shall simply confine
ourselves to stressing one.single aspect. To become a
Member of Organization,
it is necessary that the
State be judged a peace-loving State. Now, the fact
that the People’s Republic of Angola fulfils this condition is something which needs no further proof,
because everyone knows that this is so. The Ambassador-atJarge of Angola, who spoke before the Council
in March, aftirrned this, saying that once the civil war
had ended, the authorities of Luanda had made and
were continuing to make every effort to normalize
relations with Angola’s immediate neighbours.
‘.

215. Angola is a ‘free and independent
State. The
authorities in Luanda are consequently free to take
whatever measures they deem necessary to protect and
safeguard the unity and integrity of their territory.
And in doing so, the authorities of Luanda have not
committed
any reprehensible
act that violates the
Charter. On the contrary, whatever they have done has
been done in accordance with Article 51. In passing,
let us say that it is rather amusing to see with what
facility arguments are found to justify something which
is unjustifiable. Yesterday it was said that the principle
of universality had not been attained; today reference
is made to Article 4 of the Charter!
216. The Angolan State was, as we all know, the
victim of external aggression, as we already had the
opportunity to prove here during the month of March.
Left to itself and faced with an international
con24

221. In this respect, I should like to recall that during
the month of March 1976 my country had the honour to
receive a highly respected delegation from Angola,
headed by Mr. Lopo do Nascimento,
member of the
Revolutionary
Council and Prime Minister
of the
People’s Republic of Angola. Various bilateral and
international questions were duly discussed during that
visit, and various agreements on economic, technical
and cultural co-operation
were signed; it was also
agreed diplomatic
relations should be established
between our two countries.

spiracy, what else could Angola do but have recourse
to the “inherent right of individual or collective selfdefence**, which is, indeed, bestowed on it by Article 51?
217. This is to say that the arguments which have
been put forward to bar from the United Nations a
State which certainly deserves to take its here in
this Organization
are absolutely unacceptable to my
delegation. My delegation can but protest vehemently
against this dictatorship
by the minority,
while we
hope, at the same time, that the United States will
reconsider its position in the very near future in order
to facilitate a new development
towards the implementation of the principle of universality which is so
dear to the heart of this Organization.

222. The resolution on Angola adopted last February
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of
African Unity, at its twenty-sixth session, reiterated
the solidarity of all the African countries with the
people of Angola and recommended the admission of
the People’s Republic of Angola to the United Nations
and its specialized agencies.

218. In concluding,
I should like to assure the
representative of Angola, who is here in this chamber, of the vigorous support of my delegation, a support
which is consistent with that which the military and
revolutionary
Government
of the People’s Republic
of Benin has always given to the defence of the just
and noble cause of the People’s Republic of Angola.
In the face of such an unjust decision, the Angolan
people can only rejoice because it knows how to fight
and how to wait, and because it knows that although
it may have lost a battle, it has not lost the war.
This is to say that my delegation is convinced that the
final victory will be won by the the People’s Republic
of Angola, which sooner or later will occupy the seat
it so richly deserves within the family of nations.

223. In submitting
its application for admission in
accordance with Article 4 of the Charter, the Govemment of Angola has declared its acceptance of all
the obligations
contained in the Charter and has
solemnly undertaken to fulfil them. Despite all these
efforts and sacrifices by the Angolan people, and
against the unanimous wish of all African and other
peace-loving States to see the People’s Republic of
Angola occupy its legitimate
place in the United
Nations, there are still some who ignore this wish and
raise obstacles ahd invent manoeuvres designed to
prevent the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to membership in the United Nations.

219. Mr. DHARAT (Libyan Arab Republic): It gives
my delegation great pleasure to speak before the Council on an important issue, namely, the admission of
the African State of the People’s Republic of Angola
to membership in the United Nations.

224. The report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members and the vote on the draft resolution
before the Council very clearly show that the vast
majority of the members of the Council support the
admission of the People’s Republic of Angola. My
delegation regrets that a single State member of the
Security Council has just cast a negative vote on the
draft resolution submitted by the representative
of
Tanzania on behalf of several members of the Council, including my own delegation, thus opposing the
wish of the overwhelming
majority of the intemational community.
This veto is a dramatic example
of the misuse of the veto, a trend we have witnessed
many times during the last few years.

220. In accordance with its consistent stand of
upholding the principles of the Organization
and of
justice and progress for all peoples, the Libyan Arab
Republic declared on 5 January 1976 its recognition
of the Government
of the MPLA as the legitimate
authority representing the fraternal people of Angola
and their aspiration for complete emancipation
and
unity. The long heroic and successful struggle by the
Angolan people for freedom and independence
is
eloquent testimony to the determination
of the African
nations to rid their continent of the ugly remnants
of colonialism and imperialism.
The people of Angola
have suffered tremendous bloodshed and destruction
as the result of a long period of colonialism and of the
ravages of war. It is high time for this heroic people
to join the international
community embodied in this
Organization
and to live in peace with no external
threat in order to be able to consolidate their national
independence and to reconstruct their country. I should
like to avail myself of this occasion to convey my
Government’s
full and unlimited political and material
support to the Government
and people of Angola in
their struggle against imperialism
and racism and in
their efforts to develop and reconstruct their country.

225. We are convinced that time is on the side of the
heroic people of Angola and that they will occupy
their seat in the United Nations with the active
support of all peace-loving
countries and peoples
throughout the world.
226. Mr. ABE (Japan): The delegation of Japan voted
in favour of the draft resolution in document S/12110,
which has regrettably failed to obtain the approval of
the Council. While it supported and continues wholeheartedly to support the admission of the People’s
Republic of Angola to membership
in the United
Nations, my delegation felt it would be better for the
25
. ..

Council to consider this question at a later date, to be
set in good time for the general Assembly to take
action. At that time, Angola’s application will have
obtained the unanimous blessing of the Council and
also that of the General Assembly, thus permitting the
principle of universality of membership so dear to us to
be well respected and implemented.

232. The People’s Republic of Angola, as an independent and sovereign country, is now a member of
the international
community.
My country has recognized Angola, as have many other countries of the
world and Members of the United Nations. In the
application
for membership,
the President of the
People’s Republic of Angola has declared that the
Government
of Angola accepts all the obligations
contained in the Charter and solemnly undertakes
to fulfil them.

227. In examining
Angola’s application,
the delegation of Japan noted Angola’s declaration accepting
the obligations incumbent upon Member States under
the Charter and expressing its solemn undertaking
to carry out those obligations. The delegation of Japan
has .full confidence in Angola’s ability and willingness
to do so. In the view of my delegation, this newly
independent State is qualified for membership in this
Organization under Article 4 of the Charter.

233. Rearing these considerations
in mind, my
delegation supported the application in the Committee
on Admission of New Members and voted in favour
of the draft contained in document S/l21 10. We greatly
regret that consideration
of this item at the present
juncture did not lead to a positive decision.

228. The Government
of Japan recognized
the
People’s Republic of Angola on 20 February 1976. In
his congratulatory
message to Mr. Agostinho Neto,
President of the People’s Republic of Angola, the
Prime Minister of Japan stated that the Government
and people of Japan sincerely hoped for the reconstruction and development
of Angola and ardently
wished to promote
friendship
and co-operation
between the two countries.
We look forward to
strengthening
our close and friendly relations with
the Government
and people of Angola in every
possible field. We strongly hope that the’ obstacles
which today prevented this Council from recommending to the General Assembly the admission of
the People’s Republic of Angola will be removed, thus
enabling it to join the United Nations as early as
possible.

234. The report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members records the view of some members
that deferral of the consideration
of this item might
have led to a different outcome. The members of the
Committee were not all of one mind on this question,
and as a result it was not able to make a unanimous
recommendation
to the Council. In the Committee my
delegation
was one of those which favoured the
immediate consideration
of the Angolan application.
In doing so, we were not disregarding the considerations which motivated the request for deferral. However, in view of the wish of the Government
of
Angola to seek an immediate decision, and since every
Government must be presumed to be capable ofjudging
its own best interests, we saw no justification
for
opposing its desire. Nor do we see any reason why
Angola should not become a Member of the United
Nations, and, as I have said, we regret the rejection
of its application on this occasion.

229. -Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): The independence
of the People’s Republic of Angola virtually completed
the process of ending the European colonial empires
in Asia and Africa, a process which began with the
achievement
of independence
by the subcontinent
that includes my country in August 1947.

235. We should like to express the hope that circumstances will enable the Council to reconsider the
application in time to permit Angola to take its due
and rightful place as a full Member of the United
Nations by the time the thirty-first
session of the
General Assembly convenes. We believe that the
admission of Angola could contribute to the strengthening of Angola’s independence and to the stabilization
of the situation in the region.

230. The peoples of the Protuguese colonies had to
wage a bitter, difficult and protracted struggle. The
determination,
courage and unity they showed in their
struggle rightly provoked
world-wide
tribute and
admiration.
In the particular case of Angola, whose
people strove with great valour for the common goal
of freedom, accession to independence came under
circumstances
of great difficulty,
internal discord
and external intervention.
My delegation had occasion
to express its views on that subject when it spoke in the
Council on South Africa’s aggression against Angola.
I shall not, therefore, repeat myself, except to reiterate
the hope that national reconciliation
will help Angola
to consolidate its independence.

236. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (interpretation
fi&r Spunish): On this question Panama has from the very
beginning been at the side of Angola and of our
African friends. Exercising their rights and privileges
under the Charter, they urged that a decision be taken
on Angola’s application so that the Security Council
could recommend
to the General Assembly
that
country’s admission to the United Nations. They
desired that decision to be taken immediately,
without
any further delay. Panama fully supported them.

231. My country believes Angola has a great role to
play, materially and morally, in the final triumph of
the struggle for independence and human dignity which
is gathering strength in southern Africa.

237. We have made that explanation
because we
would not wish to leave any room for doubt about
our position. The delegation of the United States
26

242. As I said earlier, the People’s Republic of
Angola is recognized by most of the Member States
of this Organization.
Angola would thus have been an
addition to the Organization
and would have played
its role in promoting
international
understanding.
Indeed, in the application contained in the document
to which I have already referred, President Neto made
the usual declaration
accepting all the obligations
laid down in the Charter. According to Article 4,
five conditions for admission to the United Nations
must be met: first, the applicant must be a State;
secondly, it must be peace-loving;
thirdly, it must
accept the obligations of the Charter; fourthly, it must
be able to carry out those obligations,
and fifthly
and lastly, it must be willing to do so.

proposed the postponement of a decision on Angola’s
annlication for ‘admission. My delegation said that it
h&l no difficulty in agreeing to the United States
proposal, on the understanding that that would make it
easier at a later time to achieve our desired goal: the
admission of Angola as a full Member of the United
Nations. The decision has now been taken, and Panama
is pleased to have voted, together with our African
colleagues, in favour of Angola’s admission.
238. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): It
is the view of the Tanzanian delegation that this is a
sad moment in the history of our Organization.
For
every time a permanent member of the Security Council uses its veto in order to obstruct the principle of
universality, so necessary for the strength and efficacy
of our Organization,
the United Nations becomes the
poorer. My delegation very much regrets the decision
of the United States to veto Angola’s admission to the
United Nations.
This veto is clearly against the
wishes and expectations
of the international
community, the overwhelming majority of whose Member
States have recognized
the People’s
Republic of
Angola. The veto also reflects an insensitivity
to the
wishes of the overwhelming
majority of the members
of this Council who voted in favour of the admission
of the People’s Republic of Angola.

243. I need hardly remind members of this Council
that the International
Court of Justice, in an advisory
opinion in the 1948 admissions case,* held that the
foregoing conditions
were exhaustive and that no
Member was juridically entitled to make its consent to
the admission dependent on conditions not expressly
provided by Article 4 (1) of the Charter. The Court
went on to state:
“The natural meaning of the words used leads to
the conclusion that these conditions constitute an
exhaustive enumeration and are not merely stated by
way of guidance or example. The provision would
lose its significance and weight, if other conditions,
unconnected
with those laid down, could be
demanded. The conditions stated in paragraph 1 of
Article 4 must therefore be regarded not merely as
the necessary conditions, but also as the conditions
which suffice.”

239. My delegation voted in favour of the .admission
of Angola and was indeed privileged to be a sponsor
of the draft resolution.
The admission of this new
State would, in our opinion, have been a fitting tribute
to it for all it has done to achieve justice and peace
in Africa. Its admission would also have been a further
step towards a realization of the principle of universality, for which we are all working.

244. I have quoted extensively
from the Couri’s
opinion in order to show that once an applicant State
has fulfilled the five conditions to which I have referred,
refusal to admit it is tantamount to a violation of the
Charter. Alien considerations
based on conditions
of political expediency defeat the aim of Article 4
of the Charter. In fact, it was a former Permanent
Representative
of the United States who stated on
11 August 1975 before this Council: “But we must not
apply partisan political tests to membership”
[1&?6th
meeting, para. 116.1 It is therefore contradictory
that
political
considerations
should have been used ‘to
refuse to admit Angola to the United Nations.

240. I should like to add that the negative vote just
cast is certainly contrary to the spirit of international
co-operation and accommodation
that many, both in
the Council and outside, have worked so hard to
defend and to promote.
241. It will be recalled that Angola’s application,
in
a letter from President Neto to the Secretary-General
was issued as a General Assembly and Security
Council document on 30 April 1976. The consideration
of that application was postponed for several weeks
in deference to a request by a member of this Council.
It was hoped that the spirit of accommodation
shown
by the majority, and in particular by Angola and the
African members of the Council, would find some
reciprocal response at this time. Unfortunately,
that
has not been the case. Indeed, I could not agree more
with this relevant observation
from an editorial,
: entitled “No Veto on Angola”, in today’s New York
Times:

245. And what are these extraneous considerations?
We are told that the reason for opposing Angola’s
admission is that there are Cuban troops in Angola.
I say that that argument does not stand up to examination. For if we were to use the absence of foreign
troops as a criterion for United Nations membership,
many States would not qualify. Moreover, some members of the Council, including some permanent members, have troops stationed in certain foreign countries
which are Members of the United Nations:Be
that as
it may, the foregoing argument is beside the point.‘It
is irrelevant, legally untenable and morally unsound,

“The United States could give African leaders
a vivid and much-needed display of good faith in its
new-found sympathy for African concerns by withdrawing the long-standing threat to veto Angola’s
application for membership in the United Nations.”
27

for, once an applicant meets the legal and objective
test laid down in Article 4 of the Charter, no other
condition can be attached to its admission-not
even
its non-recognition
by the objecting State, as is the
case here.

States Members of the United Nations that took part
in the discussion of the application of the People’s
Republic of Angola, it was very properly stressed that
the full participation of the People’s Republic of Angola
would have enabled that State to make a useful contribution to the solution of the important problems
faced by the United Nations in connexion with the
strengthening of international
peace and security and
the development of co-operation on a basis of equality.
At the same time, Angola’s participation
would have
helped to alleviate the destructive consequences of
the recent aggression against that long-suffering country. It would also have helped that country to carry
out the difficult tasks involved in its economic and
social development.

246. At the beginning of my statement I said that
this was a sad day for the United Nations. The blocking
of Angola’s admission means that it is the Security
Council and the United Nations that suffer. It is our
Organization’s
credibility which is put to the test. But,
despite this, my delegation believes that justice will
finally triumph and that Angola, sooner rather than
later, will be recommended
by the Council for
admission.
247. In this respect we urge the Government of the
United States to reconsider its position. That reconsideration is called for in the interests not only of
Africa-United
States understanding and co-operation
but also, and above all, in the interests of justice for
Angola and of our Organization’s
effectiveness.

25 1. The delegation that voted against the admission
of the People’s Republic of Angola used as an argument
to explain its use of the veto, which was totally
unjustified, the presence in Angola of Cuban troops.
No one has denied their presence, neither the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola nor the
representative of Cuba, who explained to the Council,
very clearly and circumstantially
for what purpose and
at whose request these troops are now on the territory
of Angola. There is every reason to raise the question:
since when and on what legal grounds can a member
of the Council take the liberty of interfering in the
domestic affairs of a sovereign State and arrogating to
itself the role of an arbiter to determine the legitimacy
of decisions taken by this State to defend its sovereignty and national independence?
The whole world
knows that the Cuban troops were sent to the territory of the People’s Republic of Angola in accordance
with the wish and at the request of the legitimate
Government
of that sovereign State, to assist it in’
repelling the aggression of the South African racists
who, together with the imperialist
murderers and
mercenaries, were trying to stifle that young African
State. Is not the position of the United States an
attempt to dictate its will to an independent State, the
People’s Republic of Angola, and also to courageous
Cuba, and to tell them how sovereign States should
conduct themselves in their relations, whom they
should select as their friends and whom they should
ask for assistance if they are threatened by some
danger?

248. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): The delegation of
the Soviet Union was a sponsor of the draft resolution
on the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola
to membership in the United Nations and it voted in
favour of that draft resolution. It therefore expresses
its deepest regret at the fact that, because of the
negative vote cast by one of the permanent members
of the Security Council, the question of the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to the United
Nations has not received a positive solution. The
United States has erected a barrier which prevents
that new young African State from joining
the
Organization,
a State which gained its freedom and
independence after a cruel struggle with the Portuguese colonialists and which defended that freedom
aainst the aggression of the South African racists and
their hired assassins, who were supported by the
United States and China.
249. The refusal to admit the People s Republic of
Angola is a challenge to the whole of the international community
and to all of Africa. It is also a
challenge to the more than 100 States which have
recognized Angola and which have diplomatic relations
with it. It is also a defiance of the overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council which have
also recognized that young African State and now
maintain friendly relations with it. The refusal to admit
the People’s Republic of Angola is a new blow to the
prestige and authority of the United Nations. It is also
a blow to the prestige of those who like to speak about
the necessity of achieving universality of membership
in the United Nations and who appeal for respect for
human rights but who, at the same time, act very selectively in deciding who should be admitted to the
Organization and who should be barred from it.

252. We all know that the representatives
of the
United States have long been pressing for the admission
of South Korea to membership in the United Nations,
a country on whose territory United States troops
and military bases are to be found. Thus, for the United
States and its representatives there are two yardsticks
and two criteria for judging the applications of States
for membership in the United Nations. One is valid for
South Korea, which in the view of the United States,
despite the presence of over 40,000 United States
troops on its soil, meets the criteria for admission.
However, as to the People’s Republic of Angola, whose
Government
had invited a very small number of
Cuban troops to assist it in its cruel struggle against

250. In the statements of the overwhelming majority
of the members of the Security Council and of the
28

South African troops and the hired assassins who had
infiltrated Angola, it seems that Angola somehow does
not meet the criteria. One may ask: where is the logic,
where is the soundness of such a position? Where is
justice and where is democracy, concepts of which the
representatives of the United States are so found of
talking, both in the United Nations and in their
propaganda statements for the mass media?

super-Power is dictating to the Government of Angola
and telling it whom it should regard as its friends, with
whom it should co-operate and to whom it should turn
for assistance if it is threatened with imperialist
and
racist aggression. The debate on the question of
Angola in the Council has demonstrated
clearly and
convincingly
to everyone that the position of China
with respect to Angola is exactly the same as that of
the imperialist
and colonialist forces. China refused
to vote for the Security.Council
resolution condemning
the aggression of racist South Africa gainst Angola;
and today, it refused to vote for Angola’s admission.
China pays lip service to the declaration of the independence of Angola but so far it has not recognized
that young sovereign African State. As in the past,
China has continued to be on the side of, and in alliance
with, those who were trying to stifle the young Republic
of Angola, who have exerted every effort to stick a
knife in its very heart and to establish in Angola the
power of corrupt pro-imperialist
mercenary elements,
thus turning the wheel backwards many decades in the
history of the liberation struggle of the Angolan people
and leaving them and their natural resources under
the complete domination
and ownership of the imperialist transnational
corporations.
.China and its
representatives pay lip-service to revolution, but what
they actually practise is counter-revolution.

253. It is also well known to all of us that the United
States did not put forward this new criterion about
foreign troops, which is not recognized
by the
Charter-as
was pointed out by the representative
of the German Democratic
Republic-when
the
admission of other States was discussed, States on
whose territory American troops and even atomic
weapons are to be found.
254. The veto which was exercised today and which
barred the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola is unjustified and unworthy. It is one of the
most flagrant abuses of the right of veto in the history
of the United Nations and the Security Council. However, we are convinced that the question of the
admission of Angola will find a positive and just
solution in due course and that the just cause of that
country will triumph. Its right to this has been supported by the overwhelming
majority of the States
Members whose words carry weight. They are the
countries which are members of the Organization
of
African Unity, the non-aligned countries, the socialist
countries, and the many countries of Western Europe
which long ago adopted a very positive approach
to the People’s Republic of Angola and its .application for admission to the United Nations.

258. China’s position on the question of Angola is the
most shameful and scandalous act of its diplomacy,
for it is a clear case of providing assistance and support for imperialist and racist forces against a national
liberation movement. That fact has shown very clearly
to all African countries and peoples-and
not only to
them-that
China’s leaders and its representatives in
the United Nations merely pay lip service to the
struggle for the liberation
and independence
of
colonial peoples while they are in fact conducting a
policy which aims at undermining
the liberation
struggle. They are in the same camp with imperialism
and racism; they are assisting pro-imperialist
and
counter-revolutionary
elements-elements
which
are selling out and betraying the interests of the
national liberation movements. Gus Hall, the General
Secretary of the Communist Party of the United States,
was one hundred per cent right when, at the Twentyfifth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet
Union, he described the position of today’s China
as follows:

255. A few words now about the retrograde statement
of the representative of the mono-super-Power.
What
can one say about the most recent slanders, the vicious
and groundless fabrications and the scurrilous aspersions that poured out of his mouth, all directed at the
Soviet Union?
256. Our main statement on the item under discussion
already contains a reply to these attacks and fabrications. However,
a few additional
comments
and
clarifications are required. Why did the representative
of the mono-super-Power
indulge in these slanders?
It was in order to conceal the well-known fact that in
Angola the mono-super-Power
itself, together with
another super-Power, somehow found its way into
the camp of Angola’s foes. It was on the side of the
pro-imperialist
elements and it helped them in their
fierce struggle against the revolutionary
and patriotic
forces which were fighting the good fight for. the
freedom and independence of the people of Angola.

“Maoism is the classic example of where the path
of opportunism
leads to, if it goes unchecked. At
the murky bottom of the swamp of opportunism
there is counterrevolution.
Maoism has reached to
that bottom.
The CIA-U.S.
corporate and Maoist alliance in
support of the fascist butchers in Chile is counterrevolution.

257. As has already been pointed out many times,
that mono-super-Power
is trying to achieve world
hegemony and impose its will on other States. From
the example of Angola, the whole world-and
above
all Africa-has
become convinced that the mono-

“The Maoist-CIA
and the racist South African
conspiracy against the people and government
of
Angola is counterrevolution.
29
,.

:

.

“The Maoist vile slander campaign
socialism is counterrevolutionary.

against world

261. In the light of these evident and well-known
facts, the delegation of the Soviet Union totally rejects
the whole set of slanderous anti-Soviet fabrications
uttered here by the representative of China regarding
the foreign policy of the Soviet Union and its position
on Angola.

“To be silent about these outrageous acts is to be
neutral. To be neutral in such a basic struggle is itself
an accommodation
to opportunism.

262. It is a fact that China has helped the proimperialist
elements in Angola, as is shown by the
boastful statement made by Roberto Holden on 5 June
1975, when he said:

“There are problems and there are momentary
setbacks, but by any yardstick the central fact, the
hard core .reality of this epoch, is the continuing
victorious flow of the world revolutionary
process
and the growing power, and the unity of forces that
propel it.”

“All my soldiers have been trained by the Chinese.
I greatly admire the Chinese because they have
unreservedly helped me.”

259. The shameful part played by China in Angola has
also been completely unmasked at the trial now taking
place in Luanda, where 13 British and American
mercenaries are being tried for having taken part in the
criminal
neo-colonialist
and racist war against the
patriotic forces of Angola and the Angolan people.
The prisoners at the bar are not only the mercenaries
and murderers themselves but also those who helped
them-and
this includes China, which placed the
weapons in their hands. On 17 June, Manuel Monteiro,
the Public Prosecutor for the Angolan people, drew
attention at the trial to the matter of the participation
of China in the conspiracy with outside foI;ces hostile
to Angola against the country’s freedom and independence. Indeed, according to the report published
in The New York Times on 18 June, in his statement,
the Public Prosecutor stressed in particular “China’s
shameful position when Chinese arms made by Chinese
workers are found in the hands of men paid by
American imperialism”.

And last February he said:
“I regularly meet with the Ambassador of China
in Kinshasa and often receive friendly delegations
from China; and I can confirm that China has not
abandoned its traditional friendship with us.”
These statements contradict the version given by the
head of the Chinese delegation in the General Assembly
and by the representative
of China at the March
meeting of the Council, namely, that China had
allegedly ceased its assistance to all three factions in
Angola.
263. We, the Soviet people, are proud that, together
with other socialist countries, the Soviet Union has
given real assistance to the Angolan patriots in their
heroic struggle for the freedom and independence of
their fatherland; and, as was already pointed out,
the President and Prime Minister
of Angola have
expressed deep gratitude to the Soviet Union and to
its people for that help. That is the best and most
convincing answer to the Chinese slanderers.

7,. !
260. Of course, the logical question arises: why did
the representative
of China have to repeat these
hackneyed and slanderous fabrications directed against
the Soviet Union, as he did during the discussion of
the question of Angola in the Council last March and
264. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation
from
again today during the consideration
of Angola’s
Chinese):
China’s
open
and
above-board
position
on
application
for United
Nations membership?
The
the question of Angola cannot be distorted. Mr. Malik’s
obvious answer which must occur to everyone is
lies can only serve to expose him.
that this was done in order to divert the attention of
the Council and of the United Nations from the
265. Soviet social-imperialism
has been frantically
shameful role and the scandalous failure of the Peking
interfering in the internal affairs of Angola for the
leadership in the Angolan affair. All these slanders
purpose of aggression and expansion. Its criminal
are used by the Chinese representatives
to distract
acts and historical record are clear for all to see
attention from the well-known fact that, as I have
and cannot be obliterated.
They were fully exposed
already pointed out, China has not yet recognized the
and criticized by the Chinese delegation during the
young sovereign State of the People’s Republic of
Council’s deliberations
in March. I am not going to
Angola. This means that China is displeased because
repeat the arguments I then put forward.
Angola has become a free, sovereign and independent
State. Peking would have preferred Angola to remain
266. As to the clumsy tactics of a thief crying,
a profitable appendage of the transnational
monopolies and a useful place for the investment of Chinese
“Catch the thief’ employed by the Soviet representative to whitewash his actions, they are beneath
capital in order to perpetuate their exploitation
of the
Angolan people and their looting of the country’s
contempt. The naked truth is that his hands are stained
with the blood of the Angolan people. As pointed out
natural resources. By not recognizing this country,
China ranges itself on the side of imperialism
and
by many African spokesmen, the Soviet Union has
international
gendarme.
racism in the matter of Angola.
- become a blood-thirsty
30

267. From recent developments
it can clearly be
seen that Soviet social-imperialism,
under the smokescreen of so-called dCtente, has become increasingly
active in carrying out flagrant expansion and aggression. Apart from further strengthening its offensive
military deployment
against Western Europe, it is
frenziedly engaged in military expansion and political
infiltration
on the northern and southern flanks in an
attempt to encircle Western Eurbpe. At the same time,
it is pushing ahead with its expansion in southern
Africa, the Indian Ocean and the South Pacific in an
attempt to tighten its strategic encirclement of Europe.

271. The crimes committed
by the Soviet Union in
Angola are bad, but they have their good side. They
are good precisely because they will certainly promote
-and indeed are promoting-a
new awakening of the
people of Africa and of the whole world, further
strengthening
them in their struggle against hegemonism. Soviet aggression and expansion breed their
own defeat. More and more African countries and
peoples are learning the lesson of experience, tearing
away the sheep’s clothing disguising Soviet socialimperialism,
discovering
its sinister features, and
therefore redoubling their vigilance so as to prevent a
situation where they would be letting the tiger in by
the back door while driving the wolf from the front
gate. Together with the peoples of the rest of the
world, they are continuing to carry on their stubborn
struggle to win true national liberation and safeguard
their hard-won national independence.
History has
borne out and will continue to bear out this truth:
the African people and the people of Angola will
certainly triumph; hegemonism is bound to fail.

268. Soviet social-imperialism’s
armed aggression
against Angola is an important step in this connexion.
Are not these expansionist acts totally incompatible
with its daily propaganda about so-called dCtente?
It is crystal clear that it is Soviet social-imperialism
which has flagrantly
committed
armed aggression
against Angola. However, Mr. Malik has the nerve
to state here that no one has the right to interfere in
the internal affairs of Angola. That is to say, if there
is to be interference,
only its interference,
that of
Soviet social-imperialism,
is permissible. What is this if
not the typical voice of hegemony?

272. As to the Cuban representative’s
slanderous
attack on China, I shall not deign to refute it, for a
very simple reason: first, everyone knows what role
Cuba is now playing in the whole Angolan incident;
secondly, we all know that the speech of the Cuban
representative
is nothing but the voice of Moscow
speaking through Havana.

269. Mr. Malik has kept on saying that the Soviet
Union does not seek any special advantages or military
bases. This reminds us of an ancient Chinese fable
which runs like this: Having stolen 300 ounces of
silver from others, a thief buried the silver underground in his backyard;
but, fearing ihat others
might suspect he was the culprit, he erected a marker
at the place where he buried the silver with the
inscription: “There are no 300 ounces of silver in this
place”. See how similar this performance is to the
justification
put foyard by Soviet social-imperialism
for its own aggression and expansion.

273. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I do not want to
divert the attentioc of the members of the Council
from the problem under discussion. The shameless
and inept slanders and fabrications of the representative of the mono-super-Power
are something which is
peculiar to him and his delegation. Nobody in the
Council is supporting him. China and its representative
in the Council are completely isolated internationally
on the question of Angola. China is on the opposite
side from Africa, Asia, Latin America-the
whole of
the world. It is in the same camp as imperialism
and
racism and is not on the side of the non-aligned countries, the socialist countries or the national liberation
movements.
If Mr. Lai Ya-li really believes all the
things he said, then I can only pity him. And if
anyone here in this chamber can believe what he
said, I can only pity him too.

270. Furthermore,
I wish to point out that while
continuing its interference in the internal affairs of
Angola, the Soviet Union is actively preparing to
go a step further in sabotaging the national liberation
movement in various parts of southern Africa and in
intensifying its aggression and expansion there under
the hypocritical
banner of “assisting the national
liberation movements”.
In the speech he delivered at
the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union, Brezhnev, the chieftain of Soviet
social-imperialism,
said that the Soviet Union would
“take into consideration
in some form” any area in
the world. This further revealed its wolfish design of
seeking world hegemony. The words and deeds of the
Kremlin clearly show that its ambitions surpass those
of Peter the Great. The Kremlin is dreaming of founding
an empire on which the sun never sets, through which
it can control every comer of the world. In these
circumstances,
would it not be closer to the truth
to pin the new lable of “mono-super-Power”
invented
by Mr. Malik on the Soviet Union itself? The broad
masses of the people in Africa and throughout
the
world are well aware of this.

274. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chi- ’
nese): Mr. Malik has not refuted the facts I gave, he
could only repeat his slanders, that will be of no
help to him.
275. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I shall confine
myself to quoting a Russian proverb: “The hunchback will be put straight only by the grave.”
276. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): There is an old Chinese saying that “the donkey
is coming to its wits’ end”. That is the best portrayal
of Mr. Malik.
31

277. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): This saying applies
to the person who quoted it, I think.

own request, and they will leave the country only
when their presence is no longer necessary. We are
a sovereign State, and we seek help from anybody
we please to defend our territorial
integrity,
our
economy and the reconstruction of our country.

278. The PRESIDENT:
Since no other member of the
Council apparently wishes to speak at this stage,
I invite the representative
of the People’s Republic
of Angola to take a seat at the Council table, in
accordance with the decision taken by the Council
at the beginning of this meeting, and to make a
statement.

285. Our international
policy is fundamentally
one
of non-alignment.
It is therefore natural that the
United Nations should base the admission of all
sovereign independent
States on the principle
of
universality.
Views have been expressed about the
importance of ensuring that that principle is not diluted
by short-term political gains designed for domestic
consumption,
and efforts have been made to attain
that goal.

279. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): It is a great
honour and privilege for me to be given this opportunity to speak in this debate.
280. I have listened very carefully to the eloquent
and succinct statements of the representatives of the
Soviet Union, Sweden, Italy, Romania, the German
Democratic
Republic,
Cuba, the United Kingdom,
France, Portugal and all those countries that have
recognized my Government.
I was greatly encouraged
by the constructive views expressed and their useful
approach to the problem of the admission of the
People’s Republic of Angola into the United Nations.

286. The people of Angola were, even before independence, engaged in a struggle against Portuguese
colonialism,
aggression and exploitation.
When independence was finally won, the Portuguese imperialists
fled the country and left it in confusion. Accordingly,
my Government
was compelled to hold the country
together in order to maintain its territorial
integrity.
This was a huge problem which the Angolan people
contained with considerable difficulty and with the
support of their brothers and sisters in Africa and
carefully chosen friends abroad such as Cuba and the
USSR, Sweden and some other socialist countries
which have love and considerable affection for the
Angolan people. However, because of the diabolical
racist intervention
of the military forces of the illegal
regime in South Africa, considerable damage was done
to the fragile infrastructure left behind by the Portuguese colonialists.
The Angolan
Government
is
therefore now engaged in a massive rehabilitation
and reconstruction
programme
in order to provide
essential services for its people and to ensure that
Angola is safe not only for its people but also for all
who seek shelter under its jurisdiction.

281. I have also followed with admiration and understandable attention the brotherly interventions
of the
representatives
of Tanzania, Benin and the Libyan
Arab Republic, as well as those of Algeria,’ Liberia,
Madagascar
and Kenya, who, in their collective
wisdom, put forward a good many of my own thoughts
on this matter.
282. For my part, I would not have wished to intervene in this debate, especially after the statements of
my African comrades, but, as the Council is aware,
this is a matter which touches the very existence of
the People’s Republic of Angola and is inextricably
linked with the very existence of the United Nation
as an organization
made up of sovereign and independent States, irrespective of size, race or political
ideology.

287. As the Council is aware, Angola is a multiracial society and my Government
intends to keep
it that way.

283. I should like to believe that the United Nations
exists to promote justice, peace and security throughout the world. Indeed, those noble objectives are
clearly set out in the Charter. It seeks to ensure the
co-existence of all States with one another. It seeks
to promote the dignity of and good-neighbourliness
between States. It seeks to promote the dignity of
man and to guarantee the political independence of
all States.

288. Finally, from this brief statement representatives will no doubt have a clear idea of the thrust of
the policy of the Angolan Government, its non-aligned
position, its love of freedom and justice for all peoples
who respect its territorial integrity and sovereign independence. I should also like to believe that the totality
of the statements made in the Council in this debate
will enable those Governments which still have some
lingering doubts about the political direction of the
Government
of the People’s Republic of Angola to
admit it to the community
of nations. Such a noble
gesture will have the effect of stemming the drift in
contemporary
political morality towards bigotry and
selfish national grand designs reminiscent
of the
gunboat diplomacy which precipitated the demise of
the League of Nations. A vote against Angola is a
vote against Africa and the African peoples.

284. Let us get one basic point very clear. The
matter of the Cuban forces, which are composed of
civilians and some military personnel, is strictly an
internal affair of the People’s Republic of Angola.
Angola is an independent and sovereign State, and it
will not tolerate the United States or any other country dictating its domestic and foreign policies. The
Cubans and other friends have come to Angola at our
32

the imperialism
that it then regarded as its enemy.
But it is good because it has unmasked those who claim
to be revolutionaries.
All doubt has now been dispelled.
We know that those sayings and ideas of 30 years
ago were mere fables.

289. We have not lost the war. The struggle continues, but victory is certain.
290. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Cuba
wishes to speak. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

293. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): In reply to the Cuban representative,
I will
only quote another Chinese saying: “When the wolf
is in power, why blame the fox?“.

291. Mr. ALARCON
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): The representative of China seemed to find
some similarity between my statement and that of the
representative of the Soviet Union. There was indeed
such a similarity,
and that should not come as a
surprise to anyone. Statements by the representative
of the Soviet Union and the representatives of Cuba
and the socialist countries on the question of Angola
are indeed similar to the statements expressing the
position of the vast majority of States in the world.
What would be difficult would be for the representative of China to find a statement of mine similar to
statements by the imperialists, colonialists and racists.
He could not do that.

294. The PRESIDENT:
As the Council has failed to
adopt the draft resolution which was before it, I should
like to remind members that in accordance with the
provisions of the third paragraph of rule 60 of the
provisional rules of procedure, the Council must submit
a special report on this matter to the General Assembly.
295. Therefore, as soon as the voting on the draft
resolution had been concluded, I requested the Secretariat to prepare a brief factual report. That draft
report is now before members, and I would venture to
express the hope that it could be quickly approved by
the Council. The Council would thus be in a position
to act speedily in reporting on the matter to the
Assembly.

292. Regrettably, the United Nations and the Security
Council have had many opportunities
to note that in
words and deeds China’s present position is no
different from that of what it formerly called its
enemies. That reminds me of another Chinese proverb:
“We must oppose everything the enemy defends and
defend everything the enemy opposes”. That is not
my statement; it is taken from something Mao Tsetung wrote some decades ago, at a time when it was
perfectly clear to the Chinese Communist
Party who
their enemies were and who their friends and allies
were. Unfortunately,
the policy of the present leadership of China has made mere fables out of ideas such
as the one I have just quoted. That is both bad and
good. It is bad because it is sad to observe the present
international conduct of that great country which some
decades ago played an important
role in the antiimperialist struggle and which today is at the service of

296. If no member of the Council wishes to make
any comments or!observations,
I shall take it that the
Security Council, adopts the special report to the
General Assembly called for in rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
The meeting

rose at 9 p.m.
Notes

’ A/31/110,
annex, p. 5.
2 Admission
of a State to the United
Advisory
Opiniok
I.C.J. Reports
1948,

33

Nations

p. 57.

(Charter,

Art.

4).

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

UNITED

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

LFlS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAK.

IIOJIY’IHTb

ZI3AAHIiII

OPTAHM

3AQSiSi

OIS%EAHHEHHhIX

HAUIIR

kI3pui~a
Opramioauwn
06-ueganerirrbrx
Haswfi
momsro xynnrb
a minmnbrx
Mat-aaunax
w areurcTuax
no ncex paRoHax
mupa. HaBOAriTe
cnpamcw
06 HJAaHHIIX
B
Bawebs KHW~WOM ?.saraxwe
WISH nnmwre
no aapecy:
Opranwsauwa
06zennuenuhrx
HaunB,
CexqnR
no npozu~me wsAauefi,
Hum-Ffop~
HJIW xeueea.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

t

‘.

UNIDAS

J-as publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00500

83-60801-September

1984-2.200
