TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: I8 JUNE 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1478)
Adoptionoftheagenda

..,,,,,.....,..........,....,.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..,

Page
’1

....................

1

Question concerning the situation’in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,’ Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, ,Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/9237 and Add. l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and S/9252) , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1478

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 18 June 1969, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).

Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237
Add.&2)
-

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

and

Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and
S/9252)
1. The PRESIDENT (trunsZated from Spanish): In a letter
dated 17 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council and reproduced in document S/9261, the
Permanent Representative of India has requested to be
invited to take part in this debate. Just before the beginning
of this meeting I received a similar request from the
Permanent Representative of Sudan. If there is no objection, I propose to invite the ‘representatives of India and
Sudan to participate in the debate without the right to
vote.

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda/1478)
1. Adoption of the agenda,
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,. Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines; ‘Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add.l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and
S/9252$

It was so decided.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the decisions already taken by the Council, I shall
also invite the representatives of Mauritania, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Guinea and Somalia to participate in
the debate without the right to vote.
3. Since the space at the Council table is limited, in
accordance with the practice followed in the past in similar
cases I shall invite the representatives of Mauritania, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Guinea, Somalia, India and
Sudan to take the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council table.
4. I have just received a request from the Permanent
Representative of Saudi Arabia to be allowed to participate
in this debate. In accordance with past practice, and if there
are no objections, I propose to invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to participate in the debate without the right
to vote.

Adoptirjn of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia

It was so decided.

Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
y;public, -Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
emocratlc Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. A, Ould Daddah
(Mauritania), Mr. A. B. C. Danieli (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. A. Tour& (Guinea), Mr. A. A. Farah
(Somalia), Mr. S. Sen (India), Mr. M. Fakhreddine (Sudan)
and Mr* J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places
reserved for them in the Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the item
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia.
6. The first ,c,pea.keron my list is the representative of
India, on whom I call.
1

.’
I

7. Mr. SEN (India): Permit me to thank you, Mr. President, and through you the members of ,the Council, for
letting me avail myself of the usual procedure of the
Council to allow non-members to participate without vote
in the debate-in this particular instance, on the question of
Rhodesia. If I have asked for this indulgence of the Council,
it is not because my country, India, has any special wisdom
to contribute to the solution of this difficult problem, but
mainly because of our interest-I
almost said special
interest-and experience in this ominous subject of apartheid. This is my only justification for delaying the Council
by a few minutes.
8. Facts and figures have already been given by various
speakers who have preceded me. I shall try to avoid
repetition of those facts; they speak for themselves. I shall,
on the other hand, to be a little more analytical with regard
to the problem facing us.
9. India was the first country in the United Nations to
have achieved independence through a long, bitter and, at
times, bloody struggle, India was the first country to bring
the problem of apartheid to the attention of the General
Assembly. So many speakers have emphasized the potential
and inherent danger of this evil of apartheid that it should
be clear to all who wish to see that unless we can remove
this evil, in time it will affect us all, big or small. It is also
evident that India, being the most populous country
represehted in the United Nations cannot but be concerned
most seriously if the present race relations turn into a
universal conflict. And that conflict cannot be avoided if
we do not or will not take effective preventive action now.
10. To turn to the main features of the problem before us,
the most outstanding one among them is that while the
British Government continues to claim responsibility for
restoring legality in Zimbabwe and continues also to declare
that the Smith regime is in a state of rebellion against the
British Crown, that Government is unable to bring down
that rbgime, far less to crushit or to punish those persons
who are guilty of rebellion. For years now and in different
forums, the British Government, has explained that it is
against the use of force in Zimbabwe on the ground that it
would involve much human misery-in fact, there is already
a great deal of suffering there-that its consequences cannot
be calculated, and that force frequently fails to bring about
the desired result. For years we have been persuaded,
however reluctantly, by that argument. Yet what is the
result?
11. The sanctions have proved a dismal failure and the
long list of “actions” which the delegation of the United
Kingdom has told the Council that its Government has
taken to bring about the fall of the Smith rggime have had
no effect on it. Other speakers have told us at length and in
detail how the sanctions have failed and some countries
have not even removed their consular representatives from
Zimbabwe. In fact, by publicly and repentedly declaring
that force would not be used, the British Government has
laid itself open to the charge or criticism that it has
encouraged the illegal r&me of Ian Smith in its intransigence and foul racist doctrine and its police state methods.
12. In these circumstances we are entitled to ask what
action the British Government now contemplates to avert

the acute “dangers to peace and stability in the whole
region of central and southern Africa. . . . Even outside
Africa stresses are being created between nations by this
issue” /1331st meeting, pnra. 231. These words are not
mine, but are the words of Mr. George Brown, former
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, before the Security
Council on 8 December 1966.
13. Since all the British theories about how to bring about
Mr. Smith’s downfall have failed, the Council is unlderstandably sceptical about further British advice as to what should
be done. We can and we should, of course, condemn the
proposed constitution, but we shall have to supplement
such a measure with others more substantial and more
effective.
14. The time has come to stop shadow-boxing and come
to grips with the real problems, Reality demands that we
accept the hard fact that we arc not dealing with the Smith
@ime, but with a collusive and offensive pact and
philosophy forged by Mr. Smith and his merry men,
together writh South Africa and Portugal.
15, The second real problem is that although many noble
statements have been made condemning apartheid, South
Africa and Portugal, many States have not matched their
statements by their actions. Indeed, we have had a feeling
over the years that many delegations do not yet take
seriously the inherent danger in the policy of apartheid and
Portuguese colonialism; perhaps they think that there is no
imminent danger, that problems will resolve themselves, or
that it is too difficult, politically or financially, to take the
right type of action. My delegation disagrees with this line
of thinking and considers that racial tension today cons%
tutes a genuine threat to international peace and security,
and that the time has come when we must impose harsh
and effective sanctions against the illegal Rhodesian rigime
and against South Africa and Portugal, until they behave in
a more civilized way and talk less about Western civiliza.
tion, of which they know next to nothing. This is the
second feature of our problem.
16. Practically all religions teach us that nothing good can
be achieved in this life unless we are prepared to make the
effort or pay the price. Curiously, this also seems to be the
philosophy underlying a free and competitive economy. If
the sanctions that I have suggested do not produce results,
for whatever reasons, we should consider using force, not in
an irresponsible or callous manner but to the extent that it
becomes absolutely necessary, It is conceivable that even
the threat of force could bring cowards and bullilss to their
senses. We have had some experience of ihis. If WC fail to
protect the Africans from the indignities, expl&l.ation and
miseries to which they have been subjected in the hands of
the racists, who will blame them if they make their OW~I
arrangements to assert their legitimate rights by such means
as are or may become available to them? I for one shall
not. If we fail them now, should we not, in considering
whether or not force should be used, keep in mind the price
which we shall have to pay eventually in blood and
treasure? It is the failure of the United Nations in
numerous ways to bring about changes in race relations in
Africa and the frequent complacency about this subject in
many prosperous hut racially different parts of the world

that account for the bitterness that is sweeping Africa and
many other continents besides. This is the third feature of
our problem.

final plunge. In these circumstances, could we not expect
that the United Kingdom would take account of our
goodwill and support and decide to respect the views of the
Africans, so ably voiced by so many speakers from that
continent?

17. Briefly, therefore we would recommend for the
consideration of the Council that apart from condemning
the proposed constitution, we should extend most stringent
and extensive sanctions against the regime of Mr. Smith,
South Africa and Portugal. Let us not ‘in this context waste
time and idle tears on the effect such sanctions will have on
the Africans themselves, for the fact is that they will put up
with it for a better future, but it is far from certain if the
rich and powerful will apply them, for fear of immediate
losses. Our action could well be covered by Article 41 of
the Charter.

21. Finally, those with a philosophical or anthropological
trend of mind might argue that solutions of complicated
and long-standing social problems of race relations and
adjustments cannot be brought about by legislation or force
or quickly, even through such an august body as ,the
Security Council. According to them these changes can
come about only slowly, through education and evolution.
Unfortunately this comfortable doctrine does not take into
account that millions of Africans are not prepared to wait
and to be systematically booted and hooted by a small
racial minority. Nor do these pundits always realize that
human efforts can and should direct evolution in the right
direction. We should be tnen and act according to our best
lights, rather than let nature take its own course with ali its
dangers and pitfalls, indeed with its threat to international
peace and security.

18. Secondly, we should make it clear that if Mr Smith
and the white minority in Zimbabwe do not accept a
civilized coexistence with the Africans, the Council will
take action to use force to the extent necessary in terms of
Article 42 of the Charter. These measures will not inhibit
the British Government from taking such other steps it may
consider necessary’ to carry out its pledge of NIBMAR-no
independence before majority African rule-and to bring an
end to the rebellion. The British Government may be
assured of very widespread support within and without the
Council in taking such supplementary action. I have in
mind, for instance, that it may want to bring Mr. Smith and
the men who support him to actual trial for rebellion-one
of the many actions which the British Government could
take even if force were to be used as the only solution.

22. The PRESlDENT (translated fvom Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Sudan, on whom
I call.
23. Mr., FAKHREDDINE
(Sudan): I am grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for
allowing my delegation to participate without vote in this
debate on the question of Southern Rhodesia.
24. As the Council meets to dis&ss the question of
Southern Rhodesia, its deliberations are overshadowed by
the virtual certainty that in two days the white colonialist
settlers of Southern ~lodesia will sanctify their oppression
of the rightful inhabitants of the country by approving
their new constitution.

19. On the other hand, if we do not act swifly and
effectively, Mr. Smith will simply ignore once again the
country he and his settlers owe so much to, and will
continue in a scandalous manner to flout the authority of
this Council and so reduce its effectiveness. No one would
wish for dissension or division in the United Nations, but
surely the way to achieve unanimity in the Council is for
the minority to abide by the wishes of the majority and not
the other way round. We do not wish to be in the position
of the British matron who, watching her son in a parade,
exclaimed, “Everyone is out of step except our little
Johnnie”. Personally, I do not believe that any unanimous
action or lack of action or even division in the Council will
have the slightest effect on Mr. Smith unless he realizes that
we mean to have our way and it is he who will have to pay
a greater price if he challenges the conscience of mankind
and all decent human values.

2.5. The endorsement of that cons,iitution by the selected
electoraie does not seem in any doubt. And iYhile it is
viewed in some quarters with approval and in others with
resignation, the people of the African continent see it in
another light, To them it represents yet another step in the
inexorable progress towards confrontation between the
white colonialist settlers in southern Africa and the
oppressed indigenous African population; and inasmuch as
the oppressors have joined their forces, the African people
have gained a new sense of solidarity and a new determination to wrest their Freedom, The passage of this constitution
will inevitably lead the people of Africa to the realization
that, ultimately, their freedom will not be handed over to
them-that they will have to show that they deserve to gain
it by demonstrating their will and ability to undergo any
sacrifice. “The door of our freedom”, the poet says, “is red,
red ,with the blood of the martyrs whose stained hands are
for ever pounding on it to gain admittance”. The door will
yield to the force of those desperate and determined hands.

20. The Government of the United Kingdom is a fully
sovereign entity and it can take any action it wishes.
However, when it brought this subject to the Security
Council 11257th meeting/ it explained that it did so
because it wished to have the support of the Member States
in order to secure maximum application of all measures,
short of the use of force, for removing the illegal regime of
Mr. Smith. It also felt that ? “situation the continuance of
which could be a menace to international peace and
security” had arisen [1263rd meeting, para. 81. The United
Nations and the Council have given ample support to the
tneasures suggested by the Government of the United
Kingdom, but the total effect of such measures has been so
negligible that Mr. Smith now feels bold enough to take the

26. Yet the Security Council, while it may realize the
inevitability of the coming confrontation in southern
Africa, has a clear duty as a guardian of peace and security
to try to prevent that confrontation. It is indeed regrettable
that the record of the Council in this regard has not been
3

unanimous than our condemnation of South Africa. and its
policies of apartheid. Yet, South Africa, as a Member of the
United Nations, persists in the single-minded pursuit of its
fascist and repressive policies. South Africa has demonstrated beyond any doubt that the censure of world public
opinion is no deterrent. South Africa stands condemned by
the world, and yet continues to prosper economically. It is
not isolated; it does not suffer in any way, even from the
fact that many Member States do not recognize its
Government or maintain diplomatic representation with it.
Nor, for that matter, will the new Rhodesia, its close ally,
unless the United Nations decides really to act in fulfilment
of its Charter and the very reason for its being.

encouraging; it has been a record of doing too little too
late. But we do not consider that this is a reason to lose
hope. The Council is now faced with an opportunity and a
challenge.
27. Now since this proposed cor!stitution in Southern
‘Rhodesia will represent the final break of its tenuous
political tie with the United Kingdom, Britain’s claim for
any sort of jurisdiction over Southern Rhodesia will
become even less credible. Britain must now prepare for the
inevitable and final break and renounce the claim for any
special privilege in dealing with this question. Britain must
now face the situation not merely as an administering
Power, but as a responsible Member of the United Nations
and must seek and find with other Members of the United
Nations and with members of this Council an adequate
remedy.

32. The Security Council has found that this situation in
Southern Rhodesia bears in it a threat to peace. It has, in
order to prevent the aggravation of the situation, decided to
take measures, short of the use of armed force, designed to
curb the Smith regime in Southern Rhodesia, Those
measures have proved inadequate. It can now either pursue
the remedies provided for in Aiticles 41 and 42 of the
Charter or acknowledge its failure, since it is deceptive and
immoral to pretend that it can achieve a reversal of the
course that the Smith r&me has been pursuing by any
means ihort of force. The history of mankind has repeatedly demonstrated the illusory and vain nature of the hope
that both peace and justice can be maintained in the same
place at the same time.

28. It must now be obvious to Britain, as it is indeed
obvious to most of us, that they have now come to the end
of the road in the application of economic sanctions. There
is no doubt now that economic sanctions, as they have been
appIi’ed to Southern Rhodesia, have failed. The reasons for
this failure have been enumerated by many speakers in this
debate. In fact they have been anticipated by many of us,
yet Britain would not be warned. One would hope that
they will now face this situation with a new awarenessand
demonstrate their desire for justice and their support for
righteousness.

33, When the United Nations has failed, the white
colonialist minorities in Southern Rhodesia and in the rest
of southern Africa will have to bend before the onslaught
of the African masses. By that time it wil1 be too late for
compassion; the time for compassion will have pas#sed.
The
claims for pity and humaneness will have been forfeited as
the vengeance of the oppressed will be terri.bIe and
unsparing.

29. Now indeed is the time for action, but such action
must provide adequate remedy for the injustice that is
about to be compounded by the promulgation of the
apartheid constitution in Southern Rhodesia. Such action
cannot be a reiteration of condemnation. The United
Natiohs has condemned the policy and practice of apartheid. The United Nations has acted before in imposing
economic sanctions on the Government of Ian Smith in the
hope that economic sanction? would bring about the
downfall of that rdgime. But, because those sanctions were
at first selective, they allowed the rCgime to make certain
adjustments in the economy and to continue to function, if
not to prosper. When this failure was realized, economic
sanctions were made mandatory. These again, as we all
know, have failed. We cannot now take the retrogiade step
of voicing condemnation of the Smith regime when
confronted with the failure of our action to bring about its
downfall by the imposition of sanctions.

34. Yet, one dares to hope that the United Nations till
not by its negligence be a party to this turn of events; one
hopes that the United Nations-and this Council-will act
while there is still time for meaningful and adequale action.
35. ’ The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
36. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. President, and members of the Council, for allowing me to
addressmyself to the item under consideration.

30. It is clear, at least to us, that we should not take that
course of action; we should not merely resort to condemnation. It is not logical, when action has palpably failed, to
fall back on mere words. The United Nations would have to
bear a heavy responsibility if it were to decide to fall back
on condemnation, which offers no solace to the oppressed
people of Africa.

37. In view of what I would call the cavalier manner in
which this question of Soutliern Rhodesia has been handled
in the United Nations, including the Security Council, and
taking into account that for the last three years or so the
tendency in the Council has been to engage in quiet
consultations, arriving at a consensus of platitudes based on
fond hopes and pious declarations, it is high l:ime that
someone like myself should raise his voice and, with your
permission, warn the United Nations that, sh0~11dwe
continue the style that we have adopted in our debates, we
will once more accentuate the misgivings of peoples all over
the world who think that, after all, we are no better than an
academic society dealing in abstracts that cannot be
translated into palpable results. What we need here is less

31, One wonders why a system like that of Ian Smith
should seek to legalize its oppression by enacting a
constitution. We should ,reaIize that we cannot be all things
to all people. How can we condemn injustice and yet
continue to take the oppressor unto our bosom, as the
United Nations has been doing with South Africa? There
has not been any condemnation more vehement or more
4

consensus, and more resolve to act. The League of Nations
failed and ultimately foundered because the stress was
placed on the publicity of its deliberations rather than on
resolute action.

two States that wield world power, but they backed out,
saying they did not want a confrontation. I am not going to
name them; you know them. Then I contacted some of my
Scandinavi,an colleagues, and one or two of them transmitted the idea to their Governments. I went as far as to
discuss the question with the Foreign Minister of South
Africa, to whom my good friend Ambassador Botha
introduced me. I do not know whether the Government of
South Africa heeded my warnings and discussed my
suggestions but I finally formalized those suggestions in a
draft resolution. At the last minute my African friends were
beguiled by the promises of the representative of one of the
great Powers, who said that they had better content
themselves at that time with having a Council for South
West Africa to deal with this subject. A “Council” sounds
better than a committee. Being good-hearted, those African
brothers thought: “Now let us forget about a co-administrator.” I told them, not only in person but from the
rostrum of the General Assembly, that Clemenceau once
said, “If you want to kill any item, form a committee and
transfer that item to it.” They said, “That was in other
days.” I retorted that things have not changed in many
respectssince the Treaty of Versailles. I suspended my draft
resolution. It is still on the books, and, should there be any
need to revive it, I will do so one of these days, with God’s
help and the co-operation of Members of the General
Assembly.

38. One might ask: “Why should Baroody take the floor?
This is not the Middle East.” After all, we are all Members
of the United Nations and are supposed to be bound by
brotherhood, and if the Africans are not my brothers and
sisters, I should like to ask, who are? I have considered the
Europeans, even the British when I lived among them, as
my brothers. Is it just to criticize without having anything
constructive to offer as a way out of the impasse in which
the Council finds itself on this item, and for that matter on
other questions? No, sir. Criticism does not solve problems
-even when it is constructive-in making plausible suggestions. It is creative thinking that we need most today, and
there is no dearth of clear thinkers in this Council. I hope
that the statesmen or politicians behind them will also
engage in clear thinking rather than in platitudes by sending
instructions spelled out in resolutions that cannot be
impIemented or a consensus that would beguile-though it
no longer does-the oppressed people with the hope that
salvation is not too far off, No, sir. As I said, criticism does
not solve problems-even when it is constructive-in making
plausible suggestions. By creative thinking, which we need
today, I mean that type of thinking that can be translated
into action. Otherwise we would be engaging in too much
ado about nothing. I heard Shakespeare being quoted the
other day by my colleague from Turkey, and then my
colleague from the United Kingdom cited Othello. That is
what we are engaged in here-much ado about nothing.
Then what will happen is that we shall become the
laughing-stock of the peoples of the world.

41. Why have I mentioned all this? Because if our African
colleagues had not been so good-hearted and so beguiled kJ\r
empty promises, I think something could have been done
even with the Republic of South Africa to persuade it to
accept a co-administrator from a small State to accelerate
the independence of what is now known as NamibiaNamibia on paper only, in name but not in fact; let us be
frank about these things.

39. I am not concerned about the names that have been
given to the Mandated Territory of South West Africa,
“Namibia”, or to Zimbabwe. I am concerned about the
indigenous people of Africa who are still under the yoke of
colonial Powers, whether those Powers seceded from the
metropolitan States years ago through the instrumentality
of being members of the Commonwealth, as in the case of
the Republic of South Africa, or by the rebelliousness of
the rggime, such as that of Mr. Ian Smith in Southern
Rhodesia. As I said, it is high time that members of the
Council did some creative thinking, especially that this
question has been churning in our minds for the past few
years.

42, ‘But now we are seized of the question of Southern
Rhodesia. I am very proud of the British Government and I
am very proud of Lord Caradon that they have not yet
yielded and said, ‘LWe now wash our hands of Southern
Rhodesia.” Technically, it is still a British colony, and I
think legally also; so we have been assured. I think we are
thankful to the British for being tenacious at least. But
technicalities and legalities do not solve the problem. It is
action that does. What line of creative action, then, should
the Council take?
43. I have a plan. I called it a radical plan, but someone
said, “You are a monarchist. Do not call it a radical plan.
‘Radical’ has something to do with communism.” I prefer
to call it “a novel plan”. But radical or novel, it does not
matter what you call it. It is not new; I gave an outline of it
in the Fourth Committee and I will repeat it now.

40. I participated in the discussions in the Fourth Committee. I gave a blueprint for a solution at one time.1 Some
of my African brothers toyed with it, and nothing was
done. I thought I could not be more African than the
Africans. In this instance you will recall that two or three
years ago I suggestedin the General Assembly that we think
seriously about a co-administrator for the Mandate over
what was then known as South West Africa.2 Again, a good
number of my African brothers encouraged me to such an
extent that I submitted a draft resolution and I went as far
as to consult with certain States, two of them great Powers,

44. The plan would be to create a United Nations fund,
financed by those who are directly concerned, so that
short-wave broadcast programmes might be instituted and
carried on twenty-four hours a day, every hour on the hour,
broadcasting not necessarily rebellion but the human rights
that should be enjoyed by the indigenous people of Africa
still remaining under the colonial yoke. The broadcasts
would be directed not only to the indigenous peoples, but
to the white population of South Africa as well, telling

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Fourth Committee, 1609th meeting, para.44.
2 Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 1449th meeting, paras.172-178.

5

,

to their duties and obligations towards their brothers, who,
regardless of the colour of their skins, are ,also homo
sapiens, descended from the same hominids-and sometimes
I think the hominids would have been better than konzo
sapiens; I wonder.

them that they are ‘doing wrong, telling them what is going
on in the world and how they are alienating themselves
from all the rest of the world by practising apartheid, by
thinking of themselves as demigods stalking the earth, by
arrogating to themselves superiority not only in demeanor
but by their rule, as if they were the lords of that part of
Africa, It would be an educative programme.

49. What will be the second stage? There is a conglomerate of nations known as the Organization of African
Unity. They have men who are sincere, who are sincere and
dedicated. We do not have to adopt any resolution here to
send a peace-keeping operation. Let there be a corps of the
States of the Organization of African Unity, disciplined and
trained by military emissaries of the United Nations. They
should see to it that a cordon would be set up around
Southern Rhodesia to make sure that no goods will be
transported by surface carriers such as by rail, or by any
other conveyance.

45. You all know very well that not along time ago there
was what was called the Voice of Free Europe. I do not
know which part of Eurupe was free and which part of it
was slave, but it was called the “Voice of Free Europe”. 1
do not know either whether it is still in existence, but the
Voice has run down to almost a whisper these days; you do
not hear much of it. I was here in the Security Council in
the 1950s when the Voice of Free Europe was operating.
Well, why should there not be a “Voice of Namibia” or a
“Voice of Zimbabwe”?
Why not? And it should be
financed by a fund derived not from one particular State
but from the United Nations collectively-provided
the
finances are mostly paid by those that are directly
concerned, because any further funds to be established by
this Organization should go to the members of the
Secretariat for a better living-wage. But this we will come to
in the Fifth Committee in due time.

50. Of course, I am not suggesting that anyone should
shoot down cargo planes, because we in the Security
Council are trying to keep the peace. But this may not be
enough. Why may this not be enough? Because of the
cartels, the monopolies, the giant corporations. I know
something about them; I have known something about
them since the twenties. In the aftermath of the First World
War, I was in Western Europe and I was assured by Germans
and by Frenchmen that certain cartels sold arms to both
sides during the First World War-to the Frenc,h and to the
Germans. I do not know if the British had need of them;
they were a big industrial Power-but they probably bought
some of those arms too.

46. We hear of all kinds of spying devices-planes, ships,
submarines. This is what appears in the press. There are
many things we do not know about; we are small nations
trying to develop ourselves economically. I once heard
about a peculiar plane. You know about it too; you have
heard about it. I do not want to embarrass members here; I
do not want Baroody to appear as if he were trying to
criticize one nation or another. However, I think all those
big Powers have all kinos of spying devices. We cannot
afford them, even if we wanted to have them. As I said, I
heard about a plane that was detected flying above the
ceiling that was regarded as being the highest attainable a
few years ago. It was a spy plane flying over another
country, and it was shot down. We do not know, but
maybe spy submarines also go here and there.

51. What were these cartels? Were they Indian cartels, or
Arabian cartels? They were European cartels and they were
selling to both sides. The patriotism of these people resides
in their pocket, Incidentahy, I am sorry to say that the
more materialistic the world becomes, the more one fiids
that the first refuge of patriotism is in the pocketbook or in
the bank account. It is unfortunate, but it is so.
52. I was involved in an uprising in one of the Mandated
Territories, but in a peaceful manner. When I was twenty I
once smuggled in my socks lists of arms bought from a
Mandatory Power, in order to be used against that same
Mandatory Power. I did not buy the arms; 1 was only a
nationalist trying to help, and almost got killed in the
process. That was in 1925. I do not want to state the
location or who was involved in that uprising.

47. Why do not those States that have planes capable of
flying over every part of the world without being chased
away, in the event that the radio broadcasts I suggested are
jammed-and we know that nations jam certain programmes that their Governments regard as unsuitable for
their peoples-why do those States not have their planes or
other conveyances drop educational leaflets, in the respective dialects and in English, to the peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, telling them of their rights as decent human
beings entitled to political, economic anti social rights like
any other people in the world? Would it be very costly for
a well-meaning, wealthy nation to undertake such an
enterprise? What would it cost? Nowadays in modern
conflicts thousands of planes are lost, You hear on the
radio of the thousands of planes that are lost.

53. Therefore, what can one expect from those States
which have strong economic and financial relations with
South Africa which produces much gold and diamonds? I
do not mean diamonds to embellish the necks or the rings
of ladies, but diamonds for industrial use.
54. We know what is happening to most of the world
currencies today. These currencies are being eroded by
inflation. Gold is a metal that does not tarnish, and it is
suggested time and again that gold should become the base
of currencies as it was of yore. Many a time none other
than Mr. Jacques Rueff has suggested a reversion to gold.
But, of course, certain countries want their own currencies
to constitute a part of the reserve funds of other countries.
And when they devalue their currencies, who pays the

48. This stage of my creative plan, if I may call it so with
modesty, would be a stage preparatory for something
further. Let us assume that this stage would be one of
broadcasting and of dropping leaflets and pamphlets to
awaken both the indigenous peoples of South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia to their rights and the white population
6

difference? The people who have held reserves of those
currencies in their national coffers: But nowadays one does
not have to devalue currencies, Currencies are being eroded,
because the index of the cost of living shows that it is
always on the rise. And South Africa is necessary for those
countries to bolster their reserves, because perhaps one day
gold again may be used as the principal base for national
currencies. Furthermore industrial complexes and combines
need diamonds because diamonds are irreplaceable in
industry, in spite of the laser beams that have been devised.
They fake the part of incising certain steel sheets and other
material. Hence, diamonds are still very important for the
development of modern industry. I am not talking out of
my head; 1 have been told all this by technical people who
know.

Vickers. In my early days it used to be Vickers-Armstrong,
purveyors of arms. Now it is Vickers: I do not know what
happened to Armstrong. Then we have Hawker-Siddeley
Bush Ltd, Gallaghers and, of course, British American
Tobacco. Some of my friends told me that tobacco stocks
were piling up and spoiling. I said: “You are ignorant;
although I am not a smoker, I know that if it is stored,
tobacco gets better, like wine. The Rhodesians will get
better prices for it.” And do not think that Mr. Ian Smith is
going to choke on a surplus of tobacco by smoking too
much of it,
60. So we find that the economic situation does not pave
the way to any settlement in the Council because of the
financial and other interrelation between that part of the
world and certain countries, And I am not going to name
them; you know them, but we have to play the game of
politeness.

55,. Now, let us look into the importance of Southern
Rhodesia to certain States. I shall read from a report given
to me and I vouch for its authenticity. It reads: “The
mining industry in Rhodesia continued to be wholly owned
and controlled by foreign-based monopolies.” But you
would say that you do not know what monopolies they are.
We shall come to that. There is an area there of 2,680
square miles south of Lake Kariba, an area likely to be rich
in gold, copper and uranium. There again is gold; there is
copper. I do not know where my Chilean friend is. Some
companies are always renegotiating copper prices with Chile
and other countries. But here they do not have to
renegotiate prices. Southern Rhodesia will tell them: Well,
we will have fixed prices, whereby-you will eat a good slice
of the cake and we will cat the rest of the cake thanks to
cheap labour.

61. What is th.e second stage of my plan? I said that the
first stage should be broadcasting educational material,
enlightening material, day in and day out; sending bighflying planes to distribute leaflets and booklets, We believe
in education. Sooner or later I think that this method will
have an impact both on the coloured people of Southern
Rhodesia and on the white people who live there and have
arrogated to themselves the responsibility for running the
whole country-225,000
of them are trying to lord it over
four and a quarter million coloured Africans. By what dint
of logic, by what yardstick of justice can we allow these
things to go on in the era of the United Nations? By
rationalization?
62. I do not think that anybody should be hard on the
United Kingdom for not taking a more drastic line of action
that it has done. And I have the courage to explain why. I
do not hold a brief for the United Kingdom; it,is well
represented by an illustrious gentleman who is the friend of
all of us. But sometimes a stranger can say things that the
representative of a given country may not find it appropriate to mention for various reasons which might confront
any one of us if his own country were concerned. But I
stand to be corrected and I apologize if I am wrong.

56. Uranium is also very important, although bacteriological warfare is getting more in the news these days. But
still, uranium is not used only for war purposes. One can
use uranium for generating electricity. There is so much
pollution in the big cities and one day, perhaps, the utilities
will turn to atomic energy. Uranium is a base for generating
electricity.
57. We would not be unhappy, because we would still use
our oil in Saudi Arabia for food. Do not think that we will
be bankrupt. We will inhale good air, and not the polluted
air of New York, if more uranium is used-not for bombs
and atomic weapons but for industry and lighting cities.

63. First, the United Kingdom has-and for that matter
have others besides the United Kingdom, in fairness to the
latter-vast interests in the Republic of South Africa and
also in Southern Rhodesia. The United Kingdom bore the
brunt of the Second World War. It got rid of 95 per cent of
its colonies in the wake of the Second World War, and we
salute it for that. The British are a people which has
struggIed for freedom and democracy-the
right type of
democracy at one time-and everybody knows that the
British Parliament is the Mother of all Parliaments in
Europe. It is not in any way shameful if one does not wield
world power; it is not shameful for a State if it does not
wield world power as it had done before. On the contrary, I
think that it is an advantage to be a small Power. Do not get
me wrong-the United Kingdom is not such a small Power,
but I speak in general because even if a small Power wanted
to hurt another Power it could not do so, and that is a
privilege. Power corrupts, as Lord Acton said.

58. And Southern Rhodesia has nickel. Who are the
shareholders of those companies in Southern Rhodesia and
in the Republic of South Africa? I was not going to read
out names, but the information has been furnished. I have
certain names here. I do not want to embarrass friends and
others. Some of them are members of legislatures of
countries which have interests in Rhodesia and in the
Republic of South Africa.
59. I shall read the names of some of the companies-and
some of them are very big companies: Unilever, Metal BOX
Company, African Explosives and Chemical Industries Ltd,
De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd, the monopolists of
diamonds, Nettlefolds, the chloride groups, British Insulated, Callenders Cables, Lancaster Steel, Stewart and
Lloyds, Tate and Lyle-these are their Rhodesian sugar
refineries-- British Petroleum, Eveready Batteries, and

64. Second, the United Kingdom had no experience in its
homeland of mixing with coloured people. We hear voices
7

War Council members know very well that the Nazis
abducted a chief of State. Were the Nazis more capable
than are the two great Powers if they put their heads
together?

in the United Kingdom saying that the 600,000 coloured
people now in that country are too many, although again
we salute the present Government for having stood up to
those critics who wish to banish the coloured people from
the United Kingdom. We salute the present Government for
taking such a courageous stand. But I submit that should
the United Kingdom take any drastic measures-aside from
the financial interests and economic ties which it has with
that region of the worl&--no British Government would be
able to survive the rebellion of the British white people
against it for adopting a policy against the whites in South
Africa and Southern ,R.liodesia. Let us face the facts. We
ourselves could be beset in a different manner by similar
problems, Therefore, as we say in ‘Arabic-and this is a
translation-God does not expect anyone to carry a heavier
burden than he can bear. I think that, very politely and
very ably, Lord Caradon, and other representatives of the
United Kingdom in the Fourth Committee and in other
organs of the United Nations, have made it clear that they
were not prepared to use force. They do not tell you what I
am saying, and if I were in their place I might take the same
stand.

69. Now if one State does not want the other State to
co-operate with it for reasons of ideology, then the United
Kingdom could carry out the operation with that other
State. I say this advisedly, because a certain ideology is still
anathema in certain parts of the world, although there arc
many political parties that have embraced that ideology.
Again, I am speaking advisedly because we do not have that
party. But I can understand others who might feel that
there is an obstacle. Let therefore one of the two great
Powers, in co-operation with the United Kingldom, carry
out the operation, perhaps not to the letter but some type
of operation along the lines I have suggested in order to put
an end to the impasse in which the indigenou,s people of
Zimbabwe and Namibia find themselves. It conld also put
an end to the very embarrassing situation in which WChere
in the United Nations find ourselves year in and :yearout, in
not being able to do anything except talk. Somebody said,
“Well, is not talk the stock and trade of diplomats at the
United Nations? ” I said, “No, we are supposed to act
through the Security Council.” It is understandable that the
General Assembly makes recommendations, but it is the
Security Council that should take action in hand.

65. Then shall we wash our hands at the United Nations
and say: The United Kingdom will not take action, does
not want to use force, and violence may breed violence and
we are here to preservethe peace? What is the solution?
66. There is a solution, again in line with some creative
thinking. There are two world Powers that have emerged on
the scene since the Second World War. When they spend
billions of dollars for the exploration of outer space or for
increasing their armaments; that is nothing. I think that
they could allocate some of the money for a project which
I shall take the liberty to unfold before the Council.

70. I shall now read from a telegram that has been handed
to me. This is from Rhodesia. It reads:
“At Salisbury movie theatre Smith”-meaning Mr. Ian
Smith-“told luncheon crowd that a vote for the consti.
tution would be a message to busybodies everywherein
the world”-busybodies meaning us, the United Nations“that are wasting their time sticking their noses in our
affairs.”

67. If the first stage of my plan of a free Africa
programme, the distribution of literature‘by various means
and the territorial cordon around Southern Rhodesia under
the aegis of the United Nations fails, then, with the
permission of the United Kingdom, which has never given
up its political struggle against Southern Rhodesia-the
United Kingdom insists that Southern Rhodesia is still a
colony, it has manifested readiness to negotiate time and
again and its Prime Minister even went out of his country to
meet Mr. Ian Smith, but failed to reach any practical
solution with him-the two great Powers and any other
concerned Power that would like to join them, with the
co-operation of certain African States, could arrange for a
regiment of parachutists to pounce on the Government
House in Southern Rhodesia and put Mr. Ian Smith and his
cohorts in straitjackets, without hurting them. I think that
they suffer from a psychosis, and we do not believe in
hurting anyone bodily or otherwise. They could be taken to
London because, after all, Southern Rhodesia is still a
colony, and the United Kingdom could then take over, and
the genius which the British have for democratic government would then not only come in handy but would
provide a solution for the whole problem.

We are sticking our noses in their affairs, we, the Security
Council, an august body of the United Nations, the organ
which is responsible for the maintenance of peNace.Well, if
we are used to swallowing such bitter pills, such news
dispatches when they are published will constitute a
challenge to us as to whether we are to remain with arms
folded or whether we are to do something practical and, if 1
may say so, not only practical. but also practicable,
something that can be implemented instead of expressing
pious hopes or trying to be sanctimonious about our work,
as if we were the arbiters of justice when we cannot enforce
the semblance of it.
71. That is my message to the United Nations on this
question. Far be it from me to feel that my suggestionsare
sacrosanct and final. But I thought that they might start
someone on another line of thought in the attempt to fmd
a practical solution, one perhaps which might be veT)’
different from that contained in the suggestions that I have
submitted. But we have to start thinking creatively in the
Council, instead of sitting here wearing the straitjackets of
instructions of many politicians who sit far away in OUT
capitals. We have our dignity as diplomats. I venture to SOY
that if many of the statesmen or politicians in our
capitals-and some of them are not statesmen but politicians-would delegate more power to the representatives

68. Of course, there wouId be come casualties, but there is
nothing that can be achieved without paying a certain price,
Remember that this plan can be modified in such a way as
not to entail too many casualties. During the Second World
8

sitting around this table, I think that our task would be
much easier and that we could arrive at practical solutions.

Security Council. On the basis of all the facts at its
disposal, the Committee wishes to state that the Govemments of South Africa and Portugal have not taken any
measures to implement the provisions of resolution
253 (1968) and have continued to maintain close economic, trade and other relations with the illegal regime
and to permit the free flow of goods from Southern
Rhodesia through the territories of South Africa and the
colony of Mozambique and their ports and transport
facilities,

72, Again, Mr. President, ‘and honorable members of the
Security Council, I thank you for having granted me
permission to speak. I do apologize if my remarks have in
any way hurt the feelings of any one representative sitting
here, because they were not intended to hurt. My remarks
were solely intended as a gadfly to the banal state of
inactivity in which, unfortunately, the United Nations has
found itself during the last few years.

“The Committee also noted with regret that the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia has been carrying on trade
with States other than South Africa and Portugal in
contravention of the sanctions and that this illegal trade,
according to one estimate, amounted to approximately
E44 million in 1968.” (S/9252, paras. 4.5and 46.1

73. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (translated from Frenchj: In
our previous statement we expressed the grave concern of
the States members of the Organization of African Unity at
the continuous worsening of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia, We expressed doubts of the efficacy of the
measures taken by our Organization. Today we have before
us two reports of the Committee set up under Security
Council resolution 253 [S/89.54, S/9262] which definitely
corroborate these doubts.

78. One year after the adoption of the resolution
253 (1968), South Africa and Portugal have taken no
measures to implement the provisions of this resolution and
are helping to strengthen Southern Rhodesia economically
and politically. Lisbon and Pretoria are still deliberately
defying the decisions of the Security Council in flagrant
violation of resolution 253 (1968) and particularly of its
paragraph 11, in which the Council

74. I do not wish to make a thorough analysis of these
reports, as we are all aware of their contents. I should like,
however, to stress certain aspects which show the extent to
which the Smith regime has strengthened its position with
the support of certain Member States, particularly Portugal
and the Pretoria regime.

“Calls upon all States Members of the United Nations
to carry out these decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with Article 25 of the United Nations Charter
and reminds them that failure or refusal by anyone of
them to do so would constitute a violation of that
Article”.

75. Annex I to document S/9252 shows that during 1968
the value of exports from Southern Rhodesia appears to
have fallen from $264 million’ to $256 million, while the
value of its imports appears to have increased from $262
million to $290 million. According to these figures the
decline in exports was barely 3 per cent, whereas imports
rose by 12 per cent, I would+point out that these figures are
for 1968, the year in which resolution 253, imposing
mandatory sanctions against the’ Smith regime, was
adopted. Despite these measures, imports into Southern
Rhodesia increased by nearly $30 million whereas exports
fell by only $8 million. This situation has arisen because a
number of States Members of the United Nations which
have announced that they hid implemented resolution
253 (1968) have in fact done very little to observe it, The
value of the imports of these States, which are listed in
annex I, was $75 million and of their exports $45 million
according to Rhodesian statistics, and %45 million according to United Kingdom estimates. It has also arisen
because the value of South Africa’s imports amounted to
approximately $80 million in 1967 and apparently to $100
million in 1968.

79. The Security Council is bound to put an end to this
provocative attitude today. Its authority and the prestige of
the United Nations are at stake. Its action against the Smith
regime will be diminished if this challenge is not taken up.
80. As the report [S/9252] shows, the measures taken
against Southern Rhodesia have had only, a very slight
effect. One of the reasons for this failure is the attitude of
Lisbon and Pretoria. Paragraph 48 states;
“As a result of the refusal of South Africa and Portugal
to take measures and the failure of some other States to
fully implement the provisions of resohrtion 253 (1968),
as stated above, the Committee is compelled to observe
that the sanctions established by that resolution against
the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia have not yet
brought about the results desired by the Security
Council.”

76. It should be noted that the Pretoria regime has not
thus far seen fit to reply to the communications of the
Secretary-General requesting it to provide information on
the measures which it has taken to implement resolution
253 (1968).

81. These measures will have the desired results only if
South Africa and Portugal respect the decisions of this
Council. The Committee set up pursuant to resolution’
.253 (1968) shares this opinion when it states:

77. The observations of the Committee set up pursuant to
resolution 253 (1968) leave no doubt of the part South
Africa and Portugal are playing in support of the Smith
regime. Permit me in this connexion to quote a passage of
‘the report:

‘L. * . consideration should be given to more effective
measures to ensure full implementation of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968)” [ibid., para. 491.
82. Measures have been resolved by the Security Council
and, if fully implemented, might enable us to achieve our

“Certain States, however, are not complying or are not
yet complying fully with the measures imposed by the
9

Council provision must be made for measures requiring
Portugal and South Africa to comply with its decisions.

purpose. States Members of the United Nations, and
particularly Portugal and South Africa, are however refusing to implement them, It is therefore necessary to
compel these States-Portugal and the Pretoria regime-to
respect our decisions. The Charter provides for sanctions
that could be applied against Lisbon and Pretoria, which are
helping to perpetuate in Southern Rhodesia a situation
which according to the Security Council constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. This is our
interpretation of the conclusion which the Security Council
Committee sets out in paragraph 49 of its report [S/9252/.

85. The Committee’s report also shows that the Imain
products exported from Southern Rhodesia are tobacco,
asbestos and chrome. These three products are exported
mainly through the ports of Mozambique and South A.frica
with the aid of false documents. The Security Council
could decide to urge States Members of the United Nations
to prevent the import into their territories of tobiacco,
asbestosand chrome from Southern Rhodesia, Mozambique
or South Africa. This measure would have the merit of
defeating the falsification of documents which the Smith
regime uses to export its principal products. We are
convinced that the Rhodesian economy would be seriously
embarrassed if the Security Council adopted this measure,
which would bring us nearer to our objective, the overthrow of the minority regime in Southern Rhodesia.

83. It is also necessary for the States Members of the
United Nations which still have trade relations with
Southern Rhodesia and are mentioned in annex I to the
report to stop trading with Salisbury, as resolution
253 (1968) recommends. Similarly it would be useful if
States which maintain consular and trade representatives in
Southern Rhodesia withdrew them to give effect to
paragraph 10 of resolution 253 (1968).

86. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): As no
other representative has indicated that he wishes to speak
this afternoon, with the consent of the Council I propose to
adjourn the meeting. In accordance with the private
consultations which have taken place, the next meeting of
the Council to continue consideration of this item will be
held tomorrow, Thursday, 19 June at 3.30 p.m.

84. The report of the Committee set up under resolution
253 (1968) justifies us in stating that the policy of
economic sanctions has not achieved the desired results.
This report has the merit of drawing attention to the
reasons why these results have not been achieved, The most
important of these reasons is the attitude of Pretoria and
Portugal. Thus in any proposal submitted to the Security

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.

10
‘Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

0LJ.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

82075-November

1972-2,050
