S/PRST/2002/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 September 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4607th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 September 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “High-level meeting
of the Security Council on the anniversary of 11 September 2001: acts of
international terrorism”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council meets today in remembrance and resolve. One
year ago, infamous and horrifying acts of terrorism took almost 3,000 innocent
lives. They included nationals of half the countries of the world. These attacks
changed the way we see our world. Today, the Council honours those innocents
killed and injured in the attacks of 11 September 2001. The Council expresses
solidarity with their families.
“New York is the home of the United Nations. The Security Council
admires this city’s determination to forge ahead, to rebuild, not to give in to
terrorism. The deaths and destruction of 11 September strengthen our common
bonds and aspirations. The Council affirms that these attacks were an assault
on global civilization and our common efforts to make the world a better and
safer place. The world saw terrorists use civilian aircraft for mass murder.
They struck at the ideals embodied in the Charter of the United Nations. The
attacks challenged each member to rise to the task of defeating terrorism,
which has claimed victims in all corners of the world.
“Following 11 September 2001, both the General Assembly and the
Security Council reacted in outrage and condemnation. They demanded that
those responsible for these crimes be brought to justice. The Council described
such acts, like any acts of international terrorism, as threats to international
peace and security.
“The international community has responded to the atrocities of 11
September with unyielding determination. A broad coalition of States has
taken action against the Taliban, Al-Qaida, and their supporters. It did so in
defence of common values and common security. Consistent with the high
purposes of this institution and the provisions of the United Nations Charter,
the coalition continues to pursue those responsible.
“The international community as a whole provides vital support as
Afghans rebuild their country. The Council applauds the efforts of so many

02-58619 (E)

110902

*0258619*

S/PRST/2002/25

from every continent and corner of the world. And, today, the Council also
honours those who died in this common effort.
“The Security Council gave substance to its determination to combat
international terrorism with its historic resolution 1373 (2001). In it, we made
the fight against terrorism a mandatory obligation of the international
community, consistent with the United Nations Charter and international law.
The Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee promotes cooperation and works
to achieve the effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
Council has also established and oversees the worldwide sanctions regime
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
“The Security Council calls on all States and regional and subregional
organizations to carry forward and build on their cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Committee established by resolution 1267
(1999) of the Security Council.
“The threat is real, the challenge is enormous, and the fight against
terrorism will be long. The Security Council will remain steadfast against the
threat that endangers all that has been achieved, and all that remains to be
achieved, to fulfil the principles and purposes of the United Nations for all
people everywhere.
“Now let us all remember and reflect with a minute of silence.”

2
