UNITED NATIONS
I/

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th

MEETING: I APRIL 1982
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pa,ly

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2345) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Letter dated I April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14942) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

I

SlPV.2345

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjic’ial Records oj’ the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions oj’ the Security Council. The new system. which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2345th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 1 April 1982, at 8 p.m.
P/*~~.~i<irr~t: Mr. KAMANDA

W;I

KAMANDA

(Zaire).

3. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): Sir,
may I first congratulate you very warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. It looks as though you are going to
have a busy month, and I think we all have great
confidence in your ability to steer us safely through
the storms that may lie ahead.

P~scrrr: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France. Guyana. Ireland. Japan, Jordan,
Panama.
Poland. Spain, Togo. Uganda, Union of
Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Zaire.
Provisional

4. I should also, of course, like to thank all my colleagues in the delegation of the United States for
having enabled US to survive the month of March.

agenda (S/Agenda/2345)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Letter dated I April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14942)

5. As members of the Council will be aware, there
have been differences for many years between my
Government and the Government of the Argentine
Republic concerning the Falkland Islands. My Government has asked for this emergency meeting of the
Council because it now has reason to believe that the
Government of Argentina is planning to attempt to
invade these islands.
6. The Falklands are situated in the South Atlantic,
some 770 kilometres north-east of Cape Horn. They
have ;I population of about 1,900. These are people
of mainly British origin, most of whom have been
born there to families that have lived there for generations, There is no significant Argentine element in
the population. The United Kingdom has exercised
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands since early in
the 19th century and continues to do so today.

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 1 April 1982 from tho Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/14942)
1. The PRESIDENT
(intc~~/~,~c~totion j?om Fren~hl:
I shullld like to inform members of the Council that
I have received :I letter from the representative of
Argentina in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative tu participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

7. For several years, the affairs of the Falklands
have been discussed by the General Assembly. The
Falklands are one of those Territories about which
the United Kingdom reports to the United Nations
under Article 73 <Jofthe Charter of the United Nations.
At. its thirty-sixth session, the Assembly adopted a decision’ to the effect that the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples should keep the
situation in the Territory under review. The Assembly
has not adopted a resolution on the subject for several
years but has contented itself with taking note of developments.

3

The PRESIDENT
(i/7l~J,‘/“‘c’/trfif~/7 ji~177 F/?llc*h):
?he Council is meeting this evening in response to a
letter dated I April from the representative of the
United
Kingdom to the President of the Council
IS/P/Y&I.
Mcml>crs of the Council also have before
them document S/14940, containinr! the text of ~1letter
dated 1 April from the represcnt:i6vc of Argentina to
the President of the Council.

8. My Government and the Government of Argentina have held ;t series of meetings to discuss the
situation in the Falkland Islands. In these meetings.
elected representatives of the lid
population have
regularly taken part. Reports have been submitted to
the General Assembly about these meetings. mOSt
recently in 21letter dated 23 M;nxh 19X1. In this letter,
I

it is stated that: “Both delegations . . . agreed that
this question should be examined in further negotiations at an early date.“’
9. Such discussions did in fact continue. most recently in New York at the end of February. Representatives of the two Governments confirmed on that
occasion their wish to continue their discussions
within the negotiating framework referred to in the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. But,
regrettably.
the Argentine Government
appears to
have decided, following those discussions, that it did
not wish to continue on this course. The joint communiqui which had been agreed to at these talks in
New York was not published in Buenos Aires.
10. Recently. relations between the United Kingdom and Argkntina deteriorated
as a result of an
incident in South Georgia, one of the dependencies
of the Fufkland Islands. which is over I .300 kilometres
from the Falkland Islands themselves.
The United
Kingdom
has exercised
sovereignty
over South
Georgia since 1775, when the island was discovered
by Captain Cook. A British Government
station has
existed on South Georgia since 1909. At present, a
British Antarctic survey base provides an all-yearround British presence. The Argentine claim to South
Georgia dates only from 1927 and is presumably
based on the island’s alleged proximity to the Argentine mainland.
I I. The Commander of the British Antarctic survey
base at Grytviken.
on South Georgia. reported on
IY March that an Argentine navy cargo vessel was
anchored in nearby Leith harbour and that a targe
party of Argentines were setting up camp. The Argentine flag had been hoisted. The base commander told
the men they had no right to land on South Georgia
without seeking permission from the British authoritie and ordered them either to seek the necessary
clearance or to Icnve. The United Kingdom Government sought immediate clarification
from the Argentine Government,
in both Buenos Aires and London,
making clear that we regarded this as a potentially
serious incident and asking the Argentines to arrange
for the immediate departure of the ship and party.
Her Majesty’s ship Ertd~r/*rrnc*r~. a lightly-armed
icepatrol vessel. was ordered into the area.
12. The Argentine ship and most of the party left
on 21 March. but about IO Argentines remained. The
Argentine Government. which claimed to have had no
prior knowledge of the landing, assured us that no
serving military personnel were involved: the men
were working for a commercial
company which has a
contract to remove equipment from disused whaling
station\ on South Georgia, It was. however, unrea\onable. the Argentine Government
stated. to expect
the Argentine Government
to seek our authorization
for their prehence on territory claimed by Argentina.
13. tic made clear to the Argentine Government
that tit’ could not allow even the now small number

of men to remain and told them that the End~rrarzc~e
was uoder way to the area and that the captain had
been instructed that. if the Argentines failed themselves to arrange for the men’s departure or regularize
their position. he should as a last resort take the men
on board, without using force, and return them to
Argentina via Port Stanley, the capital of the Falkland
Islands, The Argentine Government replied that it
would regard this as gravely provocative. We assured
them. in turn. that we wished, if at all possible, to
prevent any escalation of this incident. but that the
men had to be removed soon. If the Argentine Government could devise a method of doing so. we would
be prepared to permit it. If not. the captain of HMS
Endr/rtr~~car would have to carry out his instructions.
1 should like to emphasize at this pdint that the Endw(//I(.<’ has played no active part in this incident. She
has not approached the Argentine party at Leith but
has been standing by well away from them.
14. On 25 March. an Argentine naval transport
vessel arrived at Leith harbour to deliver further
supplies to the men ashore. The British Ambassadorin
Buenos Aires sought an early response from the
Argentine Government to our previous requests that
they should arrange for the men’s departure, This
request was refused. The British Ambassador made it
clear to the Argentine Government that we wished to
do everything we could to avoid confrontation and
proposed that if the party requested the proper authorization from the British authorities at Grytviken. lhis
would be given. No immediate reply was received
from the Argentine Government.
But on 26 March. the Argentine Government
a press statement announcing that the Argentine
party would be given all necessary protection by the
The Argentine press
reArgentine
Government.
parted that Argentine naval vessels had been ordered
into the area.
1s.

issued

16. On 28 March. the Argentine Minister for Foreign
Affairs sent a message to Lord Carrington, the British
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, I-e-iecting the British proposal to regularize
the presence of the Argentine citizens in South Georgia
but pressing instead for discussion not only of rhis
issue but also of the wider sovereignty issue.
17. On 30 March. statements in both Houses of
Parliament in London made it clear that the British
Government had no wish to interfere with a straightforward commercial contract but that we could not
accept an illegal unauthorized
presence on British
territory.
The statement emphasized our wish to
defuse the issue and to pursue a diplomatic solution
to it.
18. On 31 March. the British Ambassador in Burno:,
Aires proposed to the Argentine Foreign Minister
thut ;I hcnior official should visit Buenos Aires to :
discuss ;I diplomatic solution. adding that the defusing :

of this incident would help prepare the way for resumption of a dialogue on the broader sovereignty
issue.

express his deep concern over the situation in the
South Atlantic and to urge restraint on both sides.
At noon today. he issued a statement urging the two
Governments
to continue to use diplomatic
means
to resolve the outstanding issues between the two
countries. I am authorized to inform the Council that
it is the fervent wish of my Government to use diplomatic channels to resolve outstanding issues and to
avert a crisis. As I have just described to the Council.
my Government has made repeated efforts to engage
the Argentine Government in the search for a diplomatic solution, These efforts were rebuffed this
morning in Buenos Aires.

II;). Earlier today. the Argentine Foreign Minister
gave the reply of his Government to the British Ambassador in Buenos Aires. His reply was negative.
He declined to discuss further the problems occasioned
by the illegal presence of Argentine nationals on South
Georgia, He specifically stated that he no longer
wished to use diplomatic
channels to discuss the
situation in South Georgia.
20. I have described in some detail this recent incident affecting South Georgia. But the purpose of my
Government in requesting this meeting of the Council
is to consider the threat not to South Czorgia but to
the Falkland Islands. which, as I have already said.
;lre more than 1,300 kilometres away. We have evidence that the Argentine navy is about to launch an
invasion. possibly as early as tomorrow morning.
The Argentine press has for several days been carrying
not only detailed accounts of Argentine naval movements “in readiness for operations in the South
Atlantic” but also statements by the Argentine Minister
of Defence about the significance of these movements.
On 2X March. all naval leave was cancelled.

24. It is this refusal of the Argentine Government
to pursue the path of negotiation, combined with its
disturbing naval and military preparations, which have
led my Government to request this urgent meeting of
the Council. We ask the Council to call upon the Government of Argentina to exercise the utmost restraint
and to refrain from the use or threat of force in the
South Atlantic. This is the way for the Council to give
an appropriate response to this menacing situation
in the arca.
25. The PRESIDENT
fintcrpr’crnliorz .fiom Fr~nc*h):
The next speaker is the representative of Argentina,
on whom I now call.

It is clear that almost all the Argentine fleet, including an aircraft carrier. destroyers. corvettes and
submarines. is now at sea. Yesterday, all Argentina’s
C I30 transport aircraft left their bases. Their destination was not revealed. but according to the Argentine
press they are being prepared to airlift troops to the
southern part of the country. On 30 March, at least
two aircraft of the Argentine air force over-flew the
Falkland
Islands.
without
diplomatic
clearance
having been sought in accordance with normal intcrnational procedures, One of these overflights was by
night and the aircraft carried no lights. All this activity. and the statements by Argentine Ministers that
have accompanied it, have given my Government
reason to believe that an attempt is about to be made
to use force to change the Administration
of the Falkland Islands against the wishes of its inhabitants.
21.

26. Mr, ROCA (Argentina)
(itltrlpt.rlntion
,fiotn
.Sponi.v/r~: Mr. President. the delegation of Argentina
would like to extend to you its respects upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I am
convinced
that your well-known
experience and
diplomatic training will ensure that you will preside
over the meetings of the Council effectively.
27. The Argentine Republic and Zaire, the country
that you represent in such a distinguished
manner.
maintain very friendly relations and share common
positions based on respect for the principles and purposes of the United Nations.
28. I should further like to avail myself of this opportunity to express our thanks to Mrs. Kirkpatrick.
the
representative
of the United States. who presided
over the work of the Council in March with equanimity and professionalism.

My Government
views the present situation
with the utmost seriousness. We call on the Council
to take immediate action in order to prevent an invasion. We ask the Council to exercise its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security, We ask the Council
to call upon the Government of Argentina to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the Falkland
Islands and to exercise restraint. I can assure the
Council that my Government
has conducted the
recent negotiations in perfect good faith and that the
British Government stands ready to continue these
negotiations in the future. What is unacceptable is
an attempt to change the situation by force,

22.

29. The Argentine Republic has once again been the
object of aggression perpetrated by the United Kingdom through the dispatch of vessels to its national
waters with the declared intention of exercising force
against workers who, with the full knowledge of the
British authorities.
have been engaged in peaceful
commercial activities in San Pedro Island. in the South
Georgia group of islands. a dependency of the Malvinas Islands. Those activities are being carried out
in accordance with the procedures that were agreed
to by the two Governments in compliance with recommendations put forward by the United Nations.

23. This morning, the Secretary-General summoned
the representative of Argentina and me separately to
3

30. This aggression
constitutes
one more episode
in the violence
which was perpetrated
by Great Britain on 3 January 1833, when by force it took possession
of the Malvinas
Islands, seizing the Argentine
authorities residing
there and expelling
almost
all of the
inhabitants.

test to Her Majesty’s
Government,
which was reiterated on 17 June in a lengthy
and documented
protest. Viscount
Palmerston
answered
on 8 January
1834. sustaining positions that were rejected by Moreno
on 29 December
1834.
37. Since that time,
the Argentine
Republic
has
never ceased to call for the return of that part of its
territory
which had been brutally
occupied
and was
illegally
held under British control.

31. The islands have been part of the national
territory since the independence
of the Republic,
through
natural succession
of the unquestionable
rights which
the Spanish Crown
had over them and which had had
governors
there since 18 I I. In exercise
of those rights
and before the end of the wars of independence
in the
American
continent,
Argentina
in 1820 sent the frigate Lo H~~wina. under the command
of David Jewett.
who, in compliance
with instructions
from the Buenos
Aires Government.
took effective
possession
of the
islands.

38. As was indicated
by the representative
of Argentina. Mr. Jose Maria Ruda, who is today a member of
the International
Court of Justice.
when the issue of
the Malvinas
was raised at the twentieth
session of
the General Assembly
in 1965:
“In the course of the last 132 years, we have
never ceased to clamour
to the deaf ears of Great
Britain for the restoration
of the Islands which are
ours. Today. a new hope is offered the Argentine
Republic,
a hope that we may find the understanding and the support of the United Nations. one
of whose noblest purposes
is to end the colonial era
all over the world,
The colonialist
policies of that
period have an outstanding
example
in the case of
the Malvinns
Islands. At that time. advantage was
taken of a country that was in the throes of orgnnization and struggling,
as are many new countries
in
Africa and Asia today, to achieve political and economic
progress.
WC defended
ourselves
on the
strength
of our dignity
and of law. but we had no
means to offer resistance.
Our friends,
the new
nations of Latin America.
also in the midst of their
own formation.
could only tender us their moral
support for they shared our material weakness.”

32.

In 1823. the Argentine
Government
appointed
Pablo Areguati
as Governor
of the islands. and made
concessions
of land and rights to exploitation
of the
wildlife
and fishing throughout
the archipelago.
Successivc expeditions
made that year, in 1826. and in
1828 brought
new groups
of families
and means to
facilitate
their settlement
of the islands. and new land
grants were made. The settlements
prospered
satisfactorily
under
the jurisdiction
of the Government
of Buenos
Aires. On IO June 1829. tho political
and
military
governorship
of the Malvinas
Islands
was
established.
Luis Ver-net. one of the first inhabitants.
was appointed
Commander.
33. At no time did Great Britain object to the Argentine establishment
in the Malvinas
Islands.
When.
in February
1825. it signed
;I treaty
of friendship,
commerce
and navigation
with
the Government.
recognizing
Argentine
indepcndonce,
no rcscrvations
whatsoever
were put forward
concorning
the islands.

39. That same year. echoing
what the Argentine
Republic
had stated, the General
Assembly
adopted
resolution
2065 (XXI
by an overwhelming
majoI%y.
In that resolution.
the Assembly.
first. took note of
the existence
of a dispute between
the Governmenls
of Argentina
and the United
Kingdom
concerning
sovereignty
over the Malvinas,
and, secondly,
invited
both countries
to pursue negotiations
so as to find a
peaceful solution to the problem,
bearing in mind the
provisions
and objectives
of the Charter of the United
Nations
and of General
Assembly
resolution
1514
(XV). as well as the interests of the population
of the
islands.

34. In 1833. when usurpation
by the primary
naval
bower of the era was concluded
;:nd when the struggle
for independence
had just concluded.
the Republic
could not oppose
militarily
the plundering
to which
it had been subjected.
Nevertheless.
on 1.5 January
1833. the Government
protested
to the British Char.@
d’affaires
in Buenos
Aires.
who said he had not received instructions.
On 22 January
the Minister
persisted in his indiffctent
attitude.
The
Minister
fol
Foreign
Affairs
of my country,
Manuel
Massa, informed
American
chancelleries
by letter
about this
usurpation.

40. The General Assembly
reiterated
its position
ill
four consensuses
reached in 1966, 1967. 1969 and 1971.
urging the parties to pursue negotiations
in accordance
with the course and scope adopted in resolution
2065
(XX).

35. In this connection.
I should
like to recall that
the Government
of Brazil
instructed
its Minister
in
London
to offer his Argentine
colleague
full co-operation so as to ensure success
in this matter.
Othct
countries
gave immediate
diplomatic
support
to the
Republic.

41.
General
Assembly
resolution
3160 (XXVIII)
reaffirmed
the same premises and stated that the way
to put an end to the colonial situation was by the peaceful solution
of the conflict
of sovereignty
between
Argentina
and the United
Kingdom:
it urged
the
parties to pursue negotiations
without
delay.

36. On 23 April
1833, the Argentine
representative
in London,
Manuel
Moreno.
upon instructions
from the
Buenos Aires Government.
submitted
a note of pro-

4

47. The declarations of the non-aligned countries
were particularly taken into consideration in the third
paragraph of General Assembly resolution 31/49. In
that resolution the Assembly again recognized the
continued efforts made by my Government to facilitate
the process of decolonization and to promote the wellbeing of the population of the islands, and it again
requested the Governments
of Argentina and the
United Kingdom to accelerate negotiations concerning
the dispute over sovereignty.

42.

As can be seen. once again the existence of a
relating to sovereignty between the two countries concerning the archipelagos was recognized and
it was noted that the only valid interlocutors to settle
this were the two Governments.

dispute

43. It is extremely important to emphasize that the
terms used in those resolutions were not chance
terms: rather. they were the outcome of a well-founded
judgement
reached by the General Assembly, which
WHS thus explicitly recognizing that, in the case of the
Malvinas Islands, the principle that enshrines and
protects the right of States to territorial integrity is
applicable. It could not be otherwise, since the illegitimate act of force by Great Britain was followed by
the expulsion of the original population of the territory-Argentine
nationals-and
their replacement by
a tiny number of citizens from the colonial Pdwer,
which makes inapplicable to this dispute the principle
of self-determination,

48. We can see the contrast in attitude of the two
Governments.
While Argentina has been concerned
about overcoming the various obstacles that have
been raised by the United Kingdom
during these
lengthy negotiations
and ensuring that the living
standard of the inhabitants of the islands would speedily be improved,
the United Kingdom
persists in
delaying negotiations that could end the dispute.
49. Indeed, in compliance with the recommendations
1 have mentioned, the Argentine Republic has made
many efforts, within the framework of such negotiations. to reach a solution. To that end, special talks
were held to open communications
between the
Malvinas Islands and the Argentine mainland. In 1971,
the Joint Declaration
on Communications
led to
continued activity by Argentina to improve the situation of the inhabitants of the islands. In the to-year
period since then, Argentina has adopted measures
such as the following. First. provisional
scheduled
service has been provided between Port Stanley and
Comodora Rivadavia: this began in 1972, making use
of amphibian aircraft of the air force. 1 note that the
first trip was carried out in response to a request for
co-operation
from the British Embassy in Buenos
Aires in the transport of a seriously ill person. These
emergency transfers to the mainland continued. Second, Argentine air force personnel were assigned to
ensure service at Port Stanley for communications
activities
with the mainland.
Third, a temporary
aluminium
runway of 800 metres’ length was constructed by the air force in 1972 to make available
regular air service, Fourth. regular weekly flight service was established by the LADE company in November 1972. Fifth. in 1976 the airport runway was
lengthened to improve air service. Sixth, air transport
of mail and freight increased since its inauguration in
1972. from 73 kilogrammes
initially
to more than
40,000 kilogrammes
in 1980. Seventh.
in 1973 a Vor
radio beacon was installed to facilitate and improve
the safety of the increasing air traffic to the mainland,
Eighth. air traffic was increased in frequency to two
flights a week. along with an increase in freight, which
led to the use of larger-capacity aircraft.

44, This particularity
of the case of the Malvinas
islands was reaffirmed in categorical terms at the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries held at Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975. The Political Declaration adopted by that conference stated the following:
“The Non-Aligned Countries, without prejudice
to ratifying the validity of the principle of self-determination as a general principle for other territories.
strongly support in the special and particular case
of the Maivinas Islands the just claim of the Argentine Republic. and urge the United Kingdom to
actively continue the negotiations recommended
by the United Nations in order to restore the said
territory to Argentine sovereignty and thus put an
end to that illegal situation, which still persists in
the southern part of the American continent.“’
45. The Political Declaration adopted at the Fifth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from I6 to 19 August 1976, stated the following:
“In the special and particular case of the Malvinas . , . the Conference firmly supported the
just claim of the Argentine Republic and urged the
United Kingdom to actively pursue the neiotiations recommended by the United Nations for the
purpose of restoring that territory to Argentine
sovereignty, thus ending that illegal situation that
still prevails in the extreme southern part of the
American
1 continent.“-’
46.

The inapplicability

of the principle

of self-deter-

50.

The uninterrupted
assistance provided by the
State throughout a decade for the exclusive
benefit of the British inhabitants of the islands, in
addition to the constant readiness of the nation to settle
the dispute by the peaceful means of negotiations,
was limited by all sorts of obstacles raised by the
United Kingdom.

mination in no way whatsoever meant that the Argen-

Argentine

tine Republic was no longer concerned about the situation of the sparse population of the islands. Rather,
throughout negotiations, my country has given all
kinds of benefits and guarantees to those inhabitants.
Some benefits have already materialised, to the extent
that the British Government was ready to accept them.
5

5 1. Thus, the United Kingdom rejected the following
proposals of Argentina:
an exchange of students
residing in the Malvinas and on the Argentine mainland: ;I plan to build housing. with credit facilities
provided: the establishment
at Port Stanley of a bilingual school by the Argentine Ministry of Culture
and Education: the establishment
of a branch of the
Argentine National Bank to provide family loans to
workers: the establishment
of a fish farm in Port
Stanley by the Argentine National Fisheries Service:
the supply by an Argentine firm of dairy products: an
offer of financial support for the construction
of
housing by the Banco Hipotecario National Argentino:
establishment of a radio-electronic
station for emergencies: the establishment in Port Stanley of a branch
of the National Savings and Loan Association: the
establishment of an oceanographic observation station
by the Universidad
Nucional
del Sur. which also
offered to provide diving instructors: the extension of
the services of the Automobile Club of Argentina to the
islands. which would have benefited especially the
inhabitants of the countryside: the establishment of a
professionril
training
centre-an
arts and trades
school: the installation of a land satellite station connected with the Argentine mainland and international
systems: the establishment
of a combined telephonctelegraph installation
with internal and international
telegraphic and telephone service: and the cstablishment of an animal breeding ranch, provided with
bloodstock, a butcher and a refrigeration plant,

This is clearly demonstrated by the attempts by Argentine citizens in 1977 to purchase Douglas Station ranch
and shares in the Falkland Islands Company, which
were prevented by the Government.
56. The supply of gas to the islands has been provided by State Gas. an Argentine company which
maintains a liquid-gas depot on the islands and has
held at least two exhibitions of domestic appliances.
thus contributing to the safety of the population.
57. In so far as education is concerned. the Argentine Government’s assistance is most important, beC;ILIS~ they choose and send two Spanish teachers to
the schools of Port Stanley.
58. For IO years. above and beyond whatever authoritics wcrc there. the Argentine Government has
meticulously and in good faith met all the commitments
urrrred to in the 197 I Joint Declaration. Now the United
<ingdom Government is saying that that declaration
is applicable only to part of the archipelago.
59. This narration of events demonstrates one
undeniable fact: the Argentine Republic has been
and continues to bc the ob.ject of continuous acts of
aggression perpetrated by the United Kingdom. This
has gone on for nearly 150 years. It is nothing othcl
than the maintenance of a colonial situation which
originated in an act of force. which was then followed
by illegal occupation. usurpation. without the metropolitan Power having demonstrated
any desire to
put an end to it. despite the repeated urgings of the
General Assembly to which 1 referred previously.

-57
-. I remind the Council that that lengthy list 1 have
just read is a lisr of offers rejected.
53. To this reluctant attitude of the British Government may be added the existence of Icgislation approved by the United Kingdom and applicable to the
Malvinas. referring to the treatment of foreigners:
the Aliens Ordinance. which dates from 1925. According to section IO of that’ ordinance no foreigner
can be a property owner or ;I mortgage holder without
special permission. That permission can be granted
only by the Governor of the islands if he deems it
appropriate, and it may be sub.ject to conditions, In
practice, and despite the fact that the official’s powel
to grant or deny permission is a facultative power,
he does not do SO without consulting the Legislative
Council.

60. The United Kingdom
Government
has used
various delaying tactics. thcrcby demonstrating
its
obstinate refusal to negotiate in good faith the setllemcnt of the dispute in the terms stipulated in United
Nations resolutions. The United Kingdom was one
of the first States to recognize the independence of
the 8rgentine Republic and. eight years after that rccognition. perpetrated an attack against its territorial
integrity,
benefiting from an obvious situation of
political and military fragility. which was quite natumt
in a country just emerging to independent life. MY
country’s pos’ition of weakness at that lime. facing
the major maritime Power of the world, prevented it
from exercising its right to self-defence. The act of
usurpation perpetrated in 1833 meant not only the
occupation of the territory but also the forced displacement of the population living in the islands and
their replacement by subjects of the occupying Power,
which constitutes one of the most serious forms of
aggression.

54. That same legislative body has decreed that no
person or corporation can. without authorization from
the Governor. be the trustee for II foreigner in the
holding of land or property and that if that should
occur the land or property would revert to the Crown.
5s. By application
of these legal provisions.
and
without the existence of valid reasons. there has been
systematic. arbitrary and discriminatory
rejection of
all legitimate
attempts
at purchase by Argentine
citizens of real estate in the Malvinas Islands, along
with the attendant prevention of the settling of persons and the bringing of capital to the archipelago.

61, That situation has been maintained to date. because despite the proximity
of the islands to the
Argentine mainland-they
are 400 kilometres from the
Patagonian coast and more than 10,000 kilometres
from their supposed metropolitan country-no
inhabitants live there without the explicit agreement of the
6

United Kingdom authorities, and that has systematically excluded not only Argentine citizens but also
nil other inhabitants who do not have United Kingdom citizenship or belong to the white community of
the Commonwealth.
62. As we have seen. narrow legislation
closes
access to anyone who is not a subject of the Crown
by means of an artificial system preventing settlement on the islands and access to property: and, as
we have experienced in this recent episode, this has
even gone as far as impeding the peaceful economic
activities that are being carried out under contract
between individuals entered into in accordance with
United Kingdom legislation.
63. My Government would therefore like to assert
that the continued refusal of the United Kingdom to
take effective steps to settle the dispute, as demonstrated by the delays over the past 16 years-added
to the long-standing
Argentine claim-constitutes
an additional form of aggression against my country.
64. This aggression has again been demonstrated
by the recent events which have caused the Security
Council to meet, by the virtual utilization of force
against Argentine nationals on San Pedro Island-on
Argentine territory that was unjustly usurped-who
were carrying out commercial activities which were
legally agreed to and about which the United Kingdom
is fully cognizant.
65. That is to say. the serious and imminent threat
to utilize force that the presence and activities of
British warships in Argentine waters and against
Argentine nationals signify means that there is a right
to exercise legitimate
defence. Those threatening
actions are not new. They have already been noted
by the Inter-American Juridical Committee in its statement concerning the question of the Malvinas Islands
which was issued at the beginning of 1976. It referred
to the incursions of the End,/lrrncac during the illicit
activities of the Shoc~klcron vessel on the continental
shelf of Argentina which led to our claim and reactions. At that time, the Committee stated that:
“the presence of foreign warships in waters adjacent
to American States constitutes a threat to the peace
and security of the hemisphere and a flagrant violation of international law concerning non-intervention, as do the intimidating
threats of the British
authorities to send more vessels”,
66. It is worth while to recall that at that time, in
Febrti:u.y 1976. Argentina informed the Security
Council about the activities carried out by the S/7(/t*/<Iv~~)II that were violating sovereignty, It also referred
to the action that it was obliged to take to defend itself.
67. Today, once again. the presence of British
vessels in the area and their unambiguous intention to
carry out acts of aggression. 11sstated in the discus-

sions in the British Parliament in recent days, in press
releases published in that country indicating the will
to utilize force and in the statement made by the
British Minister himself, who announced that the
.!57d111~117w
would be moving towards the theatre of
these events, confirm this attitude.
68. Unfortunately.
there can be no doubt whatever
that there is a serious and imminent
threat by the
United Kingdom to utilize force against Argentina’s
islands, waters and mainland. leaving my country no
other course than immediately
to adopt the necessary
measures to ensure its legitimate defence.
69. The system of collective security set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations cannot be interpreted
in a way that would mean that provisions for legitimate defence would become inoperable.
Sending
warships and dispatching landing troops and missiles
in compliance with aims that have been debated at
great length in the British Parliament and sufficiently
publicized by the press of that country not only are
measures of intimidation
but. indeed, constitute the
cffeclive commencement
of aggression occurring at
a time when my country has made no warlike preparations. The presence of a small number of Argentine
workers on San Pedro. in accordance with the provisions of a contract entered into by private persons with
the knowledge of the British authorities, at no time
can justify and, even less, explain an operation of
deployment of the magnitude of that of the United
Kingdom. Argentina is thus facing a new act of aggression on the part of the United Kingdom that is in
addition to others. My country has unambiguously
expressed in all world forums its respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter, especially its
repudiation of the use of force and its adherence to the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. Its
conduct has been and will continue to be in accordance
with that. The Charter has provided that Metnbers of
the United Nations, when complying
with its principles and purposes. should not be left in a defenceless state against any act of aggression perpetrated
against its territory or population.
70. Argentina will consider itself obliged to utilize
appropriate means of defence to protect its territory
and nationals. The Argentine Government continues
to have as one of its major concerns the future wellbeing of the small population
of the islands, numbering approximately
I .700. and my Government has
always given assurance that they will en.joy all necessary guarantees and safeguards so as to ensure respect
for private interests. the system of property. respect
for acquired rights and their religious and cultural
characteristics.
Argentina
has always emphasized
these points in the course of negotiations and has
proposed concrete measures in that connection. We
reiterate them once again. as well as the fact that we
are ready to reach an agreement that is honourable
for both parties.

vinas). The Council accordingly calls on the GOVernments of Argentina and the United Kingdom to
exercise the utmost restraint at this time and. in
particular, to refrain from the use or threat of force in
the region and to continue the search for a diplomatic solution.

71. It is ironic and inadmissible
for the Security
Council to be convened by the United Kingdom today
to consolidate the spoils of colonial plundering.
We
vehemently re.ject having our country put on the stand
when in fact what should be judged, if justice is to be
served and peace preserved. is the conduct of the
accuser. We are therefore surprised at the speed and
diligence with which the United Kingdom convened
the Council with the request that it exhort us to negotiate and seek peace when it has for I7 years rejected
negotiation and has obstructed any Argentine attempt
at reaching a peaceful and negotiated solution.

“The Security Council
question.” [S/14944.]

will remain seized of the

75. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): Mr. President. it is as if you had prepared a special
script for this evening’s meeting to demonstrate your
intention to exercise with rare dispatch and effectiveness the responsibilities
of leadership that have devolved upon you today.

72. As was stated recently by our Minister for Foreign
Affairs, we have not inflamed passions because we
have a clear idea of what justice is. Our foreign policy
has at all times been dignified. conciliatory and prudent. We have conducted it with serenity and patriotism. The British Ambassador is aware of our firm
decision to negotiate generously and with justice so
as to protect the interests of the islanders and of the
United Kingdom in the islands, without any restriction whatsoever. We are ready to do this. but we are
in no way whatsoever, as we have already indicated,
ready to continue negotiations
if there is no prior
recognition by the United Kingdom of our sovereignty
over the islands. Everything else is open to negotiation.

76. My delegation welcomes the onset of your presidency of the Council. We wish you well and our hopes
are very high.
77. May I also express, on behalf of the Permanent
Representative of the United States, what I know will
be her very deep gratitude for the many compliments
that have been paid to her skill, her wisdom. heI
evenhandedness and her professionalism indischarging
the office of President of the Council in the month of
March.

73. We did not seek this incident in the South Georgia
islands. We did not invent it. We were not the ones
who magnified it. The incident has now been terminated and the true reason for the crisis now emerges.
namely. the perpetuation of a colonial situation and
the irrational and persistent rejection of a just and
logical solution to it.

78. 1 speak, of course, from very special knowledge.
I want to assure all who have paid Mrs. Kirkpatrick
those compliments that they are absolutely right.

“The Security Council has heard statements from
the representatives
of the United Kingdom
and
Argentina about the tension which has recently
arisen between the two Governments.

79. The United States enjoys exceptionally
close
ties with both Argentina and the United Kingdom.
We place a very high value on those ties of friendship
and affirmation of the principles which animate the
United Nations. We therefore whole-heartedly subscribe to the statement that you, Mr, President, have
just read out. We particularly stress its principal part
-its call on the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom to exercise the utmost restraint at
this time and, in particular, to refrain from the use or
threat of force in the region and to continue the search
for a diplomatic solution.

“The Security Council has taken note of the statement issued by the Secretary-General.
which reads
as follows:

80. The United States will lend whatever support
it can in that search. and we are hopeful that the SOILItion of peace and reason will be found.

‘The Secretary-General,
who has already seen
the representatives
of the United Kingdom and
Argentina earlier today. renews his appeal fol
maximum
restraint on both sides. He will, of
course. return to Headquarters al any time. if the
situation demands it.’

81. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
United Kingdom wishes to speak in exercise of his
right of reply. I call on him.

74. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpt.cttrtioM
from Fwnc~h):
After consultations
with members of the Council.
I have been authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the Council:

82. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
First. I should like to reiterate what I said in my statement. namely that it is the fervent wish of my Covernment to use diplomatic channels to solve outstanding
issues and to avert a crisis.

‘*The Security Council, mindful of its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international
peace
and security. expresses its concern about the tension
in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas Mal-

83. My Government welcomes the statement just
made by you. Mr, President. and I can assure YOU tht
8

we bill be guided by its terms. We will exercise
the
utmost restraint: we will. in particular. refrain from the
WJ or threat of force in the region: and we will continue the search for a diplomatic solution.
x4.

We are not aggressors. as my Argentine colhas again and again suggested we are. What
possible or conceivable reason could we have for
itggressive intent against Argentina? We threaten
nobody. We have no interest in the area except to
protect the interests of the inhabitants of the Falkland
Islands and to respect their freely expressed wishes.
Hague

85. My Argentine colleague and I could debate endlessly the rights and wrongs of history, and I doubt
ivhether we would agree. 1 would hope.. however.
thut he would be prepared here and now. as I have
done. to respond positively on behalf of his Govern-

ment to the appeal of the Secretary-General
and to
respond positively. as I have done. to the call made
by you. Mr. President. on behalf of the whole Council
for abstention from the use or threat of force in the
region and continuance of the search for a diplomatic
solution.

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

Litho

in United

Nations.

Ncu

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

ma> bc ohra~ncd
I’rom hookstorcs
and distributor:.
or write to: United
Nation\.
Sales Sectton.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLlCATlONS

DES

NATIONS

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

Les publications
drs Nations
Ume+ XXII sn vente dans les librairies
mondc
enticr.
Inl’ormer-vous
auprPs de votre lihrairr
ou adrrssez-vaus
des ventes.
New Ycrrk ou Gent5,c.

et les agences
$ : Nations

Las puhlicaciones
de 1% Nacioneh
todas panes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
SecciCIn de Vcntas.

York

L!n~d;~s estBn en venta en librcrias
a su ljbrcro
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

dtiposituires
du
Unies. Section

XX-h0989--October

19X9--!.o:\o
