S/2006/584

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 July 2006
English
Original: French

Letter dated 26 July 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to draw to your attention the decision adopted by the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union at its 40th meeting, held on 6 October at
Addis Ababa. I also wish to refer to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of
21 October 2005, pursuant to which an international working group was established
to assist the Government of Côte d’Ivoire in implementing its road map and to
consolidate and strengthen existing monitoring mechanisms.
I append hereto the text of the communiqué issued by the International
Working Group at the conclusion of its 9th ministerial meeting, held at Abidjan on
20 July 2006 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-44771 (E) 280706 280706

*0644771*

S/2006/584

Annex
[Original: English and French]

Final communiqué of the 9th ministerial meeting of the
International Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire
Abidjan, 20 July 2006
1.
The 9th ministerial meeting of the International Working Group was held in
Abidjan on 20 July 2006 under the joint chairmanship of H. E. Mr. Rodolphe Adada,
Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs and la Francophonie of the Congo,
and Mr. Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for Côte d’Ivoire. In attendance were the Ministers of Benin, France,
Nigeria and the Republic of South Africa, as well as the High Representative for the
elections in Côte d’Ivoire, and the representatives of Ghana, Guinea, Niger, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the African
Union, the European Union, the International Organization of la Francophonie and
the World Bank.
2.
The Group was briefed by the Prime Minister on the progress achieved in the
implementation of the road map, in particular the implementation of the decisions of
the high-level meeting on Côte d’Ivoire held at Yamoussoukro on 5 July 2006 on the
initiative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Since that meeting, the
Prime Minister has resolutely undertaken the implementation of the measures for
which he is responsible in spite of unacceptable obstructions to his initiatives.
3.
The Group reiterated its full support for the Prime Minister and requested that
the mobile court hearings whose procedural modalities were determined in
consultation with the Head of State, should no longer be impeded; they should
proceed under the best possible conditions of security and transparency. The Group
stresses that the nationwide organization of mobile court hearings is a crucial step
for the identification of the population and the establishment of reliable voters’ lists,
both of which are indispensable for the holding of free, regular, open and
transparent elections. The Group observes that the Presidential decision empowering
the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) to amend the electoral code was not
taken within the agreed time frames. It notes the information provided by the Prime
Minister that this decision would be taken in the next few days by the Head of State
in accordance with the decisions of the Yamoussoukro meeting of 5 July 2006.
4.
The Group notes with satisfaction the Prime Minister’s announcement of the
completion of the pre-cantonment of the Defence and Security forces of Côte
d’Ivoire (FDSCI) and of the Armed forces of the forces Nouvelles (FAFN); it
welcomes the establishment of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
Monitoring Group and invites the latter to take all necessary measures to verify the
pre-cantonment of armed groups and the pursuit of the military dialogue whose
success requires the intervention of the political authorities. Furthermore, the
International Working Group notes that the Prime Minister will take urgent steps to
dismantle and disarm militias by 31 July, as decided at the Yamoussoukro high-level
meeting.

2

06-44771

S/2006/584

5.
The Group underscores the importance of conducting the identification and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes concomitantly.
6.
The Group condemns the serious disturbances of 17, 18 and 19 July 2006 that
were provoked by organized groups impeding the smooth conduct of mobile court
hearings further to the calls made by certain political leaders. It stresses the need for
the national authorities to take urgent steps to put an end to interference with the
free movement of the population and of impartial forces. The Group also condemns
the incidents that took place on 15 July at Radio Télévision Ivoirienne (RTI) and
hopes that security will be strengthened at RTI so as to preserve its independence.
7.
The Group wishes to submit these elements to the consideration of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1572
(2004) so that it may take appropriate measures against the perpetrators of these
incidents and those behind them, pursuant to the Council’s presidential statement of
19 July 2006.
8.

06-44771

The Group will hold its next meeting on 1 September 2006 in Côte d’Ivoire.

3
