S/PV.8078

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8078th meeting

Thursday, 26 October 2017, 3.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2017/870 and
S/2017/870/Corr.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-34767 (E)
*1734767*

S/PV.8078

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Abyei (S/2017/870 and
S/2017/870/Corr.1)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of South Sudan
and the Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Alexander
Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of
Law and Security Institutions of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2017/870 and S/2017/870/Corr.1, which
contain the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zouev.
Mr. Zouev: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Abyei and the ongoing efforts to support
the implementation of the agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area of
20 June 2011. I shall also provide an update on the
status of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, as requested in resolution 2352 (2017).
Conflict in the Abyei Area continues to follow
four patterns. First, the traditional source of conflict
between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya continues to
be the issue of access to grazing land and water. The
conflict prevention and mitigation strategy adopted by
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) has been effective in reducing large-scale
2/10

26/10/2017

violence. The mission’s success in managing those
issues has encouraged the return of the Ngok Dinka,
with an estimated 15,000 returnees being assisted by
the humanitarian community.
Secondly, criminality in and around the Amiet
common market, which has become an important
economic hub, has been shown to have the potential
to exacerbate intercommunal tensions as the two
communities mingle in the market and the surrounding
areas. The spike in July and August in intercommunal
violence related to the market has dropped sharply
in the wake of UNISFA’s proactive engagement in
de-escalating tensions between the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya communities. Unfortunately, a few
violent incidents have occurred since the publication
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/870 and
S/2017/870). On 13 October two Ngok Dinka died and
three more were wounded at the Amiet common market
after unknown armed assailants opened fire. UNISFA
responded promptly with a pursuit and initial medical
treatment. Thirdly, violence continues to be associated
with petty crime, largely as a result of the adverse
economic situation in the Abyei Area, where there is
a lack of livelihood opportunities and a large presence
of arms. And lastly, the presence of armed groups has
the potential to influence and polarize communities,
thereby inflaming intercommunal tensions.
While UNISFA operations have continued to
enhance peace and stability within the Abyei Area,
intercommunal tensions persist in the absence of
progress in the implementation of the agreement
of 20 June 2011. Disagreement on the joint interim
institutions continues to hinder their establishment. The
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee did not convene in
the last week of July as was agreed on at its meeting in
May. The African Union called for a follow-up meeting
of the Committee in Addis Ababa on 16 August, but
it was postponed the day before the scheduled date at
the request of South Sudan, which cited the need to
await the outcome of an expected meeting between the
Presidents of South Sudan and the Sudan. The Presidents
have been expected to meet since July, and that meeting
is crucial, but a date has yet to be announced, although
we hope it will be shortly, if not today. The efforts of
the African Union continue, which has called for an
extraordinary meeting of the Oversight Committee on
9 November.
The agreement of 30 July 2011 established the
border monitoring and verification mission, and the
17-34767

26/10/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Cooperation agreement of 27 September 2012 on
security arrangements operationalized the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Nearly
six years later, the Mechanism remains at an initial
operating capability. Despite the lack of progress, both
countries and the African Union view the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism as essential
and, in an important show of common purpose, jointly
asked Council members to retain UNISFA’s support to
the Mechanism in their letter of 23 September.
In that context, I would like to share with the
Council the progress made on the benchmarks for
the full operating capability of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism , namely, the
regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism , the resumption of border demarcation
discussions, the resolution of the dispute over the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and full freedom
of movement for Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism operations. With regard to the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism, both parties
have stated that concrete action could only follow the
anticipated meeting of the Presidents. The meeting
of the Joint Security Committee in early June did not
take place, with mutual accusations of support for each
other’s rebel movements. The Committee was created
to address exactly those kinds of disputes, which makes
its current suspension particularly discouraging.
I also regret to report that border demarcation
discussions have not resumed, nor have the documents
for the non-binding opinion on disputed and claimed
areas been handed over. However, in a positive step
to advance the implementation of decisions taken at
the latest meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, held in May, the parties participated in an
initial joint aerial reconnaissance mission in September,
facilitated by UNISFA, to identify temporary
observation sites within the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone, in the vicinity of the agreed border crossing
corridors. We hope that both parties can come together
again to further the border demarcation discussions.
There continues to be an agreement on the
centreline of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone,
a decision of the extraordinary meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism in Addis Ababa on
14 October 2015, thereby providing the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism with a defined
area of operations. Since the latest resolution, there has
been considerable progress in terms of full freedom of

S/PV. 8078

movement for Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism operations, with the helipad at Gok Machar
now fully functional and expedited approval procedures
in place to clear aerial patrols.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that UNISFA has
clearly had a stabilizing role in Abyei and along the
border region between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Neither the Abyei Area nor the border area have seen
any major confrontation between the forces of the two
countries. I urge both Governments to consolidate the
gains achieved by UNISFA at the local level by actively
engaging in discussions to resolve the deadlock over
establishing the temporary arrangements that should
lead to determining the final status of Abyei.
Progress on the operationalization of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
remains dependent upon the active collaboration of
the parties, and is yet to meet all the benchmarks set
by the Secretary-General to proceed to full operating
capability. Both countries pledged to address challenges
facing the Mechanism in the joint letter of 23 September
I mentioned, highlighting the importance of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism as
a confidence-building measure. In that context, we
encourage the parties to use the mechanisms they
have established to address their security issues and
normalize their relations.
In that regard, it is imperative to preserve the
achievements of relative stability realized through the
work of UNISFA, both towards maintaining peace
and stability in the Abyei Area and in preventing
confrontations along the Sudan-South Sudan border
area. Bearing that in mind, I would like to echo the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
Security Council to extend UNISFA’s mandate for an
additional six months.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Zouev
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on progress
in the implementation of resolution 2046 (2012), which
concerns outstanding bilateral issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan and the conflict in the states of
South Kordofan and Blue Nile.
As relations between the two countries have
continued to be tense, it was hoped that the meeting

17-347673/10

S/PV.8078

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

between Presidents Al-Bashir and Kiir that was planned
to take place in Khartoum during the reporting period
would provide guidance on the way forward, at least
on the stalled implementation of the 2012 agreements.
But that meeting did not materialize, at least during the
reporting period.
The internal conflicts in the Sudan and South Sudan,
coupled with the mistrust between the two countries,
have continued to impede the proper implementation
of the agreements and the normalization of their
bilateral relations. At the extraordinary meeting of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, held in
Addis Ababa from 14 to 15 May, both Governments
recommitted to the resumption of regular meetings and
to the implementation of the decisions taken at their last
meeting, held in Khartoum a year earlier.
However, the ordinary meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism agreed to be held at the end
of June did not take place, after both Governments
once again exchanged accusations of harbouring each
other’s rebels. An extraordinary Joint Political and
Security Mechanism meeting convened by the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel is expected to
take place on 1 November. In my engagement with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, I have
reiterated that the agreements on security arrangements
and border issues cannot be implemented without
regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, the main bilateral mechanism empowered
to take decisions regarding security and the border.
The monitoring of the border remains critical to
peace efforts, as border violations have the potential
to be a flashpoint of military confrontation between
the countries. In line with the July 2011 agreement
on the border monitoring support mission, both sides
acknowledge the importance of border monitoring. If
fully implemented, the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism can help them prevent violations
and cross-border incursions by armed groups, contain
the cross-border circulation of weapons and assist in
building mutual trust, particularly in the light of the
mutual accusations of harbouring rebels. It can also
serve to protect the flanks of the Abyei Area.
While there has been limited progress on security
and border issues, the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan have continued to show more appetite
for sustained bilateral cooperation in the oil sector.
In September, the Ministers of Petroleum of the two
4/10

26/10/2017

countries agreed in Khartoum on the resumption of
oil production in the Unity state oilfields, which had
stopped with the outbreak of the war in 2013. The Sudan
would provide technical assistance and electricity and
accommodate oil workers at its base camp in Heglig.
In line with the agreement on trade and trade-related
Issues, the two Governments agreed in September
to boost border trade and approved the export of 54
Sudanese products to South Sudan through five border
crossing points yet to be identified. It is expected that
a meeting of customs and immigration officials will be
organized to operationalize the agreement, while the
branch of the Sudan’s central bank at Kosti has been
identified to facilitate transactions. The contemplated
Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting at
the end of this month is intended to expedite the
establishment of the first crossing points.
The Sudan also continued to facilitate the provision
of humanitarian aid to South Sudan by allowing the
World Food Programme to deliver food assistance on
5 October to Aweil.
With the lifting of United States sanctions on the
Sudan, South Sudan has expressed interest in a joint
approach to the international community, including a
creditor outreach strategy arrangement as contemplated
in the agreement on economic matters, which has not
yet been implemented. In my future engagement with
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, I will
encourage them to build on their sustained cooperation
on oil and their interest in enhancing their economic and
commercial cooperation to implement the agreements
on security arrangements and border issues in the
same spirit.
Since the independence of South Sudan, the
most prominent outstanding territorial issue between
the Sudan and South Sudan has been the question of
sovereignty over the Abyei Area. After an interval
that followed the upsurge in violence in Abyei in 2011,
resulting in the displacement of the population there,
and following the independence of South Sudan later
that year, the Security Council adopted resolution 2046
(2012), which urges the parties to cease all hostilities
and withdraw their forces. The main concern of the
members of the Security Council then was to avoid the
risk of greater conflagration and, in the words of the
United States representative,
“returning to the horrors of the past and [taking]
the entire region with them” (S/PV.6764, p. 1).
17-34767

26/10/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Today, thanks notably to the sustained and fruitful
efforts of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA), for which Ethiopia should be
commended, the risk of relapse into conflict between
the Sudan and South Sudan is low. The stabilizing
role of UNISFA, described in detail in the briefing by
my colleague Assistant Secretary-General Alexander
Zouev, should inform any decision the international
community takes regarding Abyei and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The conflict
prevention and mitigation strategy adopted by UNISFA
and its engagement with both communities to foster
dialogue and reconciliation have also been critical in
averting an escalation of tensions.
In my view, the enabling role of UNISFA is crucial
for any future progress on the implementation of the
transitional agreements and the arrangements on the
border, as well as the resumption of talks about the
final status of Abyei. In my continuous engagement
with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, I
have urged them to build on the relative improvement in
their relationship, including through bilateral meetings
between President Al-Bashir and President Kiir, to
take concrete measures to achieve progress on the joint
administration of Abyei and to resume discussions
about its final status.
Turning my attention to the conflict in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile, if fully implemented, the road
map agreement brokered last year by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel can lay the ground
for lasting peace in the Sudan, as it contemplates a
comprehensive solution to the conflicts in Darfur
and the two areas through peace negotiations and
national political dialogue resulting in a new, inclusive
social contract.
Humanitarian aid delivery to the territories under
the control of the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth (SPLM-N) remains a major contentious issue and
a road block between the Government of the Sudan
and the SPLM-N. The Government of the Sudan has
reiterated readiness to implement the so-called United
States proposal on humanitarian access, which consists
of the United States delivering medicine from within
the Sudan to South Kordofan Blue Nile states by air.
The new SPLM-N leadership stated that the position of
the Movement on the matter has not changed and that
it sticks to the delivery of a certain percentage of the
humanitarian assistance directly from a neighbouring
country to the areas under its control. In my future

S/PV. 8078

engagement with the parties, I intend to urge them to
build on the current unilateral cessation of hostilities
declared by both sides in the two areas and to resume
talks on the basis of the United States proposal on
humanitarian assistance, under the auspices of the
High-level Implementation Panel.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to express our gratitute for the
briefings by Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and South Sudan.
I shall focus my statement on two points: first,
specificallly on the work of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA); and secondly,
the lack of concrete headway in implementing the
agreements of 2011 and 2012 intended to resolve the
conflict over the status of Abyei.
There can be no doubt that, since its establishment
in 2011 and to date, UNISFA has played a stabilizing
role in Abyei and along the entire border between the
Sudan and South Sudan, as clearly pointed out in the
report (S/2017/870) of the Secretary-General’s report.
Although some violent incidents have been reported
over the past few months, the security situation in
the Abyei Area has remained relatively calm, to a
great extent thanks to the role played by UNISFA.
Nevertheless, it is worth highlighting that the situation
remains unstable due to the lack of progress made in
the political process. In that regard, I would like to
express our gratitude for the work of UNISFA. Thanks
to its proactive stance and unflagging support for
mediation initiatives and political dialogue, the mission
has contributed enormously to the fact that there have
been no major clashes between the armed forces of the
two countries in the Abyei Area since 2011. In short,
UNISFA has fulfilled the role that was expected of
it — that is, establishing a secure environment in which
the Sudan and South Sudan can resolve their differences
through dialogue.
However, the peacekeeping mission has been
hamstrung in achieving its full potential as a result of

17-347675/10

S/PV.8078

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the glaring lack of willingness to compromise by both
parties to the conflict, which have not only incessantly
put obstacles in the way of UNISFA’s work, but have
also failed to show tangible progress in implementing
the agreements of 2011 and 2012, aimed at achieving a
lasting solution to the status of Abyei.
That leads me to my second point, namely, to
reiterate the primary responsibility borne by the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to fulfil
the commitments they themselves undertook in those
agreements. However much support the international
community might offer the parties — as it has done
throughout the years, in particular through the United
Nations and the African Union — we reiterate that the
responsibility for showing real progress in resolving
the conflict lies primarily with both Governments.
We take note of the point made by Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, in his communication dated 23 October,
where he referred to the latest efforts to convene
meetings of the various mechanisms established under
the 2011 and 2012 agreements, including the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee and the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism. In that connection, we urge the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to take
advantage of the mechanisms that have been established
to resolve outstanding issues and to implement the
decisions taken. That is vital in order to promote goodneighbourly relations and avoid a relapse into conflict.
In conclusion, allow me to recall that resolution
2352 (2017), which the Security Council adopted in
May and which set out the current mandate of UNISFA,
is a conditional resolution. Through the resolution, it
was decided that the continuation of UNISFA support
tasks with regard to the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism would end with that
extension unless both parties demonstrated, via their
actions, clear commitment and firm assurances for
operationalizing the Mechanism. UNISFA’s mandate
expires in mid-November, which is why I repeat here
what we stated at the time of the adoption of resolution
2352 (2017):
“[l]et me clearly reaffirm that the future of this
peacekeeping mission is now exclusively in the
hands of the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan.” (S/PV.7939, p. 6)
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful to the
6/10

26/10/2017

French presidency for convening this briefing. It has
been a long time since the Security Council held a
public meeting on the situation in Abyei, and this
format makes it possible for the entire membership to
learn in greater detail about the work being done in the
Area by the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA). We also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Alexander Zouev and Special Envoy Nicholas
Haysom for the important information they have shared
with us today.
Bolivia believes that the current state of relative
stability in Abyei is a reflection of the efficient work of
UNISFA, which is as important for the Sudan as it is for
South Sudan, given the difficult time that the latter is
experiencing due to the civil war afflicting the country.
In that connection, we would like to commend the
Ethiopian troops as well as United Nations personnel
for their great work in Abyei.
Although we acknowledge the stability in the Area,
we also recognize that the political, humanitarian
and security situations continue to pose challenges.
UNISFA responds where it can, but its abilities to
respond are limited by various factors outside of its
control. It is clear to us that it is up to the Governments
of both countries to make headway in the development
of measures allowing for the implementation of the
2011 agreement and the final status of the Area.
In that connection, we underscore the good
offices role played by UNISFA in terms of mediation
to encourage dialogue and rekindle the political
process between both countries, as well as to promote
understanding and reconciliation between the Misseriya
and Ngok Dinka communities. The coexistence of
those two communities, whether through commercial
activities or the setting up of community protection
committees, helps to establish the bonds of trust that
are fundamental among the inhabitants of the Area.
Although the security situation is relatively stable,
it continues to be unpredictable. Despite the reduction
in the number of violent incidents in comparison with
the period covered by the present report (S/2017/870)
of the Secretary-General), and taking into account the
update provided by the Assistant-Secretary-General
at this meeting, we must continue working to further
reduce the tensions in the Amiet common market. As
we know, it is the economic heart of the Area and helps
to improve the relationship between the parties.
17-34767

26/10/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As reported by the Secretary-General, there are
many needs that must be met to provide humanitarian
aid. The arrival of displaced persons from South Sudan
has led to an urgent situation that UNISFA and other
humanitarian actors are struggling to grapple with.
There are still problems in terms of access to education,
health, safe drinking water and food security. Headway
needs to be made in consolidating the institutions that
should properly administer the Area and guarantee
the provision of basic services to the people of Abyei.
UNISFA cannot, and should not, substitute the role that
the State.
Despite the problems being experienced, we
underscore the fact that educational activities are
currently under way to provide training to mitigate the
risks posed by explosive remnants of war. Such efforts,
which have reached almost 65,000 Abyei inhabitants,
constitute an important component in establishing
lasting peace in the Area. Moreover, we would highlight
the joint work of UNISFA and the United Nations Mine
Action Service to confiscate and destroy weapons,
detect and eliminate explosive munitions and destroy
explosive remnants of war along priority routes. The
two latter are essential for delineating the terrain
coordinates of border transport corridors.
In a joint letter we received on 23 September, the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan publicly
expressed their willingness to implement resolutions
1990 (2011) and 2352 (2017). That seems to us a
positive sign of the rapprochement between the two
parties, but it is vital that this commitment be put into
practice. We hope that these issues will be the subject
of consensus at the summit between the Presidents
of the Sudan and South Sudan, which we hope will
take place as soon as possible. We urge the parties to
demonstrate leadership and political determination to
move forward with serious negotiations that will ensure
the operationalization of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism, as called for in resolution
2352 (2017), as well as determine the final status of the
Area in line with the 2011 agreement.
Finally, we see that there are still many challenges to
overcome in Abyei. We hope that the Security Council
will remain unified on this issue, while listening to the
positions of the parties involved, the troop-contributing
country, regional organizations and the Secretariat.
We must not lose sight of our principal mandate and
continue to work to help these countries achieve peace,
stability and well-being for their inhabitants.

S/PV. 8078

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency of the Security Council this month
and I wish you every success. Moreover, I would like
to pay tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia, for his wise stewardship of
the Council’s proceedings in the past month. Through
you as President of the Security Council, as well as
through the President of the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General, I would also like to offer to
the Government and the people of Chad our deepest
condolences for the death of the Chadian peacekeepers
in northern Mali.
I also take this opportunity to renew Sudan’s
commitment to cooperate with the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in order to
enable it to carry out its mandate set out in resolution
1990 (2011). I express my thanks and appreciation to His
Excellency the Secretary-General and we thank him for
the Report on the situation in Abyei (see S/2017/870)
presented to the Council. I thank Mr. Alexander Zuev,
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Special Envoy for Sudan and South
Sudan, Mr. Haysom, for their briefings.
I would like to reaffirm the security stability that
Abyei is experiencing and the progress that has been
achieved in enhancing the principles of peaceful
coexistence between the Messiria and the Ngok, which
has been confirmed in the Report presented today
(S/2017/870) as well as in all of the reports presented
to the Council during the past period. This stability is
a direct result of the extensive governmental and social
efforts that have been made in addition to the positive
role that UNISFA plays and has always played since
its creation.
The Government of Sudan confirms its commitment
to all of the agreements signed with the Republic of South
Sudan, starting with the Abyei Protocol of 2004, the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, which we signed on 20 June
2011 and the Cooperation Agreement between the two
States, signed on 27 September 2012.

17-347677/10

S/PV.8078

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Here we call upon our brothers and sisters in the
Government of South Sudan to enhance their serious
engagement with the Government of Sudan and the
African Union in order to speed up the process of
forming the Abyei institutions stipulated by the 20 June
2011 Agreement in order to determine the final status
of Abyei. This is truly and only in the hands of the
Presidents of Sudan and South Sudan, according to the
agreements signed between the two countries.
My delegation reaffirms its position that the path
towards sustainable peace and stability in Abyei and
throughout the border area between Sudan and South
Sudan is based on two main elements, namely the
implementation of both the Agreement of 20 June
2011 and of all points contained in the Cooperation
Agreement signed between Sudan and South Sudan on
27 September 2012.
The Agreement of 20 June 2011 stipulates the
formation of a joint administration for Abyei as well
as a joint legislative council and a joint police force.
These are basic institutions that are indispensable to the
management of the area and in offering the necessary
services to its citizens, as well as enhancing peaceful
coexistence betweent the different social elements.
There is also a need to create the necessary conditions
in order to peacefully establish a final status for Abyei
based on the 2004 Abyei Protocol. This Protocol
stipulates holding a joint referendum in a manner that
meets the aspirations of all stakeholders by finding a
win-win formula that satisfies everyone.
Furthermore, the Cooperation Agreement has
established strong foundations for the normalization of
ties between Sudan and South Sudan and to enhance
the level of cooperation between the two States in
all aspects. It also stipulates the need for sustained
peace between them.
The Agreement covers vital areas that are important
to the present and future relationship between the two
countries, such as oil, trade, debt, borders, security
arrangements, citizen affairs and other important
matters. However, the lack of enthusiasm among our
brothers in South Sudan for implementing all of those
points, with the exception of the oil agreement, has
prevented the achievement of the desired results. My
delegation hopes that the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan will fulfil its pledges to implement
all of these agreements, especially the agreement on
security arrangements and all its facets.
8/10

26/10/2017

Everyone, especially the members of the Security
Council, knows that meeting security needs in any
situation must come before meeting economic and
other goals, as explicitly stated in resolution 2046
(2012), adopted in May 2012. It will require broadening
the horizons of the relations between the two States
in a manner that would guarantee cooperation, rise
above any disaccord and fulfil the aspirations of the
two sisterly nations to achieving peace, stability and
development, as good neighbours.
My country confirms that the Sudan has never
been the cause of obstacles to the work of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism or to
restrict its movements. My delegation believes that the
Mechanism is important to ensuring lasting peace along
the joint borders of the Sudan and South Sudan, and
must be maintained and activated in order to normalize
ties between the two States. As Council members will
recall, at the most recent meeting of the joint political
and security mechanism between the Sudan and South
Sudan, held on 14 and 15 May in Addis Ababa, stressed
the centrality of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism:
(spoke in English)
“The joint political and security mechanism
stressed the centrality of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism for the
peace and security of the Sudan and South Sudan.
They pointed out that the absence of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism would
be detrimental to and have detrimental effects on
stability along the border and within both countries
as a whole. In that regard, the meeting resolved
that the parties must urgently take practical steps
to activate the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism and facilitate its work.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Moreover, the Sudan and South Sudan, as well
as other relevant parties, have worked together since
the Council’s meeting in May. The Foreign Ministers
of both countries sent a joint letter to the Council on
23 September in which they reaffirmed both countries’
commitments to the activation of the Joint Border and
Verification Monitoring Mechanism. Furthermore, both
countries dispatched aerial patrols to the Mechanism
and patrols in the four border crossing areas that were
agreed upon for activation. In addition, an invitation
was sent out for the meeting of the joint political and
17-34767

26/10/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

security mechanism. It was also agreed to conduct the
long-awaited visit by His Excellency President Salva
Kiir Mayardit of South Sudan to Khartoum on Tuesday,
31 October. We hope that the meeting will result in the
necessary progress in regard to the issues that remain
outstanding between the two countries.
While we understand the concerns of those calling
to end UNISFA support for the operational activities
of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, we believe that the Mechanism is
indispensable to maintaining stability in Abyei and
along the border with South Sudan. Ending UNISFA
support for the operational activities of the Mechanism
could lead to developments that would threaten the
gains that have been made through the joint efforts of
all concerned — including the Security Council, which
has endorsed the Mechanism — and reignite tensions.
It would be tantamount to a collective punishment
of those who have met their obligations and of those
who have not, and of civilians in both countries. We
therefore see little justification for ending support for
those activities.
We believe that the way to revitalize and reanimate
those activities is for the Council and the entire
international community to make an extra effort to
enhance dialogue and encourage both countries to
fulfil their obligations in regard to creating a buffer
demilitarized border zone and to removing all obstacles
to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. I confirm the full commitment and
willingness of the Government of the Sudan to do its
part to activate the Mechanism and implement the
agreement on security arrangements of 27 September
2012 and other agreements signed with the Republic of
South Sudan.
In conclusion, I would like to offer my sincere
thanks and gratitude to all of our partners whose efforts
facilitate UNISFA’s work, in particular the Government
of Ethiopia, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, the African Union Commission and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel for the
Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan. We also reiterate the Sudan’s commitment to
cooperating with UNISFA in fulfilling all its duties
unhindered, pursuant to resolution 1990 (2011) and
subsequent relevant resolutions.

S/PV. 8078

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, we are
delighted and honoured to speak before the Security
Council for the second time under your leadership.
My delegation would like to join in expressing
our condolences to the people and the Government of
Chad for the untimely death of their troops. I would
also like to acknowledge the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions,
Mr. Alexander Zouev, and Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan, both of whom are here with us today.
My delegation welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Abyei (S/2017/870) and
the progress in the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). My delegation accepts the report, not only
for its comprehensiveness but, more importantly, for the
glimmer of hope for what could happen to the people of
Abyei if the international community could build on the
current relative tranquility that the report talks about.
My delegation would be remiss if we did not pay
a well-deserved tribute to the Ethiopian men and
women of UNISFA in general, and in particular to the
Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia, for their unwavering commitment to keeping
peace and harmony among the people of Abyei. As
the report conveys, it is the creativity of the Ethiopian
troops in Abyei that has brought relative peace to
the Area. As we appreciate their commitment to and
sacrifices for the people of Abyei, we would like to
appeal to the international community to maintain the
much-needed support for those troops.
We would also like to thank the Council for the
positive role and attention that it continues to pay to
the issue of Abyei. Needless to say, its continued
engagement will be crucial until the case of Abyei is
positively resolved to the satisfaction of both countries.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate South Sudan’s
commitment to engaging the Republic of the Sudan in
renewed efforts towards finding an agreed solution
to the issue of Abyei. Such renewed engagement was
conveyed to the Council in the joint letter that was sent
by the Foreign Ministers of South Sudan and the Sudan
on 23 September. I would like to remind the Council
that, in that letter, both Ministers stated:

17-347679/10

S/PV.8078

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

“We would like to reconfirm to you our resolve
to remove the obstacles and address challenges
facing the operationalization of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. We
would like to affirm to you our readiness to uphold
the commitments we made in the Agreement on
the Border Monitoring Support Mission of 2011
and the Agreement on Security Arrangements of
2012, and to hold the meetings of the joint political
and security mechanism, and the joint security
mechanism, and begin a political process to unlock
the deadlock on Abyei and the borders, as urged by
Security Council resolution 2352 (2017).”
In the spirit of the aforementioned letter and as the
report of the Secretary-General notes, South Sudan has
granted the operations of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism full freedom of movement.
The helipad at Gok Machar is now fully functional
and expedited approval procedures to clear flights
for the Mechanism’s aerial patrols have been granted.
The report further notes that the cancellation rate for
aerial patrols is at its lowest since its establishment in
2013, having decreased from 56 per cent to 22 per cent,
and that many of those cancellations mentioned were
due to bad weather. The report also notes the positive
progress made towards full operational capacity of the
Mechanism. Both parties have accepted the proposal
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) to establish four temporary observation sites
within the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and sent
their respective monitors to start a joint reconnaissance
mission with UNISFA to identify the four temporary
observation sites.
All of that demonstrates significant progress
and the commitment of South Sudan to making the
mandate of UNISFA, and in particular the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, functional.
The Republic of South Sudan appreciates the role of the
Mechanism in maintaining the effective operations of
UNISFA, which in turn sustain harmonious coexistence

10/10

26/10/2017

in the area. Moreover, we are happy to report that there
is serious and credible information that the expected
visit of President Salva Kiir Mayardit to Khartoum will
finally take place in the next few days.
Realistically, we must admit that there are
serious differences between the two countries, and
the aforementioned activities cannot replace the final
resolution of the Abyei issue. In that regard, while we see
the call to establish interim administrative structures
in Abyei, we feel that it has been superseded by many
events. Rather, we stand for a final settlement of the
Abyei matter on the basis of African Union High-level
Implementation Panel’s proposal of 21 September 2013,
which the African Union Peace and Security Council
has accepted a number of times and for which it sought
the support of the Security Council in its communiqué
of 26 October 2013.
Finally, as the Council knows, serious differences
on such a historic dispute usually take a long time to
settle. We would like to appeal to the international
community through the Security Council that in order
to build on the limited peace and tranquility achieved
so far by the Ethiopian peacekeepers, as the report
indicates, certain fundamental humanitarian and social
services ought to be provided for the people of Abyei.
We appreciate the various early recovery and transition
activities mentioned in the report, which include the
rehabilitation of the Abyei Referral Hospital, the Abyei
Women’s Centre and the various livelihood ventures
targeting young people and women. We encourage
more such ventures, as providing livelihood for the
young people of Abyei will help reduce the criminality
that is caused by the economic situation.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

17-34767
