A /72/PV.76

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

76th plenary meeting

Saturday, 23 December 2017, 11.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 p.m.
Statement by the President
The President: I congratulate everyone on the
successful conclusion of our work during the main
session. I would like to commend Ambassador Tommo
Monthe, Chair of the Fifth Committee, as well as the
other members of the Bureau for their dedication and
skill in steering the work of the Committee and for their
collective efforts to end the plenary session on time,
before Christmas.
The steadfast support that Ms. Sharon Van Buerle
and her outstanding team have provided to the Fifth
Committee merits special acknowledgement. I also
thank the interpreters and conference service staff,
who are with us at this unusual hour. The decisions we
have agreed to and are about to formalize are crucial to
the functioning of the United Nations. We have agreed
on the programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019,
which provides the Secretariat with the resources
necessary to carry out its work.
We have considered various other topics on the
financing and management of the Organization, from
construction to human resources management, and we
have adopted a draft resolution on management reform
in the Fifth Committee (A/C.5/72/L.22), enabling the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to make
the United Nations more effective, accountable and
efficient. Those decisions are the result of hard labour
and countless hours spent in the windowless rooms of
the United Nations basement. Arriving at consensus

required difficult compromises from all sides, and I
want to commend everyone for their commitment and
resilience and the collegial manner with which they have
conducted the work of the Fifth Committee this session.
Looking back, everyone should feel proud of
the results. The Fifth Committee was working under
serious time pressure, due to the late availability
of documentation. This problem has been plaguing
the Committee for years and is beginning to hamper
the intergovernmental consideration of issues that
have significant financial and political importance.
Looking ahead, in the spring the Fifth Committee
will have two resumed sessions with heavy agendas. I
encourage the Chair and the Bureau to continue their
tireless efforts to address the problem of documentation
with the Secretariat and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions. I stand ready
to help them to make everyone’s working conditions
better, and I believe we will give this problem serious
consideration during the resumed session. For now, I
thank one and all for their excellent work. By the way,
everyone looks better than I expected.
Programme of work
The President: I would like to draw the attention
of members to the date of recess of the current session.
Members will recall that at its 75th plenary meeting, held
on Friday, 22 December, the General Assembly decided
that the seventy-second session would recess today,
Saturday, 23 December. However, in view of the work
that remains to be completed, I would like to propose
that the Assembly postpone its recess date to tomorrow,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-46702 (E)

*1746702*

A/72/PV.76

Sunday, 24 December. If there is no objection, may I
take it that the Assembly agrees to postpone the date of
recess to Sunday, 24 December?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly will take up
the pending items listed in today’s Journal, including
the reports of the Fifth Committee, on Sunday,
24 December, at 10 a.m. in the General Assembly Hall.
The meeting was suspended at 11.35 p.m. on
Saturday, 23 December, and resumed at 10.10 a.m.
on Sunday, 24 December.
Agenda items 14 and 117 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/72/L.9)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/676)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.9, entitled
“Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference
to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.9?
Draft resolution A/72/L.9 was adopted (resolution
72/244).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted. I
would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): My country would like to make a statement
following the adoption of resolution 72/244, on
modalities for the intergovernmental conference that
will adopt the global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration. El Salvador is pleased to have joined
the consensus and hopes that all States Members of
the United Nations will give the compact their full
attention and political participation. We also hope
2/24

23/12/2017

there will be broad participation on the part of civilsociety organizations.
El Salvador, as is well known, would have preferred
that the international conference for the adoption of
the global compact be held in New York in order to
facilitate the participation of all delegations, given the
presence here of the Permanent Missions of all Member
States, as well as in order to maintain a political focus
on the universality of the issue of migration and its
strong links with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which was adopted in New York.
Nevertheless, we appreciate Morocco’s willingness to
host the conference. We have no doubt that as host, it
will ensure that national and regional migration issues
will be taken into account and that no country or
region’s situation will be placed above any others.
However, El Salvador believes that this is a package,
and there is agreement, on behalf of the membership,
to implement the provisions of paragraph 6 (b) of the
resolution, where it is established that the document will
be concluded according to the negotiation deadlines in
New York in July 2018, and that the outcome will be
transmitted by the President of the General Assembly,
during its current session — in other words, before it
ends, in September — to the conference for the sole
purpose of its adoption. This goes together with the
commitment in paragraph 9, whereby the compact
will be adopted at the opening, and not at the end, of
the conference.
Similarly, El Salvador is joining the consensus
based on the understanding that countries that have a
high level of interest in this subject, but that do not have
permanent representation in Morocco, will be able to
benefit from the trust fund supporting the participation
of representatives from developing countries, as called
for in paragraph 19. We also have the understanding that
the words “in particular”, referring to least developed
countries, do not mean “exclusively”, and that countries
such as El Salvador — which has been labelled in
accordance with macroeconomic factors that are now
out of step with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and which has a strong interest in
ensuring the success of the conference — will benefit
from the fund in order to ensure their participation.
El Salvador hopes that, with this compact, we will
achieve universal consensus focusing on migrants and
their families, which will promote their well-being
wherever they are, irrespective of their migration status,
17-46702

23/12/2017

and above all will focus on human rights. As a country,
we believe that this is an opportunity not to be missed,
and we therefore reiterate our interest in participating
actively in the conference throughout the process.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassadors Gómez Camacho of Mexico and Jürg
Lauber of Switzerland, the co-facilitators of the
informal consultations, who demonstrated great ability
and patience in their conduct of the discussions and
complex negotiations on resolution 72/244. I also thank
Member States for their valuable contributions to our
efforts to reach an agreement on the resolution.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 14 and 117.
Agenda item 68 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children

A/72/PV.76

quite apart from the problem of its disreputable history
since its inception.
The ICC is not an organ of the United Nations, in
spite of the fervent attempts of some parties to depict
it as otherwise in meetings of the Main Committees
of the General Assembly. My delegation wants to
distance itself from the Court and would therefore like
to refer delegations to paragraph 16 of draft resolution
II, on document on the rights of the child contained in
document A/72/435, and to request a recorded vote on it.
We call on Member States to vote against the inclusion
of such references by deleting the words “inter alia,
through the International Criminal Court” at the end
of paragraph 16.
The President: We shall now take a decision on
draft resolution II, entitled “Rights of the child”.
In accordance with rule 90 of the Assembly’s rules
of procedure, the Assembly will first take a decision on
the proposed draft amendment circulated in document
A/72/L.36/Rev.1.

Report of the Third Committee (A/72/435)

A recorded vote has been requested.

Draft amendment (A/72/L.36/Rev.1)

A recorded vote was taken.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/672)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution II, recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 44 of its report.
I shall now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan to speak in explanation of vote before the vote.
Ms. Mukhtar (Sudan): My delegation has serious
reservations with regard to the inclusion of any references
to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and to the exploitation of draft resolution II to
call for, propagate or exert unacceptable pressure on
Member States to include such references and language.
This jeopardizes the ongoing peacebuilding efforts
in my country aimed at safeguarding the rights of the
children of the Sudan.
We want to reiterate once again that since 2003,
and throughout the long period during which we in the
Sudan addressed the conflict in Darfur, the International
Criminal Court has been nothing but an impediment to
peace. Every effort to achieve a lasting peace has been
obstructed by the ICC simply through its persistent
interference since its establishment in 2002. At best,
the ICC is a threat to stability and peace in my country,

In favour:
Bahrain, Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gabon, Guyana,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Namibia, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen
Against:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,

17-467023/24

A/72/PV.76

Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Congo, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Malaysia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Palau, Qatar,
Rwanda, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Viet
Nam
The draft amendment was rejected by 30 votes to
89, with 31 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Central
African Republic informed the Secretariat that
it had intended to vote in favour; the delegations
of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and the
United Arab Emirates had intended to abstain.]
The President: We will now turn to draft resolution
II, as a whole. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia,
4/24

23/12/2017

Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,

Micronesia

(Federated

Monaco,

Mongolia,

Montenegro,

States

of),

Morocco,

Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Palau
Draft resolution II, as a whole, was adopted by 162
votes to none, with 1 abstention (resolution 72/245).
[Subsequently, the delegations of the Central
African Republic and Lebanon informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 68 as a whole?
It was so decided.
17-46702

23/12/2017

Agenda item 72 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/72/439/Add.2)
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/72/680
and A/72/675)
The President: The General Assembly will now
to take action on draft resolutions XXI and XXII,
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph
188 of its report.
Draft resolution XXI is entitled “Effects of terrorism
on the enjoyment of human rights”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
South Africa

A/72/PV.76

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft resolution XXI was adopted by 95 votes to 1,
with 58 abstentions (resolution 72/246).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Burundi, the
Central African Republic, Lebanon and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution XXII is
entitled “Twentieth anniversary and promotion of
the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms”. The Third Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XXII was adopted (resolution
72/247).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/72/439/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/674)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution V, recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 33 of its report.

17-467025/24

A/72/PV.76

I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar,
who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before
the voting.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation reiterates
its rejection of draft resolution V, entitled “Situation
of human rights in Myanmar”, as contained in
document A/72/439/Add.3. We have time and again
stated in unequivocal terms our strong objection to the
discriminatory and selective application of overlapping
multiple actions being taken unfairly against my
country in the name of human rights under the various
United Nations mechanisms.
My delegation voted against the draft resolution
in the Third Committee (A/C.3/72/L.48) and will do
so again in the General Assembly today, because it
contravenes the established United Nations procedures
and universally accepted principles for addressing
human rights issues in a member country. The draft
resolution is subjective, politically motivated and
written with the blatant intention of putting unwarranted
political pressure on Myanmar. Its adoption will not help
promote human rights in Myanmar. More importantly,
it will not contribute to solving the protracted and
complex situation in Rakhine state. This futile exercise
will lead only to further polarization and an escalation
of tensions among the various communities inside the
country and beyond.
We are also seriously concerned about the
orchestrated demonization of Myanmar’s Government
and security forces, which is being intensified with
the deliberate intention of tarnishing our leadership’s
image and integrity. Highly overdramatized and
unverified human rights allegations, as well as
irresponsible remarks by some countries, human rights
groups and certain heads of United Nations agencies,
are sowing seeds of hatred and mistrust among the
various religious communities in Myanmar and the
region beyond. The continuing provocative actions and
the chorus of incitement, inflammatory rhetoric and
biased media portrayals of the issue of Rakhine state
must be stopped if we are to de-escalate the tension and
restore normalcy to the lives of all the communities in
the affected areas.
Myanmar takes primary responsibility for
addressing the complex and challenging issues in
Rakhine state. However, they cannot be overcome
overnight or by Myanmar alone. Our efforts must
be buttressed with the understanding and support
6/24

23/12/2017

of the international community. The Government of
Myanmar has been striving diligently to address the
immediate humanitarian, security and socioeconomic
needs resulting from the terrorist attacks perpetrated
on 25 August by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army (ARSA). At the same time, the Government is
continuing its efforts to promote peace and harmony
and the sustainable development of Rakhine state for
the benefit of all communities.
The violence in the vicinity of Maungdaw has
now ceased. Humanitarian assistance has been
provided to all affected families through the Red Cross
Movement, in coordination with the Government and
the Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance
on Disaster Management of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. We have already agreed on
the terms of reference for setting up a joint working
group with Bangladesh, and a voluntary, safe and
dignified repatriation process will begin before the
end of January 2018. We have begun implementing
the recommendations of the report of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, also known as the
Annan Commission, as a road map for addressing the
root causes of the problems in Rakhine state.
As a responsible State Member of the United
Nations, Myanmar has accepted and accommodated
the United Nations special missions appointed under
various mandates with the objective of building
constructive engagement based on mutual respect and
cooperation in the promotion and protection of human
rights. Over the past three decades, we have fully
cooperated with the successive special rapporteurs
appointed by the Human Rights Council, the special
advisers of the Secretary-General and other special
mandate holders.
Myanmar is also working closely with the
Secretariat to establish a constructive partnership in
our quest for peace, reconciliation and sustainable
development in Rakhine state. The recent successful
visit of Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
was a clear demonstration of Myanmar’s sincere desire
to work with the United Nations. We will continue to do
so in the future in good faith. We believe that mutual
respect and constructive cooperation can only bring
about positive results.
The Security Council has held eight meetings on
the situation of Rakhine and the humanitarian issue
17-46702

23/12/2017

since March this year and has adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/22 in that regard. The Human
Rights Council, at its thirty-fourth session, adopted a
resolution (34/22) and appointed an international factfinding mission, in addition to the existing Special
Rapporteur on Human Rights in Myanmar. Once again,
on 5 November, the Human Rights Council held a special
session and adopted another resolution (S-27/1). Here in
the General Assembly, the Third Committee adopted
draft resolution A/C.3/72/L.48 on the same issue.
All these sequential events exceed reasonable
actions for the promotion and protection of human
rights in a country. There is a strong ulterior political
motive behind them. Moreover, we cannot be obliged
to accept a country-specific draft resolution on
human rights initiated by countries with malicious
intent whose own human rights records are far from
perfect. Today’s draft resolution represents nothing but
evidence of an attempt by some countries to abuse the
United Nations in order to impose their political agenda
on Myanmar. The draft resolution will not help to solve
the current humanitarian problem or the complex issues
of Rakhine state. Exerting undue political pressure and
coercive measures can have only negative results and
will exacerbate the situation on the ground.
The Government and people of Myanmar are united
in their unswerving resolve to address the issue of
Rakhine state. We will not be deterred by any external
interference in our efforts to bring peace, harmony
and development to Rakhine state. The Government of
Myanmar wishes to express its profound appreciation to
all the countries that supported Myanmar by rejecting
this draft resolution in the Third Committee. We would
like to urge all delegations to do the same today and to
vote against this politically motivated, country-specific
draft resolution on Myanmar.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
Draft resolution V is entitled “Situation of human
rights in Myanmar”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei

A/72/PV.76

Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Yemen
Against:
Belarus, Cambodia, China, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Philippines,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Viet
Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
India, Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Papua
New Guinea, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Draft resolution V was adopted by 122 votes to 10,
with 24 abstentions (resolution 72/248).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Côte d’Ivoire
and the Islamic Republic of Iran informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 72.

17-467027/24

A/72/PV.76

23/12/2017

Agenda item 77 (continued)

constructive spirit, and that is reflected in the text that
we have adopted today.

Oceans and Law of the Sea
Draft resolution (A/72/L.7)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/677)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.7, entitled
“International legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in document A/72/L.7,
the following countries have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Albania, the Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, the Dominican Republic, Georgia, Iceland,
India, Israel, Lebanon, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal,
Nigeria, the Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Sierra
Leone, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine
and Viet Nam.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.7?
Draft resolution A/72/L.7 was adopted (resolution
72/249).

Colombia is a nation with coasts on both the Atlantic
and Pacific oceans, and its biological and geographic
conditions afford its marine and coastal ecosystems
great diversity. The health of these ecosystems
depends not just on coherent and responsible national
management, but also on other countries that have
effects on both their own waters and those beyond
national jurisdiction.
As a highly diverse country, Colombia is committed
to the conservation, protection and sustainable
development of the oceans through the implementation
of policies, plans and programmes in this area at the
national, regional and global levels. Now more than ever,
we join the chorus of voices calling for the protection
and sustainable development of areas beyond national
jurisdiction. This is particularly important in the light
of the fact that these ecosystems and their resources are
increasingly threatened by human activities. I would
like to stress the importance that Colombia attaches to
the creating this instrument as soon as possible.
However, we would like to recall that paragraph
10 of the resolution just adopted indicates that neither
participation in the negotiations nor their outcome
may affect the legal status of non-parties to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
Colombia takes this opportunity to reiterate that it
has not ratified UNCLOS, which is why UNCLOS’s
provisions, other than those that Colombia has expressly
adopted, cannot be applied to it.

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Based on this premise, Colombia has decided to
participate in the negotiations on the creation of this
new instrument. We therefore understand that this
resolution and Colombia’s participation in the process
of its adoption cannot be considered or interpreted
in any way as implying Colombia’s express or tacit
acceptance of the provisions contained in UNCLOS.

Mr. Pedraza (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Colombia would like to offer its sincere
thanks to the facilitators, Ms. Kate Neilson of New
Zealand and Mr. Pablo Arrocha Olabuenaga of Mexico,
for their tireless work as coordinators of resolution
72/249, aimed at establishing the modalities to create
an international legally binding instrument for the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. Both led
the discussions at a high level of transparency and in a

Ms. Chernysheva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian delegation attaches great
importance to the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction. We have repeatedly stated that this topic
requires serious and careful consideration, especially
given the fact that radical approaches have often been
voiced during discussions. Such approaches could
undermine the existing legal regime established under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea

8/24

17-46702

23/12/2017

(UNCLOS) and the international treaties that have been
adopted on its basis.
Our doubts about the consideration of the topic grew
with each round of discussions. During the negotiations
on biodiversity, there was a stark divergence of
positions, a lack of effort to find common ground and
a reluctance on the part of many delegations to strike
a balance between the importance of sustainable
economic activity and the protection of the marine
environment. This state of affairs naturally resulted in
the collapse of the work of the Preparatory Committee
established under resolution 69/292. The Committee
failed to fulfil its mandate, since it did not reach a
consensus on any of the possible elements of a draft text
of an international legally binding instrument under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We regret that the final document of the Preparatory
Committee (A/AC.287/2017/PC.4/2) did not take into
account the positions of a number of States, including
our own principled approaches.
In the circumstances, we see no reasonable
justification for convening a diplomatic conference.
What would be justifiable would be to continue
working within the Preparatory Committee so that it
can fulfil its mandate, which means seeking consensusbased elements that could form the basis of a future
agreement. We therefore saw no reason to accelerate
the drafting of resolution 72/249. In order to conclude
work on the resolution speedily, ambiguities in the
modalities of the future conference were overlooked.
Currently, it is underpinned by procedural mechanisms
that enable their application to be loosely interpreted,
to the detriment of the process and its potential results.
The rules of procedure are reflected in the practice of
the General Assembly, which is not always consistent.
That inevitably carries the risk of abuse, including on
the sensitive issue of adopting resolutions by consensus.
The resolution contains a provision for drawing
up a legally binding instrument as soon as possible.
However, no agreement was reached on it in the
Preparatory Committee. Our constructive proposal
for drafting two resolutions, in order to enable all the
procedural foundations of the work of the diplomatic
conference to be carefully considered, was ignored.
The haste and negligence we saw in this process served
only to undermine trust in it.
In that regard, the Russian delegation dissociates
itself from the consensus on the resolution to convene a

A/72/PV.76

diplomatic conference. We call on the parties concerned
to pursue their future work on the basis of an open,
honest and inclusive dialogue, a crucial component
of which is the adoption of resolutions exclusively by
consensus, including on all procedural issues. That
is the only approach that can ensure fruitful and
successful work on biodiversity issues.
Ms. Salas Pellicer (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation would
like to discuss resolution 72/249, just adopted under
agenda item 77, “Oceans and the law of the sea”, on
an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction.
We thank the delegations of Mexico and New
Zealand for facilitating the negotiation process.
We would like to recall that Venezuela is not a party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
That is why the norms referred to in that instrument,
especially those that could be classified as customary
international law, cannot be applied to us unless our
country expressly recognizes them in the exercise
of its full sovereignty. Similarly, UNCLOS should
not be considered the only legal framework within
which all activities carried out in the oceans and seas
must be governed, since there are other international
instruments in this area that, together with UNCLOS,
form part of the body of legal texts known as the law
of the sea.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
efforts aimed at fostering the use of marine areas in
an efficient and sustainable manner, in accordance
with the provisions of international law. Accordingly,
Venezuela joins the consensus on this resolution,
taking into account paragraph 10, whereby the
Assembly recognizes that neither participation in the
negotiations nor their outcome may affect the legal
status of non-parties to the Convention or any other
related agreements with regard to these instruments.
That is why the participation of our delegation at the
intergovernmental conference cannot be interpreted as
a change of our position with regard to UNCLOS.
The conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction are the
subject of special attention from the international
community and our country. The urgent need for

17-467029/24

A/72/PV.76

convening a conference has always been clear to
Venezuela but, as various delegations said during
the negotiations, this cannot take place without a set
of minimum agreements to ensure that the results of
the intergovernmental conference, which will begin in
2018, are effective in accordance with the aspirations
of the international community. In particular, they must
be aimed at advancing the desired goal of improving
the health of the oceans and seas for the preservation
of life on the planet and for the benefit of present and
future generations.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): With regard to resolution
72/249, adopted under sub-item (a) of agenda item 77,
I would like to point out that Turkey supports efforts
aimed at efficient, environmentally conscious and
sustainable use of maritime spaces in accordance with
international law. We therefore supported resolution
72/249.
Having said that, our delegation’s participation
in the deliberations and negotiations envisaged in
the framework of the resolution, which may result
in a possible legally binding instrument, cannot be
construed as a change in Turkey’s established position
on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS). Turkey is not a party to UNCLOS and
is of the opinion that UNCLOS is neither universal nor
unified. Nor is it the only legal framework regulating
activities in the oceans and the seas. Indeed, we welcome
that the fact that the resolution contains a paragraph
that acknowledges that neither participation in the
negotiations nor their outcome may affect the legal
status of non-parties to the Convention or any other
related agreements with regard to those instruments.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
As my delegation stated during the debate on this
agenda item on 5 December (see A/72/PV.64), we
strongly believe that the intergovernmental conference
should operate by consensus. We believe that this is the
best way to arrive at effective and lasting solutions with
regard to an international legally binding instrument
on the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction
that will be supported by the most States.
Unfortunately, resolution 72/249 does not require
decision-making by consensus in the conference. While
we remain concerned about the potential outcome of
an intergovernmental conference operating on the
decision-making modality presented in the resolution,
10/24

23/12/2017

we do not object to its adoption. My delegation remains
hopeful that we can make progress towards our shared
goal of the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction,
and urges all States to continue to work on a basis of
consensus, as the best path to a meaningful and lasting
new agreement.
Finally, the United States expresses its appreciation
to the delegations of New Zealand and Mexico for their
efforts in shepherding the resolution, and particularly
for their outreach to all delegations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote. May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 77?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 97 (continued)
Prevention of an arms race in outer space
Report of the First Committee (A/72/407)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/673)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution III, entitled “Further
practical measures for the prevention of an arms race in
outer space”, recommended by the First Committee in
paragraph 12 of its report A/72/407.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
17-46702

23/12/2017

Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
France, Israel, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey
Draft resolution III was adopted by 108 votes to 5,
with 47 abstentions (resolution 72/250).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Timor-Leste
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 97?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 99 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/72/409)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/673)
The President: The Assembly has before it draft
resolution XXVIII, entitled “Follow-up to the 2013
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear

A/72/PV.76

disarmament”, recommended by the First Committee
in paragraph 84 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested. A separate
recorded vote has been requested on the twelfth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution XXVIII.
I shall first put to the vote the twelfth preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/72/L.28.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Finland, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, United Republic
of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Burundi, China, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Hungary,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Montenegro, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Syrian Arab Republic, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Armenia, Australia, Belgium, Benin,
Bulgaria, Canada, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Japan,
Nigeria, Portugal, Serbia, the former Yugoslav

17-4670211/24

A/72/PV.76

Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates
The twelfth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution XXVIII was retained by 97 votes to 29,
with 18 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Cuba, the Syrian
Arab Republic and the United Arab Emirates
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour; the delegation of Norway that it had
intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution XXVIII, as a whole.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Moldova, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Albania, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France,
Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
12/24

23/12/2017

Netherlands, Poland, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Japan,
Portugal, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates
Draft resolution XXVIII, as a whole, was adopted
by 114 votes to 30, with 14 abstentions (resolution
72/251).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of Norway
that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 99?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
Draft resolution (A/72/L.19)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/678)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.19, entitled
“Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
of the members of the party accompanying him”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/72/L.19, the following countries
have become sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.19:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bangladesh, Benin,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chile, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Djibouti,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia,
Greece, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
17-46702

23/12/2017

Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru,
Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Viet Nam and Zambia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.19?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/252).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 130.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 134 to 136, 141, 143, 146 to 148, 163 and 165.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Felipe García Landa of Mexico, to introduce, in one
intervention, the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly.
Mr. García Landa (Mexico), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour
of introducing the reports of the Fifth Committee. The
Fifth Committee met from 5 October to 23 December,
with 29 plenary meetings and numerous informal
consultations. The Committee’s reports were
considered by the General Assembly in its 29th, 55th
and 61st meetings, held on 9 October, 17 November and
1 December, respectively.
(spoke in English)
The Committee issued reports on the following
items: agenda item 133, “Financial reports and audited
financial statements, and reports of the Board of
Auditors”; agenda item 137, “Programme planning”;
agenda item 139, “Pattern of conferences”; agenda item
140, “Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations”, specifically on Article
19; agenda item 145, “Report on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services”; agenda item
134, “Review of the efficiency of the administrative
and financial functioning of the United Nations”; and
agenda item 115, “Appointments to fill vacancies in
subsidiary organs and other appointments”.
Let me now present the additional reports of the
Fifth Committee that contain recommendations and

A/72/PV.76

issues that require action during the main part of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
With regard to agenda item 135, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly,
in paragraph 8 of its report contained in document
A/72/668, the adoption of a draft resolution that the
Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 141, entitled “Human
resources management”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/72/667, the adoption of a draft
resolution that the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 143, entitled “United
Nations common system”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/72/666, the adoption of a draft
resolution that the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 146, entitled
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/72/665, the adoption of a draft resolution that the
Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 147, entitled “Financing
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991”, and
agenda item 148, entitled “Financing of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals”, the
Committee, in paragraph 6 of its respective reports,
contained in documents A/72/664 and A/72/669,
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of the related draft resolutions, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 163, entitled “Financing
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/72/671, the adoption of a draft resolution
that the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 165, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in

17-4670213/24

A/72/PV.76

document A/72/670, the adoption of a draft resolution
that the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 136, entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019”, in
paragraph 42 of document A/72/681, the Committee
considered five draft resolutions: draft resolution I,
entitled “Questions relating to the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2018-2019”, which the
Committee adopted without a vote; draft resolution II,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2018-2019”, with regard
to which a recorded vote was requested on section
XXII, with the Committee rejecting the inclusion of
an oral amendment to that section, and with the draft
resolution, as a whole, being adopted without a vote;
draft resolution III, entitled “Proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2018-2019”, which the
Committee adopted and which contains the following
sections: (A) “Budget appropriations for the biennium
2018-2019”, (B) “Income estimates for the biennium
2018-2019” and (C) “Financing of the appropriations
for the year 2018”; and draft resolution IV, entitled
“Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the
biennium 2018-2019”, and draft resolution V, entitled
“Working capital fund for the biennium 2018-2019”,
both of which the Committee adopted without a vote.
The Committee also recommended the adoption
of nine statements on programme budget implications.
The reports of the Fifth Committee on those statements
are issued in documents A/72/672 to A/72/680.
Finally, under agenda item 134, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 8 of its
report contained in document A/72/682, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
the draft resolution entitled “Shifting the management
paradigm in the United Nations”. Also, in paragraph
9 of the same report, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of the draft decision
entitled “Questions deferred for future consideration”,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
I assure delegations that changes made during the
29th formal meeting of the Fifth Committee will be
reflected in the relevant draft resolutions, decisions and
reports, which will be issued shortly.
14/24

23/12/2017

(spoke in Spanish)
Before I conclude, I would like to thank all
delegations for their cooperation throughout the
negotiations, as well as the colleagues who offered
their support as facilitators of the various draft
resolutions for their excellent work. I would also like
to thank the Chair of the Committee, the Permanent
Representative of Cameroon, Ambassador Tommo
Monthe, for his able leadership and, above all, for his
clear commitment to reaching negotiated solutions that
would garner consensus. I also feel honoured to have
shared responsibilities with the other members of the
Bureau, who embody diplomacy and professionalism.
I thank them for their companionship and friendship.
The President: Before proceeding further, I
would like to point out to representatives that, as the
Fifth Committee only finished its work early this
morning, the reports are available in English only.
It is my understanding that they will be issued in all
languages as soon as possible. I thank everyone for
their understanding.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. May I
remind members that, in accordance with decision
34/401, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain
its vote only once — that is, either in the Committee
or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee. Additionally, explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Fifth Committee,
unless notified otherwise in advance. That means that,
where recorded votes were taken, we will do the same.
17-46702

23/12/2017

I also hope that we will adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Fifth Committee. The results of the voting will be
uploaded and available on the PaperSmart portal.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/668)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 9 of the
same report.
We first turn to the draft resolution, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/72/L.11. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/253).
The President: We now turn to the draft decision,
entitled “United Nations office for partnerships”. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 72/546).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 135.
Agenda item 141
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/667)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.10.
We will now take action on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/254).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 141.

A/72/PV.76

Agenda item 143
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/666)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.9.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/255).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 143.
Agenda item 146
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/665)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.8.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/256).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 146.
Agenda item 147
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/664)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft

17-4670215/24

A/72/PV.76

23/12/2017

resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.7.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/259).

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 163.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/257).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 147.
Agenda item 148
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/669)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.12.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/258).

Agenda item 165
Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/670)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.13.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/260).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 165.
Agenda item 136

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 148.

Proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2018-2019

Agenda item 163

The President: The report of the Fifth Committee
under this agenda item, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/72/L.21.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/671)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.14.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
16/24

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/681)

The Assembly has before it five draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 42
of its report.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba to
introduce a draft oral amendment to draft resolution II.
Mrs. De Armas Bonchang (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes to discuss agenda item
136, in particular draft resolution II, as contained in
document A/C.5/72/L.21, and specifically to section
XXII of the draft resolution, entitled “Estimates in
respect of special political missions, good offices and
17-46702

23/12/2017

other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council”.
As we have pointed out for more than 10 years, there
is no legal basis for carrying out activities related to the
responsibility to protect, since there is no negotiated
intergovernmental agreement among Member States
with regard to the definition of that concept. During
that more-than-10-year period, the Secretariat has not
been able to present a legislative mandate given by
Member States to make progress on the implementation
of that concept. Resources related to the Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect seem to have
been combined with those requested for the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, whose functions have the full support of
our delegation, in line with the consistent principled
position of the Cuban Government against genocide.
The amendments we propose do not seek to
undermine either the functions or the resources of
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
The delegation of Cuba therefore firmly believes that
the budgetary estimates and the associated narrative
presented for the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect should be deleted and should be considered
only once the General Assembly has decided on the
concept, its implementation, the scope of its application
and other related matters.
I would therefore like to reiterate Cuba’s request
to introduce amendments to section XXII of draft
resolution II, incorporated in the following preambular
and operative paragraphs, which I will now read out.
The first preambular paragraph should read
as follows:
“Recalling that the General Assembly has
not decided on the concept of responsibility to
protect, its scope, implications and possible means
of implementation”.
The second preambular paragraph should read
as follows:
“Noting that the estimates of thematic
cluster I comprise narratives, functions, expected
accomplishments, indicators of achievement,
outputs and other information related to the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect”.
Operative paragraph 1 should read as follows:

A/72/PV.76

“Decides to delete all references to the
activities, functions, expected accomplishments,
indicators of achievement, outputs and other
information related to the Special Representative
to the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to
Protect, as contained in the strategic framework
and the related narratives of the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide”.
Operative paragraph 2 should read as follows:
“Requests the Secretary-General to issue a
corrigendum to his report contained in document
A/72/371/Add.1”.
In conclusion, we ask delegations to consider the
amendments that we have just introduced and to vote in
favour of them.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
delegations that wish to explain their vote or position
before we take action on the proposals before us.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the member States of the European Union.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as
Liechtenstein, align themselves with this statement.
The Fifth Committee is the Main Committee of
the General Assembly entrusted with responsibility for
administrative and budgetary matters. We believe that
the discussions in the Fifth Committee should focus
on those aspects of the items under consideration. The
Committee should refrain from political discussions
belonging to other United Nations forums.
The mandate of the Office of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide was
approved by Security Council resolution 1366 (2001).
It is our responsibility, as the budgetary committee,
to ensure that the Office is adequately funded, so that
it can effectively implement its mandate and all of
the functions related to it. The paragraphs proposed
as amendments to draft resolution II, however, would
greatly reduce the capacity of the Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide to implement its mandate. In particular, the
paragraphs would hamper the Office in cooperating in
close collaboration with other United Nations entities,
especially the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Responsibility to Protect. For that reason, we

17-4670217/24

A/72/PV.76

will vote against the draft amendment, and we call on
other delegations to follow suit.
Mr. Yazdani (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation has asked for the floor to explain its vote
on the proposed draft amendment introduced by the
delegation of Cuba to section XXII of draft resolution II.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has always supported
the activities of the United Nations within its mandates
and based on its rules and regulations — in particular
the Charter of the United Nations. Furthermore, my
delegation supports ensuring an expeditious, effective
and immediate response by the United Nations in the
prevention of genocide and mass atrocities. However,
in my delegation’s view, there is no intergovernmental
consensus on the concept of the responsibility to protect.
It is therefore not acceptable to my delegation that the
limited financial resources of the Organization be
allocated to a post for which there are no agreed terms
of reference for its functions, owing to the absence
of an agreed definition regarding the responsibility
to protect.
For that reason, my delegation will vote in favour
of the amendment proposed by the delegation of Cuba
and would like to invite all delegations to do the same.
Mr. Escoto (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has asked for the floor to explain its vote on
Cuba’s proposed amendment to section XXII of draft
resolution II.
Nicaragua finds it inappropriate for the United
Nations to assign resources to the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect
and deems even more inappropriate the mixing of
those resources with those of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide.
We note that there is no consensus on this concept in
the General Assembly, which is why my delegation will
support Cuba’s proposed amendment to the text. We
urge the other Member States to duly support it as well.
Mr. Vachon (Canada): Canada supports the call
for a vote and urges Member States to reject the oral
amendments to draft resolution II and vote no for
all of the reasons we have already expressed in the
Fifth Committee.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation
considers the principle of protection to be one of the
most controversial issues at the United Nations. The
General Assembly has not reached agreement on the
18/24

23/12/2017

definition of that principle, its scope, effects or possible
means for its implementation since the adoption of
resolution 63/308. My delegation believes that the
implementation of that concept constitutes a flagrant
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations — in particular those concerning
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs of Member States. My delegation
will therefore vote in favour of the oral amendment to
draft resolution II.
Mr. Varankov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus has consistently
been of the view that it is premature to determine the
concept under consideration. Furthermore, we object to
conflating two completely unrelated mandates, which
leads to abuse in allocating financing for one mandate
at the expense of another. In that connection, we call
for support for the amendment proposed by the Cuban
delegation to draft resolution II.
Mr. Ri Song Chol (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea supports the draft oral amendment to
section XXII of draft resolution II proposed by the Cuban
delegation, since the concept of the responsibility to
protect has not yet been agreed on by all Member States
in the General Assembly and informal discussions are
still ongoing. It is unacceptable to discuss budgetary
issues related to the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Responsibility to Protect and mix them
with the budget of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will therefore vote in favour
of the draft amendment.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote or position before the voting. We
will now take a decision on draft resolutions I to V, one
by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Questions relating
to the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2018-2019”, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/72/L.16. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 72/261).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
II, entitled “Special subjects relating to the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019”,
17-46702

23/12/2017

A/72/PV.76

the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/72/L.17.

Thailand, Timor-Leste, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen

The representative of Cuba has introduced a draft
oral amendment to section XXII of draft resolution II.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will now take a decision on the draft oral
amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.

The draft oral amendment was rejected by 24 votes
to 76, with 44 abstentions.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Angola, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Burundi, Cambodia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Guinea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, China, Colombia, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guyana, India,
Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Oman, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,

The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution II, entitled “Special
subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2018-2019”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 72/262).
The President: We next turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “Programme budget for the biennium
2018-2019”, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/72/L.18. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
72/263).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Unforeseen extraordinary expenses for the biennium
2018-2019”, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/72/L.19. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
72/264).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2018–2019”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/72/L.20. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 72/265).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
delegations that wish to explain their vote or position
on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We requested the floor to explain our vote on
certain sections of resolution 72/262.
My delegation voted in favour of section XXII of the
resolution, on special political missions. However, my
delegation has reservations about allocating financial
resources to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General

17-4670219/24

A/72/PV.76

on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1559 (2004). Until he resigned, Special Envoy Terje
Rød-Larsen went beyond the limits of his mandate,
as set out in resolution 1559 (2004). Unfortunately,
the authors of the reports of the Secretary-General,
the Under-Secretaries-General for Political Affairs,
have to date continued to adopt the same approach by
monitoring bilateral issues pertaining to two sovereign
States, Syria and Lebanon, especially as expressed
in paragraphs 80 and 88 of the relevant report of the
Secretary-General, which refer to the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Syria and Lebanon and
the demarcation of boundaries between the two States.
That is a violation of their sovereignty and amounts
to interference in the internal affairs of those two
brotherly countries.
Furthermore, the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of that resolution are
clearly biased towards Israel, the occupying Power,
as they continue to intentionally overlook Israel’s
non-compliance with any of the terms of reference
under resolution 1559 (2004), particularly withdrawal
from the occupied Lebanese territories.
My delegation joined the consensus on resolution
72/262, but with regard to section XIX, on the
resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human Rights
Council, the Syrian delegation has reservations about
allocating financial resources to Human Rights Council
resolutions 34/26 and 36/20, on the status of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic. That is based on
our well-known principled position whereby we reject
the use of human rights issues in a selective, illegal
and politicized manner so as to interfere in the internal
affairs of countries under different pretexts. That is
a contravention of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular sovereign
equality and non-interference in the internal affairs
of Member States, bearing in mind that the entity that
adopts such decisions has no credibility and is biased.
With regard to section IV of the resolution,
on the Office of Counter-Terrorism, we joined the
consensus in line with our well-known position of
principle against terrorism, which is the main threat
to international peace and security, as well as an
obstacle to development at the national, regional and
international levels, in particular to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. My delegation
underscores that the United Nations should play an
20/24

23/12/2017

active role in countering terrorism and strictly abide by
the principles of international law and the provisions of
the Charter. We emphasize that the Office of CounterTerrorism should not be subject to political pressure or
efforts to achieve financial polarization, which some
States have attempted in trying to improve their world
public image by using twisted, suspect methods such
noble and humane-looking donations. However, those
donor States have ulterior motives and evil aims in
providing particular certain United Nations bodies
with huge sums of money in order to influence their
credibility and performance.
In order to prevent this from continuing, therefore,
we reaffirm that funding of all United Nations
initiatives related to the interests of all States or to
new international mechanisms must be part of the
regular budget of the United Nations, so that there can
be no interference by any State in the financial and
administrative functioning of those mechanisms. That
will protect the credibility, transparency, neutrality and
non-politicization of the United Nations. Based on that
principle, my delegation underscores that the Office
of Counter-Terrorism should be exclusively funded by
the regular budget, which is under the control of the
relevant United Nations bodies.
Consequently, my delegation expresses its
reservations about the funding of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism by one State that is well known
for its sponsorship of terrorism. That is a serious and
unjustified precedent that affords privileges and special
status to the Government of one particular State in the
work of the Office.
Mr. Yazdani (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation wishes to dissociate itself from section XXII
of resolution 72/262, in which it allocates resources for
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015).
In that connection, I would like to express my concern
about the overflow of human and financial resources
into the resources allocated for the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). Taking
into account the nature and scope of the legislative
mandates under resolution 2231 (2015), including with
regard to the size and budget of the related verification
and monitoring staff, the allocation of 11 positions and
significant sums for official travel for an entity with
such small capacity could definitely be interpreted as
a waste of the Organization’s scarce resources. My
17-46702

23/12/2017

delegation is of the view that the General Assembly took
its first step to rectify that problem by downgrading
two P-4 positions. However, we believe that while that
measure is necessary, it is insufficient. We encourage
the General Assembly to take more measures in that
regard in order to prevent the squandering of resources
and ensure that the amount of resources allocated to an
item is commensurate with its mandated activities.
Furthermore, we were interested to learn more
about the performance of the capacity, as well as the
justification for the proposed assumption, in order to
examine the accuracy of the resource-requirement
estimate. However, the Secretariat failed to meet the
principle of transparency and neglected to provide the
Committee with the additional requested information,
which is essential to the fulfilment of its mandate.
My delegation would also like to express its deep
concern about non-compliance with mandates, related
rules and regulations in terms of official travel and the
provisions of paragraph 10 of the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document S/2016/44.
According to that paragraph, “any actions related ...
to enquiries, providing guidance and examining and
taking appropriate action” shall be carried out only
with the Security Council’s approval. Regrettably, the
Secretariat has consistently neglected the provisions of
that note.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that my
delegation aligns itself with the consensus on resolution
72/262 but wishes to dissociate itself from it part XXII,
where resources for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) are allocated.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Following the adoption
of resolution 72/262 under agenda item 136, I wish
to make a statement on the resolution’s subvention
to the international component of the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) for 2018.
On behalf of the Royal Government of Cambodia,
I would like to express my sincere thanks and gratitude
to Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the
United Nations, for his commitment to the ECCC and
his kind efforts in securing funding for the Courts.
Cambodia attaches great importance to the ECCC’s
ongoing effort to bring justice to the Cambodian people
through the ongiong trials of top Khmer Rouge leaders
for various crimes committed during the period from
17 April 1975 to 6 January 1979, such as genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

A/72/PV.76

The Royal Government of Cambodia supports the
Secretary-General’s request that the General Assembly
provide a subvention to the ECCC’s international
component for 2018. The approved subvention will
enable the Chambers to further carry out their work and
activities towards completing the judicial proceedings
in their various cases, in accordance with the completion
plan. As it has for the past three consecutive years,
the Royal Government of Cambodia will contribute
$4 million to the national component of the ECCC in
2018, which accounts for 69 per cent of the proposed
$5.8 million budget for the national component of the
Courts. Of that contribution, $1.65 million is to cover
the operational costs, and the other $2.35 million is
to pay national staff salaries for the first six months
of 2018.
The Royal Government of Cambodia will
seek continued United Nations support in raising
additional funds from potential donors in the amount
of $1.8 million, to cover the payment of national staff
salaries for the remaining six months of 2018. I wish to
report that, so far, the Royal Government of Cambodia
has made significant contributions in kind and cash
to the ECCC, totalling $41.5 million, reflecting the
Government’s consistent commitment to the Chambers.
Eleven years have elapsed since the inception of
the Chambers. Through close collaboration and joint
efforts between the Government of Cambodia and the
United Nations, together with the generous support
of the international community, the ECCC has made
substantive judicial achievements and progress, as
was highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report of
16 August (A/72/341).
Case 001, against Kaing Guek Eav, and Case
002/1, against Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, were
definitively concluded. All of them were sentenced to
life imprisonment, and their appeals were upheld by
the Supreme Court Chamber. Case 002/2, on additional
charges against Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, was
also concluded, and the delivery of a judgment is
expected in the second quarter of 2018. Significant
progress has also been made in Cases 003 and 004.
In addition to the progress on the judicial aspects, the
Chambers have also undertaken outreach activities in
their efforts to increase public awareness and educate
people on the progress of the Courts. Close to 560,000
people have had direct exposure to the ECCC.

17-4670221/24

A/72/PV.76

The judicial process of the Chambers is lengthy,
requiring time and adequate financial support. The
fight for justice is never easy, but it is a worthwhile
endeavour. I believe that when the process is completed
the ECCC’s legacy will be extremely important, in
terms not only of the justice that we are seeking but
also of the invaluable experience that the Chambers
have had in the trials of the top Khmer Rouge leaders.
That experience will serve as a basis for important
court reform in Cambodia and elsewhere and for study
by academia, university students, non-governmental
organizations and civil society.
The final judgments will send a strong signal to
the world that the top Khmer Rouge leaders have been
appropriately punished for crimes against humanity,
that the criminals have not escaped with impunity and
that such crimes will not be repeated. The Cambodian
people will finally receive justice and assurances that
they can live peacefully with full freedom and enjoy all
the fundamental rights that are their due. As of today,
the ECCC has left Cambodian society with a positive
legacy, thereby contributing to national reconciliation
and remembrance, ensuring that regimes like that of
the Khmer Rouge do not recur and enhancing capacitybuilding and institutional reform.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my sincere thanks and gratitude to the
Secretary-General, the Steering Committee, the
principal donors and other stakeholders for their
support and financial contributions to the ECCC,
without which the Courts could not have gone very
far. I am fully confident that, at the end of the process,
justice will be fully served for the Cambodian people
and for all humankind.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): This is the last time I will take the floor today.
My delegation joined the consensus on resolution
72/261. However, we have a reservation regarding the
allocation of financial resources to the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism in the Syrian Arab Republic
based on the following points.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
stresses its principled and firm position regarding the
provision of humanitarian assistance to all people in
need without discrimination, owing to its constitutional
obligations. The Government underscores that it will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and its
agencies in ensuring that assistance is delivered based on
22/24

23/12/2017

respect for the United Nations guidelines on providing
assistance in emergencies pursuant to resolution 46/182.
Paramount among those guidelines is respect for
national sovereignty and the role of the relevant State
in supervising the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in its territories, and for the principles of neutrality,
integrity and non-politicization.
My delegation believes that it would be better to
use the large amounts of money cited in the report to
increase humanitarian assistance provided through
international organizations operating within Syrian
territory, in full cooperation and coordination with the
Syrian Government. The Charter of the United Nations
stresses the sovereignty of States and the importance
of not contravening that principle through the
establishment of such mechanisms, which constitute a
flagrant violation of the sovereignty and independence
of States and interfere in their internal affairs.
My Government regrets that the General Assembly
continues to overlook the root causes of the humanitarian
crisis brought about by the emergence and proliferation
of terrorist organizations that are supported, financed
and facilitated by the Governments of well-known
States. The General Assembly continues to ignore
the fact that the Syrian Government provides 75 per
cent of its people’s humanitarian needs and fulfils its
obligations with regard to them, despite the arbitrary
measures imposed unilaterally by certain Governments
in clear violation of various provisions of the Charter
and international law.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote or position after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 136.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/682)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report, as well as a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 9 of the same report.
The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution, entitled “Shifting the management paradigm
in the United Nations”, the text of which, for the time
17-46702

23/12/2017

being, is contained in document A/C.5/72/L.22. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/266).
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on the draft decision, entitled “Questions deferred for
future consideration”, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/72/L.23. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 72/547).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 134.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
(i) Appointment of the judges of the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal
The President: Members will recall that the
Secretary-General, in his report circulated in document
A/72/204, recommended that the General Assembly
approve the extension of the three ad litem judge
positions for a period of 12 months, from 1 January to
31 December 2018, in order to allow the Tribunal to
keep abreast of its caseload.

A/72/PV.76

It was so decided (decision 72/415).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (i) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/107)
The President: Members will recall that, at its 74th
plenary meeting, on 20 December 2017, the Assembly
took note of the appointments of Botswana, France and
the Russian Federation as members of the Committee
on Conferences for a period of three years beginning
on 1 January 2018.
Members will also recall that two seats from among
the Group of Asia-Pacific States still remain to be filled
for a term of three years beginning on 1 January 2018.
Following consultations with the Chair of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States, I have appointed Iraq and
Nepal to fill those two vacancies for a period of three
years beginning on 1 January 2018. May I take it that
the Assembly takes note of those appointments?
It was so decided (decision 72/412).

Members will also recall that, by its resolution
72/256, of 24 December 2017, the General Assembly
decided, among other things, to extend the terms of the
three ad litem judge positions and the current incumbent
judges whose current terms of office are about to
expire for one year, from 1 January to 31 December
2018. The three ad litem judges whose terms expire
on 31 December 2017 are Judge Rowan Downing of
Australia, Judge Alessandra Greceanu of Romania and
Judge Nkemdilim Amelia Izuako of Nigeria.

The President: I should like to remind members
that one seat from among the Group of African States
and one seat from among the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States remain to be filled for a term
of three years beginning on 1 January 2018. I should
also like to remind members that one seat from among
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
remains to be filled for a term beginning on the date of
appointment and expiring on 31 December 2018. I urge
those groups to submit their candidates for those seats
as soon as possible.

Pursuant to resolution 72/256, the General
Assembly will now proceed to the extension of the
terms of the three ad litem judges for the period of
1 January to 31 December 2018.

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda
item 115.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to extend
the terms of office of the three ad litem judges — Judge
Rowan Downing of Australia, Judge Alessandra
Greceanu of Romania and Judge Nkemdilim
Amelia Izuako of Nigeria — from 1 January to
31 December 2018?

Programme of work
The President: With regard to the programme
of work of the General Assembly, apart from
organizational matters and items that may have to be
considered by operation of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, and bearing in mind that consideration

17-4670223/24

A/72/PV.76

23/12/2017

and action have already been taken by the Assembly
on a majority of items, I should like to inform members
that the following agenda items remain open for
consideration during the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly: agenda items 9 to 15, 19, 19 (b), 22,
22 (b), 24, 24 (a) and (b), 29 to 38, 40, 41, 43 to 49, 55,
65, 66, 66 (a) and (b), 70, 72, 72 (c), 73, 73 (a) to (c), 88,
107, 111, 112, 113, 113 (a) and (b), 114, and 114 (a) and
(b), 115, 115 (f) to (h), 116 to 128 and 130 to 165.

same priority — peace and prevention, in particular
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I look forward
to members’ participation during the high-level
meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
April 2018. Maintaining momentum on the Sustainable
Development Goals is critical. We will launch the
International Decade for Action, on the theme “Water
for Sustainable Development”, look at innovative
financing and engage young people.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note
of those agenda items that remain open for consideration
during the seventy-second session of the Assembly?

One of the first high-level meetings that I convened
focused on Hurricane Irma’s devastating impact on
the Caribbean islands. That reminds us how much
work remains to be done on climate change. Work
will continue on Security Council reform. We will
consider the December report on the repositioning of
the United Nations development system. Following the
Secretary-General’s detailed report on the reform of
the peace and security pillar (A/72/525), we will have
more discussions.

It was so decided.
The President: We are now at the end of the main
part of the seventy-second session. More than three
months ago, the general debate saw a record number of
speakers. From the start, a few messages were clear. For
instance, there were calls for a stronger United Nations
and for us to focus more on people and recommitments
to multilateralism. In that respect, I would like to stress
two points.
First, we have made progress in this main part of
the seventy-second session. Progress is not measured
by the number of resolutions that we adopt or the length
of the meetings that we hold. Rather, it is measured
by the impact that we make on people’s lives. Only
last night, we adopted the programme budget for
the biennium 2018-2019. In the past few months, we
have had many discussions in the General Assembly
and the Main Committees. We have made progress
in some areas; in others we need more time to find
solutions. We have moved forward on the SecretaryGeneral’s reform proposals. We adopted two important
resolutions by consensus: on the peace and security
pillar reform (resolution 72/199) and on management
reform (resolution 72/266). That shows the commitment
of Member States to making the United Nations deliver
for people. I stand ready to use my convening power to
ensure the engagement and ownership of Member States
with regard to the reform processes and their outcomes.
Secondly, our work is not yet done. We have
more to do next year. On migration, we must finalize
the United Nations global compact. We share the

24/24

In order to have meaningful outcomes from all
those processes, we need to talk and, more important,
to listen to one another. Such agenda items represent
global challenges and multilateralism is the tool that we
need to solve them.
Before I conclude, I must pay tribute to the
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session and to the Committee Chairs,
Bureaux and secretariats for their work. I look forward
to our continued collaboration. I also commend the
representatives of Member States, who have embodied
the messages from the general debate and focused on
people. Each Committee has a different role to play, but
they all represent multilateralism in action. The fruits
of members’ labour are the resolutions and decisions
adopted. Let us turn the words in those resolutions into
action for people’s lives.
I look forward to our work together in the new year.
On 11 January, I plan to outline in detail my priorities
for the resumed part of the seventy-second session. Let
me once again thank all members and wish them a welldeserved holiday.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

17-46702
