226

General Assembly - Thirty-ninth Session

of 1985 to allow enough time for a full discussion of this
important matter;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
13. Again urges the Secretary-General, taking into
account the suggestions of the Human Rights Committee,
to take determined steps within existing resources to give
more publicity to the work of the Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Economic and Social Council and its
Sessional Working Group and to improve administrative
and related arrangements to enable them to carry out their
respective functions effectively under the International
Covenants on Human Rights;
14. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to expedite the publication of the official public records of the
Human Rights Committee in bound volumes, as indicated
in General Assembly resolution 37/191, starting with its
first session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat effectively
assists the Human Rights Committee and the Economic
and Social Council in the implementation of their respective functions under the International Covenants on
Human Rights.
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/137. Elaboration of a second optional protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of
the death penalty
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 35/437 of 15 December 1980 and
its resolution 36/59 of 25 November 1981 concerning the
idea of elaborating a draft of a second optional protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 189 aiming at the abolition of the death penalty,
Recalling also its resolution 37/192 of 18 December
1982, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to consider the idea of elaborating a draft of a
second optional protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the
death penalty,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/19 of 6 March 1984 190 and the action taken by
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to implement that resolution, 191
Taking note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 192
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights and the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to consider further the idea of
elaborating a draft of a second optional protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty;
2. Invites Member States which are in a position to do
so, specialized agencies and international organizations to
189 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
l90 See Official Records oft he Economic and Social Council, 1984, Supple
ment No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. II, sect. A
l91 See E/CN.4/!985/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1984143. chap. XVlll. sect. A. re,
olution 1984/7.

assist the Commission and the Sub-Commission in the
consideration of this question;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly at its forty-second session of the consideration given to this question by the Commission and the
Sub-Commission;
4. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its forty-second session, in the light of the action
taken by the Commission and the Sub-Commission, under
the item entitled "International Covenants on Human
Rights".
/01 st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/138. Reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations conventions on human
rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/44 of 3 December 1982 and
38/117 of 16 December I 983,
Considering that the General Assembly, as the principal
organ of the United Nations entitled to adopt conventions
on human rights, is in the position to take an overview of
their implementation as an integrated system of substantive provisions and reporting obligations of States parties
to the various conventions,
Conscious that the fulfilment of reporting obligations
constitutes an essential element of co-operation by States
parties in contributing to the assessment of their compliance with their obligations,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on
the reporting obligations of States parties under various
United Nations conventions on human rights, 19 •1
Having considered the report of the meeting of the
Chairmen of the Commission on Human Rights, the
Human Rights Committee, the Sessional Working Group
of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination held at Geneva on 16 and I 7 August
I 984,194
Concerned about the problems experienced by the
above-mentioned bodies in the functioning of the reporting procedures, including the burden which several coexisting reporting systems place upon States parties to the
conventions on human rights.
Convinced, therefore, of the need to improve the existing
reporting systems in order to resolve the problems experienced both by the bodies entrusted with the consideration
of the periodic reports of the States parties and by the
States parties to the conventions on human rights,
I. Reiterates the importance it attaches to the obligations established under international conventions, including their respective reporting systems;
2. Takes note with interest of the report of the meeting
of the Chairmen of the Commission on Human Rights, the
Human Rights Committee, the Sessional Working Group
of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, which contains suggestions made by the
192 A1391535.
193 Af381393.
194 A139-484. annn
