S/2017/1109*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 December 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which is submitted pursuant to paragraph 25 of Security
Council resolution 2358 (2017) and paragraph 55 of resolution 2372 (2017), provides
information on the implementation of both resolutions, including on the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major developments in
Somalia during the period from 23 August to 20 December 2017.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by strained relations between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states. The Federal Government felt
that the federal member states were taking bilateral decisions on Somalia ’s foreign
relations, which is the remit of the Federal Government, while the federal member
states alleged that the Federal Government was taking decisions on key national
issues without including them. Divergent positions over the Gulf crisis exacerbated
tensions: Puntland, the Interim South-West Administration and the Galmudug Interim
Administration publicly broke away from the position of neutrality declared by the
Federal Government. Inadequate efforts to institutionalize the relationship and the
absence of a mechanism to bring the Federal Government and the leaders of the
federal member states together to consult and decide on key political issues rendered
the relationship even more vulnerable to internal and external pressures.
3.
In the HirShabelle Interim Administration, the regional assembly elec ted
Mohamed Abdi Waare as the State President on 16 September. The HirShabelle
regional assembly had impeached his predecessor, Ali Abdullahi Osoble, in August,
citing poor performance and lack of consultation with the Assembly. President Waare
was formally inaugurated on 22 October in a ceremony attended by Prime Minister
Hassan Ali Khaire, the presidents of all federal member states, my Special
Representative for Somalia and representatives of the international community.
4.
Meanwhile, tensions between the federal member states and the Federal
Government escalated amid allegations of attempts to undermine the leaders of some
* Reissued for technical reasons on 9 January 2018.

17-22852 (E)

090118

*1722852*

S/2017/1109

federal member states by elements within the Federal Government. The Galmudug
Interim Administration and the Interim South-West Administration experienced
political turbulence, including multiple motions in their state assemblies to impeach
their respective presidents. In the Galmudug Interim Administration, conflicting
positions by the President, Ahmed Duale Geele “Xaaf”, and his Vice-President,
Arabey Hashi Abdi, on the Gulf crisis led to a political confrontation between the
two. The leaders of both Galmudug and South-West state alleged that the attempts to
unseat them were sponsored by individuals in the Federal Government. The Juba land
administration also made similar allegations.
5.
The Presidents of the five federal member states held a consultative meeting in
Kismaayo, Jubaland, from 8 to 10 October, without the presence of representatives of
the Federal Government. The meeting focused on, among other issues, cooperation
among the federal member states, the relationship between the Federal Government
and the federal member states and the fight against Al-Shabaab. The presidents of the
federal member states formed a “Council of Interstate Cooperation” and decided
temporarily to suspend all cooperation with the Federal Government, including on
legislative matters and the constitutional review process, pending resolution of key
issues that had strained their relations with the Federa l Government.
6.
Following the meeting in Kismaayo, after the deadly Al-Shabaab attack in
Mogadishu on 14 October, President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed “Farmajo”
invited all leaders of the federal member states to a consultative meeting in
Mogadishu on political and security developments. The consultative meeting was
held from 29 October to 5 November, after which a communiqué was issued in which
the participants agreed to step up security across the country, build a working
relationship based on cooperation, consensus and trust and refrain from activities that
could cause political instability. They also agreed to establish a technical committee
to reach political consensus on key issues related to federalism within six months.
7.
In “Somaliland” the long-delayed presidential elections took place on
13 November. Musa Bihi Abdi of the ruling Peace, Unity and Development Party
(Kulmiye) was declared the winner, with 305,909 votes (55.19 per cent), against the
candidate of the main opposition, the National Party (Waddani), who garnered
226,290 votes (40.73 per cent). The Waddani party raised objections that the election
was biased in favour of the ruling party. Clan elders played a key role in resolving the
disagreement and domestic and international observers, including a team from the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, declared the voting to be fair
and the outcome credible. The Supreme Court endorsed the result on 28 November.

B.

Security developments
8.
The overall security situation remained volatile across Somalia, including in
Mogadishu, despite the operationalization of the Mogadishu stabilization force and
strengthened security measures. In August, there were a number explosions caused
by vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, mainly in the vicinity of Makka
Al-Mukarama Road, an area frequented by Government officials, with some
commercial establishments. There was a steady flow of low-intensity armed clashes,
crime and terrorism-related incidents in September, with two large-scale attacks using
vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices. Targeted assassinations continued in the
city with a record number of 12 assassinations targeting businessmen, security
personnel, civil servants and Government officials.

2/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

9.
Following a brief lull in attacks using vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices in September, a suicide attack using such a device took place on 14 October
at a major junction near the Safari Hotel in Mogadishu, followed by a second
explosion some kilometres away. The explosion killed an estimated 512 people, with
230 injured and 70 missing, in what is being regarded as the deadliest terrorist attack
in Somalia’s history. One national staff member of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) was among those killed. The attack bore the signature of
Al-Shabaab although the group has not claimed responsibility.
10. On 28 October, a complex attack targeted the Naasa Hablood 2 Hotel in
Mogadishu, in which 23 people were killed, including the Minister of the Interior,
Federalism and Reconciliation of the Interim South-West Administration, Madobe
Mohamed Nunow. Thirty people sustained injuries in the attack, including one
national staff member of the World Food Programme. Al-Shabaab claimed
responsibility for the attack. The Director-General of the National Intelligence and
Security Agency and the Commissioner of the Somali Police Force were removed
from their posts following the attacks of 14 and 28 October.
11. In the south and central regions, Al-Shabaab continued to launch remotecontrolled improvised explosive devices, ambushes and hit -and-run attacks,
particularly against the forces of the Somali national army and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) travelling along the main supply routes in Bay,
Bakool and the Shabelle regions. There were four large -scale Al-Shabaab attacks on
towns and security installations in these regions, namely on Bulo Gaduud, Belet
Xaawa, Ceel Waaq and Afgooye. An increase in the number of attacks by Al-Shabaab
was also recorded along the Kenya-Somalia border region in the run-up to the
rescheduled elections in Kenya on 26 October. At least eight attacks by Al-Shabaab
were recorded during this period, compared to two in September and three in August.
12. Periodic armed encounters between Al-Shabaab and Somali security forces
occurred in Puntland. Al-Shabaab fighters fired six mortar shells at the village of Af
Urur in the Galgala mountains on 15 November near a camp of Puntland security
forces. No injuries were reported in the incident. Movement and activity by members
of Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL) was reported in and near Boosaaso,
Puntland, and responsibility for a suicide attack outside a police station in Boosaaso
on 4 October was claimed by ISIL. Reports of incoming fighters from Yemen to areas
in Puntland were also received.
13. While the security situation remained relatively calm in “Somaliland” during
the reporting period, there was some unrest before and after the presidential election
of 13 November, mainly violent demonstrations in New Harge ysa, Erigavo, in the
disputed Sanaag region, and in Burao, in “Somaliland”, by supporters of opposition
parties.

C.

Economic developments
14. Somalia’s economy was on the path to recovery before the drought. Real growth
in the gross domestic product (GDP) appears to have weakened, down from 3.2 per
cent to 2.4 per cent in the first half of 2017. The agriculture sector experienced near
total collapse due to the drought, with crop failures and reduced rural employment
opportunities, widespread shortages of water and pasture and increa sed livestock
mortality. Drought and food insecurity have driven up food prices, and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) reports that inflation is expected to rise to 2.9 per

17-22852

3/20

S/2017/1109

cent in 2017 from 2.3 per cent in 2016. Crop prices significantly increased during the
drought period, affecting household purchasing power.
15. The Federal Government has put a policy framework and facilitative measures
in place to improve the performance of the economic and financial sectors. However,
the overall effectiveness of such measures in raising revenues remains limited,
constrained largely due to overdependence on a small revenue base and the absence
of a political agreement with the federal member states on revenue sharing. Domestic
revenue has increased in nominal terms, growing 15 per cent over the year, until
September, compared to the same period in 2016. Grants grew 23 per cent. Domestic
revenue was $112.7 million in 2016 (about 2.7 per cent of GDP) and is expected to
reach $137.6 million in 2017. Weak revenue mobilization has hindered the ability of
the Government to deliver services to citizens. Unrealistic revenue projections,
coupled with weak expenditure controls, have contributed to an accumulation of
arrears.
16. The Government continues to lead a programme of wide-ranging economic
governance reforms, including: the introduction of automation in revenue collection
and expenditure management; sector regulation; expanded statistical capacities; and
a currency reform agenda. On 12 December, IMF welcomed the commitment of the
Somali authorities to implement policies and reforms to restore key economic and
financial institutions, describing the performance of the Somali authorities under the
IMF staff monitored programme through September 2017 as “broadly satisfactory”.
It also passed the $274 million budget for 2018 on 13 December.
17. Important legislation was passed this year, strengthening the credibility of the
Government’s reform agenda and the fiscal and fiduciary position of Somalia. The
promulgation of the Communications Act, which provides for the first formal
regulation of the information and communications technology (ICT) sector, provides
a legal basis for licensing current operators and, potentially, introducing new
competition. The Act is also critical for the Government’s finances, as revenue from
the ICT sector is equivalent to around 11 per cent of GDP, although very little has
been has been contributed in terms of taxation.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state

1.

Deepening federalism
18. There was limited political progress on the federalization process during the
first half of the reporting period, as political consultations between the Federal
Government and the federal member states on federalism issues initially stalled. This
was linked with tensions around the Gulf Crisis and the lack of an accepted forum to
discuss and take decisions on relevant issues, including the division of powers, the
management and control of natural resources and strategic infrastructure such as
ports, the distribution of revenues and the status of the Benadir region (Mogadishu).
However, on completion of a consultative meeting, held from 29 October to
5 November, the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states leaders
agreed to task a technical committee to develop options that should provide the basis
for a political settlement on these key issues. Decisions taken on 3 December by the
National Security Council also deepened federalism, most notably the political

4/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

agreement on police distribution and the agreement on a justice and corrections
model.
2.

Constitutional review
19. Progress on the constitutional review process was mixed. Despite initial
setbacks, following meetings convened by President Farmajo, the Ministry of
Constitutional Affairs, the Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission and the Joint Parliamentary Constitutional Review Oversight
Committee, with the support of the United Nations integrated constitutional support
team, developed a consolidated road map and a memorandum of understanding,
setting out the agreed division of roles and responsibilities. On 14 November, the
Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the Constitutional Revie w Committee and the
Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission signed the
memorandum of understanding and endorsed the consolidated road map for the next
phase of the constitutional review process. This is expected to pave the way for the
holding of the delayed national constitutional convention.

3.

Prevention and resolution of violent conflicts
20. On the political crisis in the Galmudug Interim Administration, following the
meeting between representatives of the Federal Governme nt and representatives of
the federal member states in Mogadishu from 29 October to 5 November, President
Farmajo invited Vice-President Hashi to Mogadishu in order to mediate discussions
between him and President “Xaaf”. The President also met with Galmudug members
of the Federal Parliament to encourage unity. My Special Representative also met
Vice-President Hashi to encourage him to find a solution to the political crisis. On
17 November, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) convened
consultations between the Galmudug Interim Administration and the paramilitary
group Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a in Nairobi to prepare for future talks, followed by a
workshop in Djibouti from 27 to 30 November, which included initial discussions on
reconciliation issues. On 3 December, President “Xaaf” and leader of Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama’a, Sheikh Shakir, announced that they had reached a preliminary agreement on
power sharing, which was signed on 6 December in the presence of the leadership of
the Federal Government and the presidents of the federal member states. The parties
have agreed to enter into a second phase of discussions in Dhusamareb to work out
details of the agreement. The United Nations is working with the Federal
Government, IGAD and international partners to ensure a coordinated approach.
21. The situation in Gaalkacyo remained stable but fragile. From 5 to 8 September,
the Puntland and Galmudug authorities, with support from the United Nations, held a
peace conference in Gaalkacyo to examine ways to fully implement previous
agreements and to promote peaceful coexistence. An inclusive 36 -member peace
committee was formed on 8 September to replace the joint ceasefire committee.
UNSOM and AMISOM support to the establishment and training of the Gaalkac yo
joint police force, an initiative under the ceasefire agreement, continued, with the
training of an additional 100 police from Puntland and Galmudug. The 200 trained
police officers continue to conduct joint police patrols with positive responses from
the local community.
22. Relations between the President of the Interim South-West Administration,
Sharif Hassan, and his opposition remained strained. Three members of the opposition
South-West Salvation Council were arrested in September but were later released on
the orders of the Chief Justice, leading to accusations against the Chief Justice of

17-22852

5/20

S/2017/1109

collusion with the opposition. The gradual improvement in relations between the
Federal Government and the federal member states, following their consultative
meeting from 29 October to 5 November muted calls for the impeachment of
President Sharif Hassan.
23. On 19 October, “Somaliland” and the self-proclaimed “Khatumo State” signed
a five-point agreement in Caynabo, in the Sool region, to pave the way for uni ty
between the two and to undermine Puntland’s claims to the disputed regions of Sool,
Sanaag and Togdheer. Tensions between “Somaliland” and Puntland in the disputed
regions flared up prior to the presidential elections in “Somaliland” on 13 November.
Puntland President Abdiweli Mohamed Ali “Gaas” was instructed by the Puntland
Parliament to prevent “Somaliland” from holding elections in the disputed regions,
using military force if necessary. On the eve of the presidential election, Puntland
forces were reinforced in Tukarak and near Buhoodle in Togdheer region, prompting
“Somaliland” to deploy heavy military contingents in both areas. Tensions
deescalated when Puntland drew the forces back following engagement with the
“Somaliland” and Puntland leadership by my Special Representative and
representatives of the international community.
24. During the reporting period, UNSOM initiated mediation-skills training for its
staff, and capacity-building in conflict resolution for female members of Parliament
and civil society actors. It also provided expert advice to the Federal Government on
the drafting of a national reconciliation framework, and continued to support several
federal member states with local reconciliation initiatives. In its efforts to further
strengthen reconciliation and conflict resolution by the Federal Government and other
stakeholders, UNSOM created a unique portfolio of reference materials on these
themes, which will form the basis for a national colloquium on peace and
reconciliation planned for February 2018, linking practitioners with senior
representatives from the Federal Government and representatives of the federal
member states with national and international experts on Somalia, for the purpose of
creating a shared “knowledge network”.
4.

Support for universal elections
25. In December, the National Independent Electoral Commission registered seven
political parties, an essential step in preparation for universal elections in 2020–2021.
In line with the 2016 political party law, parties register temporarily, with official
registration to take place after the registration of eligible voters.
26. In September and October, the National Independent Electoral Commission
conducted a voter registration feasibility study, supported by the United Nations.
Voter registration methodologies were assessed in the context of Somalia, which lacks
national registration data. The study sought input from the Federal Government and
the federal member states. Interlocutors raised a number of issues, including:
accessibility and security; internally displaced persons and the nomadic population;
the need for an electoral legal framework and an amended citizenship law to define
eligible voters; and the need for agreement on outstanding constitutional is sues. The
study will assist in deciding on a voter registration methodology in 2018, for
implementation in 2019.
27. In September, a federal-level electoral task force was established comprising
representatives from the National Independent Electoral Commission, the Ministry of
Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, the Offices of the President and Prime
Minister, parliamentary representatives and other relevant ministries. The aim of the
task force is to enhance coordination within the Federal Gove rnment on electoral law

6/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

drafting issues, including consideration of electoral systems. The United Nations
provided technical advice on inclusive systems of representation, including those
suited to post-conflict environments.
28. The National Independent Electoral Commission, UNDP, UNSOM and donors
are finalizing the programme for the next stage of United Nations electoral support
for Somalia, focusing on essential steps to be taken in 2018. UNSOM also produced
a booklet on the various communications products and services it generated to support
the 2016–2017 electoral process as a guide for Somalia’s universal elections in 2021.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and women’s empowerment
29. Despite notable progress made in women’s representation in the Federal
Parliament, promoting women’s leadership and decision-making roles remained a
challenge. Women were notably not represented in parliamentary committees,
including the Joint Parliamentary Constitutional Review Oversight Committee
reviewing the provisional constitution.
30. To promote a greater role for women, my Special Representative held
consultations on 25 October with a group of 11 women Members of Parliament and
civil society leaders, during which they identified local reconciliation, constitutional
review and the 2020–2021 elections as priorities. The group is to be convened on a
regular basis.
31. On 13 November, my Special Representative convened the annual “Open Day
on Women and Peace and Security”, attended by over 50 women leaders representing
civil society and Federal and state government institutions. The event highlighted the
important role of women in peace and reconciliation efforts in Somalia and stressed
the need to enhance women’s leadership and their decision-making role, as well as to
enhance protections for women, particularly those in communities of internally
displaced persons.

2.

Youth empowerment
32. In November, the Federal Government adopted the national youth policy,
developed with support from the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). The
Federal Ministry of Youth and Sports, in coordination with the United Nations, has
convened three retreats with the ministries of youth from the federal member states
to increase coordination within the sector. The United Nations is supporting the
efforts of the ministries to develop a joint two -year work plan for the implementation
of the youth policy. From 17 to 19 December, the Ministry of Youth and Sports and
the United Nations hosted the second National Youth Conference, attended by my
Envoy on Youth, gathering 300 young people to discuss the role of youth in the
implementation of the national youth policy and the national development plan and
to identify young people’s priorities. The United Nations continues to expand the
youth portfolio, scaling up youth employment programming and developing new
programmes on the political participation of young people; youth-led prevention and
countering of violent extremism; and support for young entrepreneurs and inte rnally
displaced persons.

3.

17-22852

Development coordination

7/20

S/2017/1109

33. In August, the Federal Government endorsed a new aid architecture that builds
on the structures of the New Deal Compact under the Somalia Development and
Reconstruction Facility, with adjustments made to align with the national
development plan. A new mutual accountability framework for the New Partnership
for Somalia for Peace, Stability and Prosperity was adopted at the Somalia
Partnership Forum on 5 December, providing a robust framework for joint
cooperation and accountability between Somalia and its international partners and
following on the heels of the Somalia New Deal Compact.
34. Under the leadership of the Federal Government, and with the proactive
engagement of the federal member states, the United Nations, the World Bank and
the European Union joined efforts in preparing the drought impact needs assessment
to inform and define the recovery and resilience framework. While remaining
committed to meeting crucial humanitarian needs, the initiative supports the
Government of Somalia in understanding drivers of vulnerability and identifies
sustainable development solutions that can help communities adapt and build
resilience to drought and break the vicious cycle of recurrent disasters.

IV. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

International coordination
35. The executive group of the comprehensive approach to security chaired by the
Prime Minister, held its first meeting on 11 November to take stock of the work of
the different strands of the comprehensive approach. Each strand is led by the relevant
federal ministry, with the support of international partners, including AMISOM, the
European Union, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America. This framework has aligned the efforts of international partners with the
priorities of the Federal Government, as agreed in the security pact endorsed at the
London Conference on 11 May. During the meeting of the Executive Group held on
11 November, those present agreed to support the development of a Somali-led
transition plan to enable Somali security institutions to assume primary security
responsibility from AMISOM in a coordinated and strategic manner.

B.

Comprehensive approach to security strands
Strand 1
Enabling AMISOM operations and enhancing AMISOM effectiveness
36. In the communiqué adopted by the Somalia Security Conference held in
Mogadishu on 4 December, AMISOM and international partners agreed that the
Mission would continue to work to a conditions-based transition, while implementing
priority tasks set out in Security Council resolution 2372 (2017). Efforts continue to
be made towards the operationalization of the Mission, with enablin g units working
in the remaining four AMISOM sectors, in addition to the two existing missionenabling units operating in sectors 1 and 5. Making the mission -enabling units more
effective remains a challenge. The main supply routes co ntinue to be targets of
Al-Shabaab, whose use of improvised explosive devices has evolved, with mobility
further compounded by the impact of weather. The collapse of the Leego forward
operating base on the Mogadishu-Baidoa main supply route also negatively affected
the delivery of support by road, forcing UNSOS to airlift rations to locations in
sector 3, with attendant high budgetary costs.

8/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

37. To mitigate the threat of explosive hazards, in support to AMISOM troops, mine
action teams assessed 28 villages and towns, and 758 kilometres of road networks,
destroying 178 items of explosive remnants of war. The United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) also supported AMISOM through the organization of its third
seminar on countering improvised explosive devices for Somali security forces, held
in Mogadishu from 25 to 27 September, with the participation of international
partners. In response to the attack of 14 October, UNMAS deployed technical
advisers, medics and explosive-detecting dog teams to search for secondary explosive
devices at the blast site, including the provision of combat engineers, with heavy
equipment for removing debris to AMISOM.
38. Thus far, Ethiopia, Uganda and Nigeria have signed the tripartite memorandum
of understanding for the reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment and selfsustainment, while Burundi, Djibouti and Kenya are in the process of concluding their
negotiations. The tripartite memorandum will facilitate the reimbursement to troop and police-contributing countries for self-sustainment and equipment lost in hostile
action. On 30 and 31 October, UNSOS organized a workshop in Mogadishu to
familiarize troop- and police-contributing countries with the standard operating
procedures for joint boards of inquiry under the tripartite memoran dum. This will
help troop- and police-contributing countries submitting claims to the United Nations
for the reimbursement of lost or damaged contingent-owned equipment.
39. During the reporting period, UNSOS facilitated the withdrawal of all
335 Burundian and 31 Djiboutian AMISOM troops that were deployed in Cadaado in
October 2016 to secure the 2016–2017 electoral process in Galmudug.
40. On 9 October, the Head of UNSOS convened a donor conference in Mogadishu
to launch an appeal for contributions to the AMISOM and Somali national army trust
funds, which stood at $388,591 and $2.7 million, respectively. The Somali national
army trust fund was augmented by a contribution of $9 million from the United States
in November.
Strand 2
Strengthening Somali security institutions
41. Strand 2.A: Ministry of Defence and Somali national army: the operational
readiness assessment of the Somali national army began on 10 September, led by the
Federal Government and supported by international partners. Assessment teams
reviewed more than 80 per cent of all army units at battalion -level and above, with
the aim of assessing military capacity to inform the process of transition from
AMISOM to the Somali national army. The assessment identified key constraints to
fighting Al-Shabaab, specifically, a lack of: military personnel; logistical support; and
weapons, ammunition and mobility. The Federal Government and UNSOM jointly
developed a “right sizing” concept, which, in combination with the operational
readiness assessment, is intended to guide force realignment in line with the national
security architecture. The Federal Government of Somalia has developed detailed
recommendations as a result of the finding of the assessment, including: (a) rewriting
the Somali national army code of conduct; (b) initiating a biometric accountability
process linked to soldiers’ payment; (c) the need to retire a substantial number of
soldiers in order to “right size” the force; (d) the need to mentor the army down to the
unit level; and (e) the immediate setting-up of a planning group to address the
identified operational shortfalls.
42. On 30 November, 2,400 Puntland forces were integrated into the Somali
national army, an important step toward the implementation of political agreements

17-22852

9/20

S/2017/1109

around security. With this integration comes the expectation that the Federal
Government is now responsible for all pay and sustainment, clearly demonstrating
the link between revenue generation, revenue sharing and security. The Federal
Government and the federal member states made a political commitment to
resectorization, redrawing Somali national army boundaries to match political
boundaries.
43. UNSOS continued to support 10,900 Somali national army troops in joint
operations with AMISOM in all locations. Due to limited resources, of the eight items
mandated for support, five are currently being provided on a regular basis: basic
rations; fuel; water; transportation; and medical evacuation by air.
44. Strand 2.B: Development of the Ministry of Internal Security, the National
Intelligence and Security Agency, federal and state police, special police units and the
coast guard: to advance the implementation of the new policing model, as set out in
the national security architecture, the authorities of the Federal Government and the
federal member states established a conference of ministers of internal security and a
council of police commissioners. On 3 December, the National Security Council
decided on the allocation of the proposed 32,000 police officers, with 4,571 officers
allocated to each federal member state and 9,145 officers allocated to the Federal
police and the Benadir region. The Council also endorsed state police plans, setting
out a strategy for each federal member state for the development of its police service
up until 2027. Under strand 2.B: the Federal internal security strategy was endorsed
by the National Security Council; the management structure of the Ministry of
Internal Security has been reformed; and an operational readiness assessment of the
police has been conducted.
45. The report on the maritime security operational readiness assessment prepared
by the European Union Capacity-building Mission in Somalia and UNSOM detailed
capacities, legislation, equipment, personnel and the state of training in the Federal
Government, the federal member states and “Somaliland”. With support from the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) and UNSOM, the Ministry of Ports and
Marine Transport drafted a revised maritime code. Parliament arians and senior
government officials convened a workshop, from 28 to 31 August, to discuss
instituting a sustainable legal framework for a national maritime administration. The
Federal Government, in collaboration with the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs
and UNSOM, held a briefing on ocean affairs and the law of the sea issues in
Mogadishu on 12 and 13 September for Members of Parliament, the second time such
a briefing had been offered as part of United Nations support for the implementation
of the 1982 Convention on Law of the Sea.
46. UNMAS continued to assist the Somalia Explosive Management Authority to
develop its mine action strategy and advised the Federal Government on the
“Badbaado (Protection) Plan”, which outlines actions and financial requirements for
the management and reduction of the impact of explosive hazards. In Mogadishu,
police explosive ordnance disposal teams trained by UNMAS conducted post -blast
investigations for 69 scenes at which improvised explosive devices had been
deployed. UNMAS continued to train state police on explosive ordnance disposal and
mentored federal police in handling explosive detection dogs. UNMAS and UNSOM
continued to deliver specialized weapons management training and advice on
developing a national commission for the control of weapons and ammunition. To
date, over 10,500 weapons have been marked and registered.
47. Strand 2.C: Rule of law and justice: following a delay due to ongoing political
discussions between the Federal Government and the federal member states, on

10/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

3 December the National Security Council reached a political agreement on the
justice and corrections model, enabling a future systematic building of justice
institutions at the state and federal levels.
Strand 3
Stabilization and community recovery and the extension of State authority
48. The Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, with support from
UNSOM, finalized the revision of the national stabilization strategy, one of the goals
outlined in the security pact. The strategy emphasizes civilian leadership and
underscores the linkages between community recovery and reconciliation, local
governance and the rule of law interventions. It provides the framework for state level plans to support the coordination and prioritization of interventions to be
developed by the Galmudug, HirShabelle, Jubaland and South-West authorities and
the Benadir regional administration. During the reporting period, the Jubaland and
South-West State ministries of interior initiated work on their respective stabilization
plans, with technical and financial support from the federal Ministry of Interior,
Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, the United Kingdom early recovery initiative and
UNSOM.
49. The United Nations and donors continued to provide support for the efforts of
the Federal Government to address the underlying drivers of fragility across
Galmudug, HirShabelle, Jubaland and South-West states. The European Union, the
Somalia Stability Fund and the United Nations Joint Programme on Local
Governance and Decentralized Service Delivery continued to support the formation
of district councils to enhance state accountability. On 15 October, the Interim South West Administration inaugurated the first district council in Xuddur. The counc il
formation process continued in four districts in South-West and five districts in
Jubaland. The authorities in Galmudug and HirShabelle are in the process of drafting
local government laws.
50. The Somalia stability fund continued to support initiative s covering community
infrastructure and the rehabilitation of government facilities in several districts.
UNMAS continued to promote community-level stabilization activities through the
clearance of hazardous material affecting 59 communities. In addition,
160 assessments of non-functional public infrastructure were conducted and shared
with community resilience and recovery partners for the safe conduct of operations.
Strand 4
Preventing and countering violent extremism
51. On 7 October, the Deputy Prime Minister of Somalia and the representative of
Sweden officially launched strand 4 on preventing and countering violent extremism.
A subsequent national roundtable discussed the threat of violent extremism, its root
causes and future steps to address the problem. Following the official launch, the
existing donor platform was merged into the ongoing activities of strand 4 to ensure
the coordination of technical discussions with, and assistance for, Somali Federal and
state governments.
52. In October, the United Nations supported the efforts of the Federal Government
to amend its national strategy on preventing and countering violent extremism. In
November, UNSOM, with the assistance of the European Institute of Peace, supported
authorities in Galmudug, HirShabelle, Jubaland and South-West in developing local
action plans to address drivers for recruitment and radicalization. In November, an

17-22852

11/20

S/2017/1109

agreement was also reached between stakeholders on amendments to the national
strategy and the state-level action plans.
53. The national programme for the treatment and handling of disengaged
combatants in Somalia continued, with UNSOM support. During the reporting period,
UNSOM also supported training on the harmonization of screening processes and
completed the implementation of pilot reinsertion projects, benefiting 1,000
disengaged fighters and community members. In collaboration with the Federal
defectors rehabilitation programme, UNSOM also produced a six -part radio drama to
encourage Al-Shabaab militants to defect.
Transition planning
54. At the Somalia Security Conference, held in Mogadishu on 4 December,
participants agreed that a conditions-based transition plan should be immediately
developed by the Federal Government, together with the federal member states and
with the support of the African Union, the United Nations, the European Union and
other international partners. They agreed that work would begin at once on a realistic,
phased, conditions-based transition plan, with clear target dates, drawing on the
results of the operational readiness assessment, to transfer security responsibility
from AMISOM to the Somali security forces. In line with Security Council resolution
2372 (2017), AMISOM made adjustments to its deployment in Sectors 1 and 2, where
two forward operating bases were merged into one in Sector 1 and two forward
operating bases were collapsed in Sector 2.

V. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
55. During the reporting period, 1,301 civilian casualties were recorded, 64 per cent
of which were attributed to the 14 October attack carried out by Al-Shabaab
(828 casualties). Two casualties are attributed to AMISOM and 79 to state security
forces, while clan militia were responsible for 57 casualties. In total, 58 civilians were
abducted: 45 by Al-Shabaab and 13 by clan militia, including one aid worker. In
airstrikes conducted by unidentified warplanes in Jubaland and South -West,
14 civilians were killed and13 were injured.
56. Several incidents illustrated continued challenges to freedom of expression. A
journalist was sentenced to 18 months in prison for defamation and false news in
“Somaliland”, while two journalists were arrested and released without charges after
reporting on a demonstration in Jubaland. The state of emergency imposed in
Galmudug entailed restrictions on freedom of expression and information. A
journalist died following injuries sustained from an Al -Shabaab attack in
Beledweyne, in the Hiran region, in September. In “Somaliland”, one media outlet
was closed, reportedly for broadcasting false news, and access to social media was
blocked during the presidential elections in November.
57. On 23 September, UNSOM co-hosted a one-day consultative meeting in
Mogadishu with Members of Parliament, heads of Somali media associations and
officials of the Ministry of Information on the 2016 Media Law and amendments to
the law approved by the cabinet of the Federal Government. The consultative meetin g
fed into parliamentary discussion during the first reading of the Med ia Law bill in
late September.

12/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

58. The African Union and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights co-hosted a workshop on 27 and 28 November in Addis Ababa o n
accountability mechanisms in African Union peace operations, with participants from
AMISOM and other regional peace operations. The workshop generated a set of
agreed criteria for effective accountability mechanisms and a work plan intended to
have a direct impact on AMISOM activities in the broader human rights compliance
framework.
59. On 10 December, UNSOM released a public report entitled “Protection of
civilians: building the foundations for peace, security and human rights in Somalia ”.
The report, which covers the period from 1 January 2016 to 14 October 2017, calls
on all parties to the conflict to take measures to protect civilians in the conduct of
military operations and comply with and ensure respect for international human rights
and humanitarian law. A “centrality of protection” strategy, which promotes a joinedup and integrated approach to protection, was endorsed by the humanitarian country
team on 6 December, following consultations among all entities of the United Nations
presence in Somalia.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
60. In October, the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy Task Force adopted a
general and preliminary risk assessment on the Somali Police. It identified the risks
of violations being committed by the police, as well as measures to prevent them.
UNSOM informed AMISOM of eight incidents of possible human rights violations
resulting in 24 civilian casualties between April and August 2017. Delayed responses
by AMISOM to allegations, especially the outcome of prima facie investigations and
boards of inquiry, continue to hamper efforts towards ensuring accountability through
the policy framework. A request for an update on the outcome of the investigation
into an allegation of sexual exploitation and abuse from June 2017 remained pending,
following an AMISOM letter dated 11 July that promised an investigation and the
eventual institution of a board of inquiry, if necessary.

C.

Child protection
61. The Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting verified 1,977 cases of
grave violations affecting 1,654 children (1,372 boys; 282 girls) from August to
December. Al-Shabaab accounted for over 65 per cent of such violations, including
262 children abducted during its August recruitment camp aign. Sustained
engagement by the above mechanism with the national programme for the treatment
and handling of disengaged combatants and the National Intelligence and Security
Agency, including on the standard operating procedures on the reception and
handover of children formerly associated with armed groups, led to the handover of
32 children to the United Nations between September and November for reintegration
purposes.
62. The Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting supported the
sensitization of 1,073 soldiers in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Cadaado, Jowhar and the
Somali national army headquarters in Mogadishu on child protection and screening.
Four children were identified. In addition, the United Nations Children ’s Fund and
UNSOM organized a training of trainers session on child protection standards from
11 to 19 November for 20 officers of the Puntland forces.

17-22852

13/20

S/2017/1109

63. Recruitment of children increased sharply. During the reporting period,
653 cases of child recruitment were reported: 70 per cent attributed to Al-Shabaab;
6 per cent to clan militia; and 11 per cent to the Somali national army. On 6 December,
the Federal Ministry of Defence and the leadership of the Somali national army held
a high-level event at army headquarters as part of a nation-wide outreach to enhance
the awareness and knowledge on child protection, and to strengthen policies to
prevent and end the recruitment and use of children in Somali armed forces.

D.

Prevention of sexual violence
64. The United Nations continued to receive reports of sexual violence from across
the country, mostly affecting displaced women and girls living in settlements for
internally displaced persons. The monitoring and reporting mechanism, through its
analysis reporting arrangements, received six reported cases of conflict-related sexual
violence in September and October. Fifty-nine incidents of rape and other sexual
violence, involving 58 girls and one boy, were reported by the country task force on
monitoring and reporting. In September and Octo ber, the gender-based violence
subcluster provided services to 13,083 girls, 6,806 boys, 23,257 women and 8,231
men on prevention and capacity-building activities in relation to gender-based
violence. Underreporting of cases due to fear of reprisals and li mited access to police
services is a major concern. While the provision of support services for survivors of
sexual violence has improved in Somalia, it remains a protection gap in areas under
Al-Shabaab control, such as the Bakool and Bay regions in South-West State. A
consultative forum to review Somalia’s national action plan on ending sexual violence
in conflict was held on 28 and 29 November in Mogadishu, during which the action
plan was adopted by Puntland, Galmudug and HirShabelle.

VI. Humanitarian situation
65. Large-scale famine in Somalia has been averted so far thanks to a sustained
humanitarian response. Latest analyses show that food security needs are nearly
double the five-year average, with an estimated 2,444,000 people in crisis phase and
866,000 in emergency phase. Priority areas for response include Sanaag and Sool in
the north, and parts of Galmudug, HirShabelle and South-West in the south. Internally
displaced persons settlements in urban areas such as Baidoa, Gar oowe, Hargeysa and
Baidoa are also a priority. Over three million people are being reached per month with
life-saving assistance and livelihood support. The food cluster, supported by UNFPA,
has helped develop tools to guarantee that vulnerable women and girls are included
when food is distributed.
66. Overall humanitarian needs remained high, with an estimated 6.2 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance. The rains brought on during the deyr rainy season
in October were erratically distributed and approximately 50 per cent below ave rage
in most areas, and rainfall in November and December is not expected to significantly
improve crop prospects. Continued emergency humanitarian assistance will be
required alongside a further scale-up of livelihood assistance to prevent populations
at risk from sliding deeper into food insecurity.
67. Malnutrition reached emergency levels in a number of locations, mainly among
displaced populations. Overall, some 388,000 acutely malnourished children are in
need of critical nutrition support, including life-saving treatment for more than
87,000 severely malnourished children. Malnutrition rates continue to rise, with the

14/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

median prevalence of global acute malnutrition rate now at 17.4 per cent, above the
emergency threshold of 15 per cent. Internally displaced persons, including more than
80,000 pregnant women, are currently more prone to malnutrition.
68. With over 23,000 people newly displaced in October, the total displacement due
to drought and conflict in 2017 is now over one million, with nearly two-thirds of that
population under the age of 18. This brings the estimated number of displaced people
in Somalia above two million. Humanitarian indicators in internally displaced persons
settlements have also deteriorated, mainly due to overcrowding. Between August and
November, UNFPA, through partners, provided 38,974 internally displaced women
of reproductive age with essential sexual and reproductive health services, including
safe delivery services, referrals, ante-natal care and prevention of mother-to-child
transmission of HIV/AIDS.
69. Suspected cases of acute watery diarrhoea/cholera continued to decline from a
peak of 5,306 cases in June to 93 in August, with no related deaths reported since
August. Between January and November, 78,426 cases of acute watery diarrhoea/
cholera and 1,159 deaths were reported in 55 districts of 19 regions across Somalia.
Of these cases, 58.8 per cent involved children below five years of age.
70. Donors have provided more than $1.2 billion towards famine prevention since
the beginning of 2017. As of mid-November, the revised 2017 humanitarian response
plan seeking $1.5 billion had received $882 million (59 per cent) in funding, leaving
a gap of $618 million. An additional $308 million has been provided outside the
humanitarian response plan. In addition to developing the 2018 humanitarian needs
overview and the humanitarian response plan, humanitarian partners were closely
engaged in the development of the drought impact needs assessment and the recovery
and resilience framework requested by the Federal Government to ensure that the next
drought does not turn into a famine.
71. The operating environment in Somalia remains challenging. The first 10 months
of 2017 witnessed rising violence against humanitarian workers. O ver 130 violent
incidents impacted humanitarian organizations, with 15 humanitarian workers killed,
30 injured, 3 physically assaulted, the arrest and temporary detention of 17, the
abduction of 30 and the attempted abduction of one. During the reporting period:
7 humanitarian workers lost their lives and 20 others were injured in the 14 October
attack in Mogadishu; 2 personnel working for development organizations were killed;
11 abductions were reported between August and October; and 3 humanitarian
workers were released in October.

VII. United Nations presence in Somalia
72. United Nations entities continue to be present in the following locations in
Somalia: Baidoa, Beledweyne, Boosaaso, Dollow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As of 1 December, there were 486 international and
1,175 national United Nations personnel deployed throughout Somalia.
73. The security risk levels for the AMISOM-protected area at Mogadishu
International Airport are being assessed. UNSOS continues to implement
recommended risk mitigation measures to improve safety and protection for all
United Nations personnel within the airport. Similar projects are ongoing in Baidoa,
Beledweyne and Kismaayo. The United Nations conducted its annual crisis
management simulation exercise on 27 and 28 November. Safe and Secure
Approaches in Field Environments (SSAFE) training for United Nations personnel

17-22852

15/20

S/2017/1109

working in Somalia has been moved from Nairobi to Mogadishu, with the first course
successfully conducted in Mogadishu between 3 and 6 December.

VIII. Observations
74. Between August and early November, Somalia witnessed worrying political and
security setbacks that exposed, in concert with the prevailing humanitarian crisis, the
fragility of the progress made so far and the scale of the challenges ahead in Somalia’s
peacebuilding and state-building process. Despite these challenges, the Federal
Government and federal member states have demonstrated a strong resolve to
overcome their differences through dialogue. I call on all international partners to
redouble their efforts to support the Somali leadership, in a coordinated and sustained
manner, as well as in the larger interest of Somalia and its people. The horrific attacks
in Mogadishu in October exemplified the reversibility of the hard-fought political and
security gains in Somalia. This is not the time for us to relent.
75. The Federal Government’s agenda is a good one and much has been achieved.
However, mutual trust between the Federal Government and federa l member states is
essential to: improve security and resolve conflicts; generate revenues and provide
services; strengthen political and financial accountability; and address poverty and
dependency. Regular consultations between the Federal Government and the federal
member states are critical. The meeting between the parties from 29 October to
5 November was a show of commitment towards closer collaboration, and this
dialogue process must be strengthened. I call upon both the Federal Government and
the federal member states to address remaining issues transparently through legal
means, respecting Somalia’s provisional constitution.
76. Renewed efforts are required to make progress on the constitutional review
process and strengthen federalism. I welcome the signing of the memorandum of
understanding and agreement on the consolidated road map on 14 November.
Progress on the constitutional review, in an inclusive manner, is fundamental for
further state-building in Somalia, including the allocation of powers, revenue and
resource sharing and the State formalization process. It will also lay the foundations
for one-person-one-vote universal elections in 2020–2021. I call upon the Federal
Government to move the constitutional review process forward in earnest, including
by holding the delayed national constitutional convention.
77. Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious security threat in Somalia and the
subregion. I am deeply shocked and saddened by the scale and impact of the attacks
in Mogadishu on 14 and 28 October. I strongly condemn these attacks and stand with
Somalia in its continued fight against terrorism. I am appalled by the civilian
casualties resulting from indiscriminate attacks that continue to target civilians,
including government officials, civil servants, aid workers and journalists. I commend
the unity shown by the Federal Government and the federal member states in
confronting the menace posed by extremists.
78. AMISOM remains critical to security, as Somalia builds the capacity of its
security institutions with the support of partners. A gradual and orderly conditions based transition to Somali security institutions will be an important phase in the
process of state-building in Somalia. Within the comprehensive approach to security,
the building of an affordable, acceptable, accountable and able Somali national army
and police should be coordinated. The process should be led by Somalia and
supported by international partners in a coherent effort.

16/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

79. I call on the Somali Government, with the support of key international security
partners and the United Nations, to develop a clear plan for security in the country,
which will enable the conditions-based transition of lead security responsibility from
AMISOM to Somali security institutions. The operational readiness assessment
represents the most current, honest and credible assessment of the Somali national
army. Its outcomes, and those of a similar assessment of the Somali police, will enable
a better understanding and improved coordination in building and reforming the
Somali security sector pursuant to the security pact agreed upon in May and in
accordance with the agreement on the national security architecture. Immediate
priorities include agreeing on the distribution of military person nel throughout
Somalia and making progress on integrating existing security personnel into
accountable federal and sub-federal security institutions.
80. While I am encouraged by AMISOM commitments made in strengthening
compliance with human rights and international humanitarian law within the human
rights due diligence policy framework, I remain concerned over the slow pace of
implementation of recommendations agreed during the African Union-United Nations
joint review of AMISOM to strengthen measures and mechanisms to prevent and
address violations in the context of military operations. I call on AMISOM, the troopcontributing countries and Member States to support United Nations efforts to
strengthen compliance. I also call upon the Federal Government to ensure that entities
of the Somali national army benefitting from United Nations support have effective
mechanisms in place to mitigate the potential risk of violations. In line with the
conditions-based transition, a stronger emphasis on measures to prevent and respond
to violations must be placed at the centre of the discussions on the gradual transfer of
responsibilities by AMISOM to Somali security institutions.
81. I welcome the successful conclusion of the delayed presidential election in
“Somaliland” on 13 November. Notwithstanding minor disturbances, the peaceful
voting and the acceptance of results serves as another example of the strong
commitment of “Somaliland” to democratic processes. I call upon the new
administration to further the democratization process in “Somaliland” by respecting
constitutional timelines and holding parliamentary elections without delay. It is my
hope that “Somaliland” and the Federal Government of Somalia will now revive their
stalled dialogue, for which they have both previously expressed readiness. The United
Nations remains committed to supporting that process.
82. While the worst has been averted, the threat of famine in Somalia persists. I
remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation, including the deep ening
food insecurity, increasing malnutrition, displacement and ongoing conflict and
insecurity, which continue to hamper the delivery of life-saving assistance. I welcome
the continued generous support of the international community for drought -affected
communities and call on donors to remain engaged. We must strive to sustain the
current level of humanitarian assistance to keep famine at bay. I also welcome the
development of the drought impact needs assessment, under the leadership of the
Federal Government, and with the proactive engagement of the federal member states,
to inform and define the recovery and resilience framework, which aims to build
resilience within society and enable developmental solutions to address the cycle of
drought. The framework will be closely aligned with the 2018 humanitarian response
plan in order to ensure complementarity of approaches.
83. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, IGAD, the European Union, Member
States, non-governmental organizations and other development partners for their
continued support for the peacebuilding and state-building process in Somalia. We

17-22852

17/20

S/2017/1109

must continue to strengthen our partnership in the quest for lasting peace and stability.
I pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali security forces for the sacrif ices they
continue to make in Somalia in the interest of long-term peace and stability in the
country and beyond.
84. I pay tribute to Faiza Mohamed Sheikh Mohamud, the UNDP staff member who
made the ultimate sacrifice in promoting the cause of peace and stability in Somalia
and extend my deepest condolences to her family. I thank my Special Representative,
Michael Keating, my Deputy Special Representatives and the staff members of
UNSOM, UNSOS and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes engaged
in Somalia for their continued hard work under extremely challenging conditions.

18/20

17-22852

S/2017/1109

17-22852

19/20

S/2017/1109

20/20

17-22852
