Resolutions adopted on the report■ of the Fifth Committee

78

(ii) Adequate and confirmed knowledge of a second
language will permit more rapid passage through
the steps within each grade, from P-1 to D-2
inclusive, for the same staff, in this case the interval between steps being ten months instead
of twelve ; a reduction by the same proportion
will be applied for grades where the interval
between each step is at present more than twelve
months;
2. Decides that·confirmation of the knowledge of a
second language shall be the obtaining of the language
proficiency certificate as at present awarded by the
United Nations, that is, by boards consisting of language teachers ; since the end in view is essentially to
provide understanding of the written and the spoken
language, the language training courses will have to be
modified accordingly ;
3. Decides that the second language, knowledge of
which will be confirmed by the award of the language
proficiency certificate, shall be one of the official languages listed in rule 51 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly ;
4. Urges the Secretary-General to take all the necessary steps to enable all the staff members specified
above who so request to take language courses and to
ensure that modern teaching methods are used as
widely as possible ;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, in 1973,
on the action taken under the present resolution, in
order to enable the Assembly to take, if necessary, whatever steps it may deem appropriate, bearing in mind
the present resolution and resolutions 2241 B (XXI)
and 2359 B (XXII), it being understood that the
application of the language bonus established by the
Assembly in resolution 2359 B (XXII) remains in suspense pending the decision to be taken by the Assembly
at its twenty-eighth session.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.
2481 (XXIII). Amendment@
to
the
Regulations of the United Nations

3. Amends regulation 3.2 of the Staff Regulations
of the United Nations accordingly.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.

B
The General Assembly
1. Approves the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its tenth report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-third session ;86
2. Decides to amend paragraphs 1 and 3 of annex I
to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations to read
as follows:
"SALARY AND ALLOWANCES-ADMINISTRATOR OF
THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME,
UNDER-SECRETARIES-GENERAL
AND
ASSISTANT
SECRETARIES-GENERAL

"Annex I, paragraph 1
"The Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, having a status equivalent to
that of the executive head of a major specialized
agency, shall receive a salary of $US 43,000 per year,
an Under-Secretary-General shall receive a salary
of $US 33,5003 7 per year and an Assistant SecretaryGeneral shall receive a salary of $US 30,()()()87 per
year, subject to the Staff Assessment Plan provided
in Staff Regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied. If otherwise eligible, they shall receive
the allowances which are available to staff members
generally."
"Annex I, paragraph 3
"The Secretary-General is authorized, on the basis
of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make
additional payments to Directors and, where offices
are away from Headquarters, to their heads, to compensate for such special costs as may be reasonably
incurred in the interest of the Organization in the
performance of duties assigned to them by the Secretary-General. The maximum total amount of such
payments is to be determined in the annual budget
by the General Assembly."
3. Decides to insert paragraph 3, as amended above,
after paragraph 5 of annex I and to renumber the
paragraphs accordingly;
4. Takes note of the changes made by the Secretary-General in the Staff Rules in the year ending
31 August 1968, as set forth in his report to the Fifth
Committee. 38
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.

Staff

A

The General Assembly
1. Approves the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its seventh report to the General Assembly at the twenty-third session ;35
2. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1969,
the maximum amount of the education grant payable to
eligible members of the staff of the United Nations
shall be $1,000 per scholastic year for each child;

36 Ibid., document A/7328.
37 See also resolution 2485 (XXIII), para. (a)(i).
38 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-thi,-d

85 [bid., document A/7~5.

Session, Annexes, agenda item 81, document A/C.5/1170.

2482 (XXDI). Budget for the financial year 1969
A
BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1969

The G~eral Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1969:
1. Appropriations totalling $US 154,915,250 are hereby voted for the following purposes:
