United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8649th meeting

Tuesday, 29 October 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila/Mrs. Pandor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Boels
Ms. Yan Binghan
Ms. Niamke
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Mayol
Mrs. Saxinger
Ms. Kristanti
Ms. Alzouman
Mr. Solari
Mrs. Zaworska-Furgala
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Clay
Mr. Farid

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Towards the successful implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda: moving from commitments to accomplishments in preparation for the
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000)
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2019/800)
Letter dated 8 October 2019 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/801)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-33950 (E)
*1933950*

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President: As previously announced, given the
financial constraints currently being experienced by the
Organization, this afternoon’s meeting will conclude at
exactly 6 p.m. As there are likely to still be speakers
remaining on the list at that time, I am pleased to inform
the Security Council that, if necessary, this meeting
will be resumed at a date and time to be announced
in the month of November under the presidency of the
United Kingdom, hopefully soon.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Given the high
level of interest in participation in this debate and the
importance of respecting the requests under rule 37 and
rule 39 received by the Council, the United Kingdom is
delighted to be able to offer to schedule the conclusion
of this meeting during our presidency. We will inform
all Council members and all members of the General
Assembly of details in due course.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom; that is appreciated.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. The red light on the
collar of the microphone in front of speakers will
begin to flash after four minutes have elapsed. Please
respect that.
I now give the floor to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala.
Ms. Jovel Polanco (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to congratulate the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa for convening this
important debate and for the concept note prepared for
this meeting (S/2019/801, annex). It was a great honour
for me to have visited Pretoria last week for the opening
of the Guatemalan Embassy in that beautiful country. I
thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their introductory words. I would
also like to thank the African Union Special Envoy for
Women, Peace and Security and the representatives of
civil society.
2/35

29/10/2019

As the second woman to serve as Foreign Minister
in the history of the Republic of Guatemala, it is an
honour to address the members of the Security Council
on this subject. Undoubtedly, being the leader of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala demonstrates
Guatemala’s increasing commitment on this issue.
Over the years, we have seen that the significant
participation of women quantifiably strengthens
protection efforts, accelerates economic recovery
and deepens the consolidation efforts for peace and
sustainability. That is why every year the Council has
been charting a path towards reducing vulnerability
among women and girls under the framework of the key
resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions.
This clearly demonstrates once again that there can be
no lasting peace without including women and girls,
and today’s valuable debate aims to ensure the full
implementation of the agenda for peace and security.
It is regrettable that, in this day and age, women
continue to be denigrated simply for being women,
especially in the media. One could agree or disagree
with certain policies, but it is unacceptable for women
to continue to be vilified based on their physical
appearance, their beliefs, their wardrobe or their
personality. I call upon the United Nations to seriously
and resoundingly emphasize the human rights of
women to put an end to actions of that nature, which
incite violence. We are concerned that we continue to
see inequality, double standards and social injustices
even in the twenty-first century, largely because of the
erroneous interpretation of the freedom of thought.
Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), it is important that every Member of the
Organization evaluate the actions they will continue
to take so as to further the implementation of such
an important resolution. We must review and identify
the ongoing gaps in order to improve and achieve
the commitments we have undertaken, nationally,
regionally and internationally.
After signing the 1996 Guatemalan Peace
Accords, Guatemala acquired a series of commitments
under the global agenda for the human rights of
women — 28 concrete commitments for advancing
the rights of women, who constitute 51.5 per cent of
our country’s population. In that regard, we have
worked towards the implementation of mechanisms,
programmes and plans for the advancement of women,
including our policy agenda for the period 2017 to 2026,
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

which are in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We have in place coordination advisory
entities that guarantee public policies integral to the
promotion of development for Guatemalan women and
the development of a culture of democracy, one that is a
product of women’s demands, based on the commitment
undertaken by the country by virtue of the adoption and
ratification of international instruments.
My delegation wishes to reiterate that the proper
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) requires
the unwavering willingness of all the relevant bodies
in all States. Guatemala has its own national action
plan for the implementation of the resolution — PAN
1325 — which was developed with the participation of
all Government institutions representing the rights of
women. We are now in the second year of implementing
PAN 1325. We can say with satisfaction that we have
contributed to strengthening national legislation,
women’s mechanisms and institutional initiatives that
generated internal change in public administration. An
initial report on progress made during the year 2018
was therefore drafted, which identifies key results from
more than 80 training processes on women’s issues.
Guatemala is currently drafting the report for 2019,
which will be issued in 2020. At the international level,
we have participated in various meetings and forums at
which the Women, Peace and Security National Focal
Points Network has been very successful.
The leadership and participation of women in
conflict prevention and resolution is crucial. All
countries must take steps to boost the representation
of women at all decision-making levels in the various
relevant institutions and mechanisms. We have
seen first-hand that discrimination against women
represents a stumbling block for our development.
Gender equality is a fundamental right and means
providing opportunities for both women and men in
order to ensure their full human potential and true
sustainable development.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
To that end, we need to recognize that as women we
are agents of change. We are aware that the challenge
of sustaining peace requires the creation of strategic
alliances among the United Nations, Governments
and civil society in order to complement efforts to
strengthen the role of women in decision-making
processes. Experience has shown that women working

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

in missions on the ground have been able to transform
their environment.
The State of Guatemala recognizes that all human
beings are free and equal in dignity and in rights. Men and
women have equal opportunities and responsibilities.
In that context, my delegation prioritizes the full
involvement of women in participatory processes at all
levels, taking into account the fact that women play a
vital role in the promotion of justice and reconciliation
and in providing support for disarmament and social
reintegration processes.
On this nineteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), Guatemala stresses that efforts must be
redoubled to continue to achieve concrete results in
the implementation of the commitments of the global
agenda. This will make it possible for States and
the United Nations jointly to work to ensure the full
participation of women in peace processes. I urge the
Council to continue deploying efforts on an inclusive
agenda that will allow us to strengthen our role as
promoters of peace.
We believe that the Organization must go back to its
original purpose: the defence of human beings and their
dignity, as this represents the bedrock of fundamental
rights. In recent years the Organization has given less
importance to those values, focusing on other issues
that not only divide but also polarize our societies. This
has also included attempts to impose initiatives that run
counter to our own legislative frameworks.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Liberia.
Ms. Saydee-Tarr (Liberia): My delegation brings
warm greetings from His Excellency Mr. George
Manneh Weah, President of the Republic of Liberia and
feminist-in-chief, and we congratulate you, Madam, on
your ascendancy to the presidency.
At the outset I should like to express our satisfaction
at the adoption of resolution 2493 (2019), which Liberia
proudly co-sponsored.
The year 2020 holds significance for amplifying
the focus on the progress of the women’s advancement
agenda. The milestone commemorations of the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the tenth anniversary of the mandate
on sexual violence in conflict create opportunities to
undertake extensive inventories of how well we have

19-339503/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

met our commitments to the protection and promotion
of the rights and advancement of women, as well as
provide an opportunity to develop practical and robust
solutions for addressing the gaps and challenges.
On 23 April, Liberia joined other Member States
in pronouncing a number of commitments on its
women and peace and security agenda leading up to
the twentieth anniversary, in 2020. I am proud to
announce today that we have made good on two of the
six commitments in advance of the 2020 target set.
Phase two of our national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) has been completed and endorsed, and the
domestic violence bill was recently passed into law, in
August. We are confident that we will see the others
come to timely fruition.
In furtherance of our adherence to the tenets of
resolution 1325 (2000), His Excellency Mr. George
Weah, President of the Republic of Liberia, in his
advocacy for advancing women in political leadership,
championed a bill for an amendment to article 80 of
the Liberian Constitution in order to provide additional
seats for marginalized groupings, to include women,
persons dealing with disabilities, and young people.
That would allow for 15 more seats for women in
the Senate in addition to the 30 existing seats, as per
political subdivisions, and only female members of
political parties will qualify to contest these seats.
There will be four specialized seats in the House of
Representatives for persons dealing with disabilities,
and young people. Although there are hindrances, as
there are with everything that comes with change,
we remain optimistic that these goals will be realized
under this Administration.
The development of our first national action plan
in 2009, following the remarkable role women played
in the restoration of peace to our war-torn country,
was a logical sequence to keeping up the momentum in
women’s political leadership. While there were many
stumbling blocks to the effective implementation of
the first plan, the Government of Liberia, through the
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection,
in collaboration with our development partners, will
endeavour to ensure that phase two of the plan, which
is fully aligned with our own national development
framework, the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and
Development, will apply the appropriate mechanisms
to ensure a successful implementation process.
4/35

29/10/2019

A significant aspect of the women and peace and
security agenda is the role of women in the security
sector and in peacekeeping; however, very little
attention is given to the contribution of women in this
sector in view of the full peace and security agenda.
Our Government, in its efforts to elevate this platform,
and as a United Nations troop-contributing country, has
embarked on various initiatives to expand the presence
of female officers in the Liberian security sector.
Currently the security apparatus in Liberia, including
the Armed Forces of Liberia, the Liberian National
Police and the Liberian Immigration Service, is
exerting efforts to increase the quota of female recruits
and identifying effective trainings and strategies to
build the needed capacity of female officers to cope
with challenges that hinder their advancement or entry
into the security sector. The Armed Forces of Liberia
in particular are exerting every effort to increase the
number of female officers in peacekeeping missions
by the year 2022, with the aim of fulfilling the United
Nations peace operations gender-parity requirement of
15 per cent. At this stage we are at 8 per cent.
The training provided by the United Nations and
other partners has contributed greatly to building the
capacity of our uniformed female officers. Nonetheless,
for us to achieve the overall objectives of women’s
active role in peace and security, there has to be more
specialized training for women in the security sector
at every level. The establishment of a database on
women in decision-making will be key. Identifying
the gaps between male and female security officers in
decision-making in the security sector will be useful,
and a sustained monitoring and evaluation practice will
be beneficial.
To that end, we are making frantic efforts to deliver
on these initiatives. As it is with many development
initiatives, the promotion of women’s active
participation in the security sector is marred by various
factors: inadequate financial and logistical resources
and capacity-building; lack of necessary equipment
and apparatus and overall support; and inadequate
retention and recruiting due to low financial benefits
and incentives. Success in meeting these objectives
hinges on overcoming these shortcomings.
In the throes of these multiple challenges, let
me reassert that the Government of Liberia remains
extensively committed to the implementation of the
international commitments to resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, and welcomes the
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

adoption of resolution 2493 (2019) under this agenda
during South Africa’s presidency.
On behalf of His Excellency President George
Weah, the Government and the people of Liberia
convey their appreciation to the United Nations and our
development partners for their consistent and continued
support for our development efforts and in ensuring the
full participation and inclusion of women and girls in
the peace and security agenda.
Liberia looks forward to strengthening support for
women and peace and security through its alignment
as a member of the Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network, the Women, Peace and
Security National Focal Points Network and the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security here at
the United Nations. As a recipient of recognition for
being the first post-conflict country to have adopted
a national action plan, we would like to urge Member
States that have not yet given it consideration to kindly
join the global initiative.
We would like to further emphasize that in
addressing issues of peace and security, it is important
to deal with and hear directly from actors in the area of
peace and security, including women in uniform and in
peacebuilding work, from the granular level upward.
Additionally, it is critical to ensure a move into
purposeful, intentional action and implementation of
our national action plan.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that until
women are a significant part of peace initiatives,
whether peacemaking or peacebuilding, the processes
thereof will be neither complete nor durable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Lee Taeho (Republic of Korea): I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to you, Madam
President, for convening today’s open debate. I also
appreciate the Secretary-General’s strong message in
his recent report (S/2019/800) on the critical importance
of the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. I also welcome today’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2493 (2019), which I hope will
strengthen the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
A number of meaningful strides have been made
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Among

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

others, the link between sexual violence and peace
and security issues has been clearly established. The
normative framework has also been strengthened by
the nine follow-up resolutions, including resolution
1888 (2009), which created the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. However, despite strenuous
international efforts and the subsequent major
achievements made over the past 19 years to address
the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence and
promote women’s participation in peace processes, the
global implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has
not fully lived up to our aspirations.
To date, 83 countries have adopted national action
plans for the implementation of the resolution, which
represents only 42 per cent of all States Members of the
United Nations. That number clearly demonstrates that
the commitment reached in the Security Council has
not automatically translated into reality on the ground.
Now is indeed the time to renew our determination to
ensure that the commitment we have made really makes
a difference in people’s lives. I would like to underline
the three important elements that should be highlighted
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). They
are participation, protection and prevention.
First, the increased participation of women in the
full continuum of peace processes is essential. Women’s
participation should be full, equal and meaningful.
Women must be adequately represented at all stages
of peace processes. In line with the Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy of the Department of Peace Operations,
the Korean Government will continue to exert efforts to
ensure women’s increased participation and to achieve
greater gender equality in each peacekeeping operation.
Korea has already pledged to increase the current level
of women’s share of peacekeeping officers and observer
positions from 17 per cent to 25 per cent by 2028.
Secondly, our protection efforts must be actively
materialized in a way that victims and survivors in
conflict zones feel they are being effectively protected
on the ground. In that regard, the victim- and survivorcentred approach should be at the core of protection.
As spelled out in resolution 2467 (2019), the survivorcentred approach is crucial, not only for sustainable
conflict solutions but also for the prevention of secondary
trauma or revictimization. That was the approach taken
by Korea in providing tailored assistance to survivors
in a few Asian and African countries, through the
United Nations Population Fund and UNICEF, under

19-339505/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

the Action with Women and Peace initiative it launched
last year. Korea pledges to provide $8 million by next
year to further support those projects.
Thirdly, prevention should be the first priority
for sustaining peace and security. As we talk about
prevention in the context of the women and peace
and security agenda, I would like to emphasize the
importance of taking a longer-term approach to, and
promoting a deep understanding of, the root causes
of conflict and of making a more concerted effort to
build the capacity of affected countries. In that regard,
raising and promoting public awareness of the women
and peace and security agenda is critical. The Korean
Government promotes public awareness of the national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), online and offline. Korea is also developing
education programmes for primary and secondary
schools in an effort to ensure that interdisciplinary
learning with regard to the women and peace and
security agenda is conducted throughout the educational
system. I believe that the international community must
make further efforts to provide countries in need with
the necessary support for developing their own national
action plans, while paying due consideration to the
need for improved public awareness of the agenda in
their local context.
Lastly, I would like to add one more point, if I may,
to the three elements I mentioned, that is, persistence.
In putting women and peace and security at the heart
of the global agenda, we must remain persistent. We
should continue to show strong political will and full
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Last July, Korea hosted an international conference
on Action with Women and Peace, the first-ever such
conference in Asia. As part of its persistent effort to help
strengthen the international community’s collective
endeavours towards the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, my Government intends
to continuously host that conference on an annual basis.
For Korea, the successful implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has a very special meaning.
Korea seeks to support and help recover the honour and
dignity of the so-called comfort women victims during
the Second World War. It is therefore important to turn
their painful experiences into lessons of history and
ensure that the same tragedy is not repeated elsewhere
in the world, through the full implementation of
the resolution.
6/35

29/10/2019

As we stand at the doorstep of the meaningful
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Republic of Korea hopes that the women and peace
and security agenda is firmly put in place as a global
challenge to be met by all Member States, and that all
commitments made over the past 20 years are translated
into tangible action by 2020. I would like to assure you,
Madam President, that my country is ready to work
together with the international community to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s meeting.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
As we prepare to mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, next year, and in view
of the slow progress in its implementation, accelerating
our efforts to ensure women’s increased participation in
peace negotiations and in the decision-making process
is urgent. Georgia continues to attach significant
importance to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Our third national action
plan for this agenda, covering the period 2018 to
2020, is harmonized with our national action plan on
the protection of human rights, based on a whole-ofGovernment approach to integrating gender perspectives
in the security sector, while using a gender lens in
peace negotiations, protecting the rights of women and
girls and promoting their meaningful participation in
conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
The Inter-Agency Commission on Gender Equality,
Violence against Women and Domestic Violence
coordinates discussions among Government agencies,
as well as civil society organizations, to ensure the
effective implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda at the national and subnational
levels. For the first time, the notion of sexual
harassment, as well as sanctions for the perpetrators,
has been introduced by the Ministry of Defence in the
disciplinary code of the defence system. Moreover, the
Ministry adopted a set of detailed procedures regarding
complaints on bullying, sexual discrimination, sexual
harassment and abuse.
Georgia attaches particular importance to the role of
women, the use of their potential in peace processes and
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

the continuous facilitation of their increased involvement
in the confidence-building and reconciliation process.
We support the engagement of conflict-affected
women’s non-governmental organizations in the
public diplomacy and dialogue process. There are
State programmes and services for victims and regular
consultations are conducted with women living along
the occupation line and their families on human
security, domestic violence, violence against women
and sexual violence. Moreover, with the support
of UN-Women in Georgia, the Government holds
regular meetings to share information on the Geneva
international discussions and incident prevention and
response mechanisms among civil society, including
women’s rights activists, internally displaced persons
and conflict-affected women. I would also like to
recall that in April the Government submitted a list of
specific commitments on women, peace and security to
be implemented before October 2020.
Despite our efforts to empower conflict-affected
women, Russia’s occupation of the two Georgian regions
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali prevents my Government
from sharing the human rights protection framework
with women remaining on the other side of the illegally
erected fences. Alarmingly, the most recent so-called
borderization process and closure of the occupation
line in the Tskhinvali region fully isolates the occupied
area and creates the risk of a humanitarian crisis,
particularly in Akhalgori district. Yesterday, there was
yet another fatal accident when 70-year-old Margo
Martiashvili, a resident of Akhalgori district requiring
urgent medical assistance, died as a result of the denial
by the occupying regime to temporarily open the socalled crossing point in order to access the nearest
hospital. She passed away in Tskhinvali.
Meanwhile, women living in Georgia’s occupied
regions, as well as in areas adjacent to the occupation
line, continue to suffer from systemic grave violations
of their fundamental rights and freedoms, including,
but not limited to, freedom of movement and
illegal detentions by officers of the Russian Federal
Security Service.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Georgia’s
commitment to advancing the implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda at the national level
and to contributing towards its implementation globally.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank South
Africa for convening this meeting, focusing on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda towards the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) next year. Japan welcomes the adoption of
the new resolution 2493 (2019), which we co-sponsored.
Under the leadership of Prime Minister Abe, Japan
attaches great importance to promoting the women
and peace and security agenda as one of the three core
pillars of its efforts to create a society where women
shine. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a historic resolution,
which recognizes women not as passive and vulnerable
victims but rather as proactive participants who
contribute to conflict prevention and resolution and
peace processes.
Today, I would like to reiterate Japan’s commitment
to strengthening the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, building on the outcome
of our efforts based on the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions.
Japan strongly supports the international fund for
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, which
will be launched at the event to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the mandate on
sexual violence in conflict tomorrow. Japan wishes to be
a proactive contributor and a board member of the fund.
We are currently making the necessary arrangements to
make an appropriate financial contribution to the fund.
Sexual violence in conflict is a great obstacle to
sustaining peace. The United Nations Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
provides crucial assistance to relevant Governments,
particularly in the areas of criminal investigation
and prosecution, legislative reform and the capacitybuilding of judicial and security authorities. As a
leading donor, Japan will continue to support the efforts
of the Team of Experts.
Gender equality and the economic and political
empowerment of women are necessary to promote
meaningful participation by women in peace and
security. From that standpoint, Japan has supported
women affected by conflict in the Middle East and
Africa regions through gender-based violence related
services and vocational training in collaboration with
UN-Women, the United Nations Population Fund and
other United Nations agencies.

19-339507/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

From next January, Japan will support the UNWomen project in Sri Lanka under the women and
peace and security partnership initiative of the
Group of Seven. The project will include support to
empowering women and their participation in national
reconciliation processes.
On the issue of comfort women mentioned by
the representative of the Republic of Korea, Japan
has been dealing with that issue for a long period of
time, including through the December 2015 agreement
between Japan and the Republic of Korea.
In conclusion, the women and peace and security
agenda is one of the most important issues discussed in
the Security Council. I believe that strong commitments
from Member States and concrete actions will push
forward the women and peace and security agenda
during the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) next year and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Schneeberger (Switzerland) (spoke in
French): The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 19
years ago signalled that we cannot achieve sustainable
peace without women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation at all levels of decision-making. Collective
efforts have advanced the women and peace and security
agenda since then. However, we have heard not only
today that the many requirements set out in resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent eight resolutions have
yet to be fulfilled. Switzerland is strongly committed
to fully implementing that normative framework,
particularly with regard to the following three priorities.
First, as one of the first countries with a national
action plan, Switzerland adopted the fourth version last
year. The action plan is a key instrument to monitor
progress. We are committed to sharing our lessons
learned with other countries. We therefore support
Chad in developing its first national action plan. In
that regard, Switzerland welcomes the launching by the
African Union of its first report on the implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda in Africa
this month.
Secondly, as stated in our national action plan,
women have a key role to play in conflict prevention.
Earlier this month, three female civil society
representatives briefed the Council during its debate
on peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.8633) and
8/35

29/10/2019

underlined the positive role that women can play in that
regard. Also, Swiss non-governmental organizations
have produced a study showing how the women and
peace and security agenda can promote prevention,
including of violent extremism. The Security Council
must build on those efforts and ensure that its relevant
resolutions, including mission mandates, contain
provisions requiring women’s meaningful participation
in peace and security and the establishment of conflictprevention activities and mechanisms.
Thirdly, the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda requires that the entire
international community and United Nations system,
across its three pillars, contribute to that effort. We
commend and support the Peacebuilding Commission’s
important convening and advisory role in such work and
other issues. Switzerland has for example been active in
raising awareness of the role that the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women can play
in such implementation. Civil society and human rights
defenders, in particular women, also have a crucial
role to play in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. We call on all States to respect
their international obligations and commitments to
that end. We must all step up our efforts and deliver
on our commitments. Switzerland looks forward to
contributing to that goal by chairing, together with
South Africa, the Women, Peace and Security Focal
Points Network in 2021.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Allow me to start by
commending the South African presidency of the
Security Council for convening this debate. I also wish
to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and the
other briefers for their remarks and valuable input in
today’s discussion.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the observer of the European
Union (EU).
The empowerment of women and their inclusive
engagement, as well as gender equality on the whole,
are not a whim of our century but rather the building
blocks for a more peaceful, secure and sustainable
world. Gender equality comes with a positive spillover
effect that benefits our children, families and entire
communities and steers us closer to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. The Security Council’s
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

resolutions on women and peace and security are
important for the integration of a gender perspective
within a broader security context, thereby representing
an important step towards conflict prevention and
resolution and sustainable peace. Hence, we need to put
the utmost effort into reducing the disparity between
women affected by conflict and the role assigned
to women in conflict prevention and resolution. It is
often overlooked that women’s participation in conflict
prevention and resolution has a meaningful effect on
the outcome of the process. In the meantime, special
attention must be paid to the needs of women and girls
in post-conflict situations, including physical security
and access to sufficient health care. The same applies
to eradicating all forms of sexual violence and abuse in
conflict. That must remain high on our agenda.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Latvia reiterates its strong
support for the women and peace and security agenda,
recognizing that the close link between global security
and the equal participation of women should not be
underestimated. We applaud the Secretary-General for
his strong commitment to putting women’s meaningful
participation high on the United Nations agenda. We
have put gender equality high on our own agenda, and
we are in the process of finalizing a national action
plan on women and peace and security. As a State
member of the European Union, we contribute to the
implementation of the agenda through the EU’s internal
and external policies. Many of the guidelines have
already been integrated into our national system. Other
examples of improved gender equality include recent
parliamentary elections, during which the highest
number of women ever were elected to the Parliament
of Latvia — 31 per cent, which is also slightly above
the EU average. Moreover, 16 per cent of the soldiers
in Latvia’s national armed forces and 30 per cent of our
State police force are women. We are proud that Latvia
has the highest percentage of women researchers in
Europe, at 52 per cent.
On a greater scale, Latvia is pleased to recall that
a robust plan of action on gender and gender-based
violence was adopted under its recent presidency of
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). That can be considered
to be the first intergovernmental agreement that aims
to improve the meaningful participation of women in
disarmament forums, as well as outlining the practical
steps that States parties will take to implement the
provisions of the ATT with regard to carrying out risk

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

assessments based on gender-based violence criteria. We
call on all States parties to the ATT to strongly adhere to
that plan of action. At the same time, we recognize that
gender equality is not just about the number of women
in positions of power. It is crucial that gender equality
and the participation of women go beyond the numbers
and ensure that the voices of women and girls are heard
and integrated into decision-making processes. That is
what we must strive for so that our tomorrow may be
better than our today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
thank South Africa for convening this debate and for
shepherding the tenth resolution on women and peace
and security (resolution 2493 (2019)) safely across the
line. Ireland co-sponsored the resolution. Of course, we
all hoped for more. It may not be perfect — little of the
women and peace and security reality is optimal. We
support you, Madam President, so that we can build a
better future together.
Ireland aligns itself with the statements to be made
on behalf of the European Union and on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security,
respectively.
As an active member of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), we sincerely hope to see the Chair
of the PBC brief the Council on this topic in the future.
Many speakers have today referred to the upcoming
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). In
my view, that should be a moment for a clear-eyed
assessment of what has been achieved rather than a
cause for celebration. Ireland welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s sobering report (S/2019/800) outlining
the increasing attacks against women human rights
defenders and peacebuilders and the unacceptable
continued exclusion of women from peace and political
processes. I know that I am not alone in the Chamber in
feeling a growing sense of frustration at the slow pace
of change. Frankly, I also feel shame at the growing
number of threats to the progress already made. The
fact is that those who wage wars — who are not, in
the main, women — continue to set the parameters for
peace without women. Quite apart from the inequality
that that serves to reinforce, let us be clear, it is also
a fundamentally ineffective way to build peace. We
have seen the evidence that peace is more durable when
women have participated in its negotiation. Which part

19-339509/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

of that reality do we not yet understand? Put simply,
women and peace and security ought to be part of all of
our peacebuilding work, which, in this Chamber entails
every mandate renewal, every geographic and thematic
discussion, every local consultation and every piece
of analysis completed in the field. We simply cannot
afford for this issue to be confined to one open debate
in October of every year. That formula clearly has not
worked so far.
Ireland sees the sustaining peace agenda and
the women and peace and security agenda not as
separate but as one and the same process. Through the
peacebuilding architecture review next year, we will
work to ensure the full recognition of that synergy.
Gender equality is at the heart of my country’s foreign
and development cooperation policy. We launched
our third national action plan on women and peace
and security earlier this year. We match our overseas
engagement with domestic action, which is focused on
migrant women affected by conflict living in Ireland
and those affected by conflict in Northern Ireland.
Ireland believes in women’s meaningful
participation in peacebuilding because we have lived
it. It is more than 20 years since the Northern Ireland
Women’s Coalition participated in the Good Friday
Agreement. Yet still today that Agreement is one of
the few global examples in which women have directly
participated in a peace process. The elements introduced
by women to the Good Friday Agreement have been
critical to sustaining peace over the two decades that
followed because they went to the root causes of the
conflict and helped to imagine a positive vision of a
Northern Ireland of the future.
With over 60 years of continuing and unbroken
peacekeeping experience, Ireland knows well how
critical it is to integrate a gender perspective in
order to empower women in peacekeeping. Ireland
is a gender champion within the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and we support the
Secretary-General’s targets. We are particularly proud
that today the highest-ranking female United Nations
peacekeeper is an Irish woman — Brigadier General
Maureen O’Brien, Acting Force Commander of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the
Golan Heights. We take the same approach in our work
on disarmament and humanitarian action, in which we
view the equal participation of women as fundamental.
10/35

29/10/2019

The Secretary-General today rightly raised the
issue of funding. As the Council is aware, today’s
debate is one of the most oversubscribed every year. We
are all eager to talk, but what if we were as eager to
invest in women? It is essential that States Members of
the United Nations continue to increase their support
for gender equality and women’s organizations. Earlier
this year, Ireland completed its two years as Chair of the
Commission on the Status of Women, so we know only
too well the challenges, complexity and urgency of this
debate. As an aspiring member of the Security Council,
Ireland is committed to standing up, raising our voice
and finding the resources to move beyond rhetoric and
towards reality. There is a short three-word sentence in
the Secretary-General’s report that really should guide
us for the next 12 months, which is that implementation
remains critical — or as Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka
of UN-Women likes to say, “do, do, do”.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): It is great to see you,
Honourable Minister, here in the Security Council. I
would first of all like to thank the presidency of South
Africa for convening this very important open debate.
I also thank the briefers for the insightful remarks they
delivered this morning.
Hungary aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU), the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and
the African Women Leaders Network.
Hungary is committed to implementing the women
and peace and security agenda. I wish to inform the
Council that we are currently in the process of drafting
our own national action plan on women and peace and
security, which we aim to adopt before the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
In order to implement the women and peace and security
agenda at the national level, the Hungarian defence
forces have incorporated training and education about
resolution 1325 (2000), gender awareness, sexual
exploitation and abuse, and conflict-related sexual
violence into national predeployment training courses
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

and international courses such as the international
military observer course. In addition, we regularly carry
out intensive training courses related to the women
and peace and security agenda for non-commissioned
officers and other officers. Mainstreaming the gender
perspective in peace operations and military processes
increases operational efficiency. Moreover, increasing
the participation of women in peacekeeping missions
as well as implementing gender-sensitive strategies
for protecting civilians and providing humanitarian
assistance are of key importance to provide the best
assistance possible for women and girls who are
affected by conflict.
With regard to increasing our efforts to promote
the deployment of female personnel, we are working
on projects that support, for instance, creating better
work-life balances and making available atypical types
of employment to women, which indirectly contribute
to recruiting a higher percentage of female soldiers
for deployment. Our female personnel can participate
in United Nations, NATO and EU missions under the
same conditions as male soldiers.
We are of course appalled by the ongoing systematic
and widespread conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence, which can constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity and even genocide. Accountability
must be accordingly provided. Survivors of sexual
violence require not only immediate medical care but
also comprehensive psychosocial support and human
rights-based and gender-responsive services.
We call for the international community to better
address the needs of those women and girls belonging
to religious and ethnic minorities who have been
persecuted and displaced by conflict or terrorism.
In order to successfully implement the women and
peace and security agenda, actions need to be taken
in advance during peacetime, on the one hand by
addressing the root causes of conflict and preventing
militarization and arms proliferation and, on the other
hand, by protecting and promoting the human rights of
all women and girls.
Only inclusive peace can be sustainable. We
hope to see heightened attention accorded to the
needs of women and their meaningful participation
in the planning and carrying out of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration activities. We play
a vital role in preventing violent conflict. As we look
forward to the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

resolution 1325 (2000), we reaffirm our commitment
and call for reinforced cooperation to fully implement
the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand welcomes the
timely focus of this open debate, which reflects on the
achievements and challenges in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions
in preparation for next year’s commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of its adoption. The 2015 global
study by UN-Women on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) pointed out that there remains a crippling
gap between the ambition of our commitments to the
resolutions and actual political and financial support.
Our firm belief is that we can and must narrow that
gap by implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the women and peace and security
agenda in a holistic manner.
In order to take meaningful action on women and
peace and security, we must recognize the interrelated,
inseparable and mutually reinforcing nature of all
the elements of gender equality in the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). We need to address, among
other things, the discriminatory laws, attitudinal and
institutional obstacles and gender stereotyping that
continue to hinder the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the 2030 Agenda. Thailand recognizes
that SDG 5, on gender equality, and SDG 16, on peace,
justice and strong institutions, are closely linked
and that their implementation is required in order to
advance the women and peace and security agenda. A
society can achieve sustainable peace only when it has
an integrated an inclusive approach that incorporates
development and human rights for all, including
women. The empowerment of women and girls and
gender equality are elements that are key to conflict
prevention and the promotion of international peace
and security.
At the national level, Thailand has adopted and is
now in the stage of implementing its national measures
and guidelines on women and peace and security for
2016 to 2021. Those measures also serve as an action
plan that has both an internal and external outlook and
aspires to enhance the role of women in addressing
conflict and political and social unrest in the world.
On the international front, Thailand has been
an ardent supporter of women’s participation in

19-3395011/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

peacekeeping missions. Seven of the 27 Thai
peacekeepers serving in the three peacekeeping
missions to which we contribute are women,
accounting for 20 per cent of the total number of Thai
peacekeepers. Thai women peacekeepers are also at
the forefront of community engagement efforts to
promote sustainable development during their service
in peacekeeping missions.
As we prepare to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action next year, and in
our efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda, Thailand
is committed to continuing to do its part at home and
abroad to genuinely advance gender equality and the
empowerment of women in all contexts, including in
maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you so
very much, Madam President, for personally presiding
over this open debate.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the representative of
Canada, on behalf of 55 Member States, and on behalf
of the European Union.
We are on the eve of the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Calling for the
full and effective implementation of all elements of this
very important women and peace and security agenda
could not be more important. This year’s report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800) is very clear on that point. We simply
cannot lower our guard. We need to stand together to
ensure that the women and peace and security agenda
is not weakened by compromising on agreed language,
especially on sexual and reproductive health and rights.
In this statement, I will highlight three aspects
of this agenda: first, women human rights defenders;
secondly, the survivor-centred approach; and thirdly,
our commitment to implementation.
On my first point, women’s organizations and
women human rights defenders play key roles in
promoting peace and security at multiple levels. We
are deeply concerned that, on the whole, violence
against them is rising. For instance, in Colombia in
the first half of 2019, 447 threats, 20 homicides and
12/35

29/10/2019

13 homicide attempts against women leaders, human
rights defenders and peacebuilders were recorded.
We need to ensure across the world that women rights
defenders are protected and can do their crucial work
without interference and without fearing for their lives.
My second point is the importance of a survivorcentred approach. When it comes to protection against
conflict-related sexual violence, it is essential to adopt
a survivor-centred approach, to listen to survivors and
to respect their dignity, their rights and their wishes.
Survivors should be the drivers of their own personal
recovery process. They should be provided support in
the form of information and comprehensive services,
including those related to sexual and reproductive
health and rights. In addition, they should have access
to mental health and psychosocial support. International
humanitarian and human rights law should, of course,
be respected
My third point concerns our commitment to
implementation. We need to go beyond words. The gap
between our commitments and their implementation
remains wide — too wide. That is something we all
have to take responsibility for. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is committed to the full implementation
of all elements of the women and peace and security
agenda. We will make use of next year’s momentum to
develop our fourth national action plan, with enhanced
accountability and a stronger national pillar. Moreover,
starting in 2021, we will double our funding for women,
peace and security. Furthermore, we will continue our
efforts to enhance the meaningful participation of
women in peace processes and to increase the number of
uniformed women in peacekeeping missions, including
in leadership roles.
In conclusion, let me quote Leymah Gbowee, the
Liberian women’s rights advocate and celebrated Nobel
Peace Prize laureate, who said that we have the power
to stop war and to “turn our upside-down world rightside up”. We agree. All of us have that power. All the
necessary elements are present in the comprehensive
agenda that is the women and peace and security
agenda. Now we, collectively, need to do our utmost to
achieve its full implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate South Africa on its successful presidency
of the Security Council for this month and to welcome,
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

with appreciation, this morning’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 2493 (2019) on women and peace and
security, of which my country is a proud sponsor. I
would also like to extend my thanks to the briefers. Their
insights inspire us all and their views are invaluable.
My country, Jordan, would like to align itself with
the statement to be delivered later this afternoon by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the 56 Member
States representing all five regional groups of the
United Nations.
Jordan has always been committed to maintaining
peace and security, not only in the Middle East but
also in areas of conflict worldwide, where it provides
peacekeeping troops and expertise. Jordan’s adoption
in 2017 of an ambitious national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with a budget
allocation from the Jordanian Government and generous
pool-funding from our donor partners, is an example
of our commitment to enabling women’s participation
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, the prevention of
violent extremism and gender-based violence.
We are at a pivotal moment in history. Xenophobes
and racists have emerged from the shadows, women’s
rights are suffering pushback, the space of civil activism
is shrinking and the legitimacy of the principles of
human rights is being attacked.
We all know that men and women are impacted
differently by conflict. A more inclusive approach to
the way peacemaking is carried out is need. While men
have long been considered the only relevant actors in
armed conflict and its resolution, women have been
gravely affected and involved in conflict as relatives,
caretakers, politicians, human rights defenders and
combatants. Efforts should be directed at increasing the
engagement of women, not only in soft and preventive
diplomacy, but also at the core of peace processes, as
we all know that women’s participation adds a broader
range of perspectives at multiple levels, enabling
inclusivity and diversity, which have proven to lead to
more sustainable peace.
In that regard, Jordan welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800), particularly its recommendation on
adopting the necessary measures to address the
social, cultural and political barriers to women’s full
participation in the security and law enforcement
sectors, such as increasing the number of female
uniformed personnel in peace operations.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

My country has made big strides towards integrating
gender perspectives across all peacekeeping functions
and is committed to further developing best practices
on gender mainstreaming in military and police
operations, including in predeployment training, as
well as supporting the roles and tasks of gender advisers
deployed in peacekeeping missions. Jordan believes that
increasing women’s participation in peacekeeping is a
critical factor for the overall success of peace missions.
We are therefore intensifying efforts in order to reach
15 per cent female participation by 2020 in order to
meet Jordan’s commitment to the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Allow me to commend the United Nations
peacekeeping missions on the impressive evolution
of their human-resources capacities and priorities
related to prevention and response to victims of war
and violence, including sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and to making the safety of all,
particularly that of women and girls, a priority of their
active involvement in peace processes.
United Nations reports indicate that, unfortunately,
only 13 per cent of countries allocate funding to statistics
and data, and almost 80 per cent of the gender-equality
indicators across the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) are lacking data. Disaggregated data sheds light
on areas where progress is made, reveals gaps where
further efforts are needed and identifies the resources
necessary to shape national policies and plans.
To fulfil our commitments to the SDGs, particularly
Goal 5, and to realize better implementation and
localization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Jordanian Department of Statistics,
relevant governmental bodies and civil society
organizations, in collaboration with UN-Women, are
relentlessly working through a three-pillar programme
in order to reach a supportive policy and institutional
environment to improve the monitoring of national
and international commitments to the SDGs, while
regularly generating quality and comparable gender
statistics and ensuring that gender statistics are widely
accessible and used to inform policymakers.
Finally, as we approach 2020, the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it
is imperative that we advance the women and peace and
security agenda by including and empowering women
politically, socially and economically and ensuring safe
universal education for all women and girls. We need

19-3395013/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to break the mould, we need to change perceptions now
and for the next generations, and we need to fight the
pushback and the current that are setting us back.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Madam President,
and to commend the South African presidency for
organizing this open debate on a key issue for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf
of a large group of countries concerned with the issue
of women and peace and security and wishes to share
some considerations in our national capacity.
My country welcomes the Secretary-General’s
useful and detailed report (S/2019/800) and the
data provided in the independent assessment of the
implementation of the gender recommendations
contained in the three 2015 peace and security reviews.
The information shows that, while tangible progress
has been made on the women and peace and security
agenda, there is still a long way to go before it is
effectively and fully implemented. Resolution 2493
(2019), which the Council adopted this morning and
which Uruguay co-sponsored, is an important step
forward on that long road.
I shall now cite the measures Uruguay is taking
at the national and multilateral levels to promote the
implementation of the agenda.
Regarding domestic measures, I am pleased to
inform the Council that my Government is ready to
finalize its national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and other relevant
resolutions. There is concrete evidence that national
plans remain one of the main tools for accelerating
the implementation of the agenda. Our national action
plan includes legislation that our country has adopted
on human trafficking, sexual violence and other
human rights violations. The plan focuses on both the
prevention and combating of such serious crimes and
on the care, protection and reparation of victims. It also
incorporates existing peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts as a basis for achieving new goals. We believe
that the results obtained through the national action
plan must be concrete and measurable, which is why
it includes both quantitative and qualitative indicators.
14/35

29/10/2019

As a troop-contributing country, Uruguay has in
recent years taken clear steps at the domestic level to
achieve greater inclusion of women in the national
armed forces, and particularly in peacekeeping
operations. Thanks to those efforts, the participation
of Uruguayan women is higher than the average
participation of women peacekeepers deployed under
the United Nations flag. Uruguay plays a very active role
in the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, of which the women and peace and security
agenda is a central component. Likewise, our country
is part of the contact group for the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Operations and is involved in projects
to identify barriers to deployment and provide capacitybuilding with the aim of increasing the participation
of women.
Among other actions taken at the multilateral level,
Uruguay will co-chair the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network next year, which coincides with
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). The Network has the potential to generate
the necessary political momentum to accelerate
progress on issues related to women, peace and security.
We see it as an instrument to promote cooperation on
those issues and the exchange of experiences and good
practices among all the States that have joined it. In
preparation for our tenure as Chair, a regional workshop
will be held in Montevideo in December to address
issues related to the women and peace and security
agenda in the Americas. Furthermore, Uruguay is
supporting an initiative proposed by Spain and Finland
that is aimed at ensuring the effective participation of
women in peace processes by 2025.
My country also pays particular attention to
interconnections with the commitments made under
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. The protection of
human rights is inextricably linked to international
peace and security. Violations of women’s rights are
not spontaneous but are an extension of other violence
that is covertly exercised within societies and is rooted
in inequality and widespread discrimination against
women in disregard of their fundamental rights. In
that connection, Uruguay will be submitting its tenth
periodic report to the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women and is renewing
its commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which prioritizes gender equality. The
2030 Agenda — in particular Goal 5, on gender equality,
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

and Goal 16, on peaceful and inclusive societies — has
the potential to create the social, economic and political
conditions to advance the women and peace and
security agenda.
To conclude, 2020 will be a historic milestone
for the women and peace and security agenda, with
the celebration not only of the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), but also of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, the fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda and the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations. Next year
will therefore have historical significance and impose
on us the responsibility to step up efforts towards the
effective implementation of commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): At the outset,
allow me to thank the presidency of South Africa for
organizing this open debate and the speakers for their
briefings and testimonials.
Slovenia welcomes the latest annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/800), which shows that we
have moved from the “what” and the “why” towards
“how” to integrate a gender perspective in peace and
security. We commend the Secretary-General for
his personal commitment to gender equality and the
empowerment of women.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
In solidarity with those who will speak after me,
I will try to use only two minutes of the Council’s
precious time and to limit my intervention to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in Slovenia.
Slovenia’s national implementation efforts are
reflected in the second national action plan, adopted in
2018. Slovenia is the only country in the world where
the positions of Chief of the Armed Forces and Chief
of Police are both held by women. At the Slovenian
Foreign Ministry, 57 per cent of diplomats are women
and 55 per cent of those deployed to foreign missions
are women. Women account for 40 per cent of Slovenian
ambassadors and heads of mission abroad; we still need
another 10 per cent to reach parity.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

Slovenia has integrated the gender perspective into
a number of national strategies, such as those on national
security, migration, counter-terrorism and violent
extremism. It has established an education and training
centre for those heading on peacekeeping operations
and missions that provides training on women, peace
and security. Its new development cooperation and
humanitarian aid strategy confirms gender equality as
one of the two key, cross-cutting issues in Slovenian
development cooperation.
Finally, we can achieve tangible results only
by working together. In the words of the SecretaryGeneral,
“we must act immediately to halt any loss of
momentum or inconsistency in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda,
deepen commitment where progress is building,
and maintain the course where results have been
achieved” (S/2019/800, para. 11).
Slovenia stands ready to do its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to thank
the presidency of the Republic of South Africa for
prioritizing the women and peace and security agenda
and welcome the adoption of resolution 2493 (2019)
earlier today. We also thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report (S/2019/800) and commend his
leadership in promoting gender-responsive policies
and equal opportunities for women and girls across the
United Nations system.
The upcoming twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) will be an important opportunity to
strengthen the collective response and take resolute
action to address all forms of violence against women
and girls and ensure the full protection of their human
rights in times of conflict and crisis. That landmark
resolution has created a comprehensive normative
framework to scale up the efforts of the international
community in mainstreaming the role of women in
prevention, post-conflict reconstruction, rehabilitation
and peacebuilding and in addressing the special
protection needs of women and girls in conflict
situations. Armenia firmly believes that women have
a key role to play in all conflict stages, particularly
in confidence-building and promoting peace and
reconciliation. The inclusive engagement of all women

19-3395015/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

affected by conflict in peace and security efforts is
vital to promoting lasting and durable settlements and
sustaining peace.
We emphasize the need to protect the rights of
women and girls residing in conflict areas, as the
most affected part of the population, and to advance
their meaningful participation and representation in
prevention and peacebuilding processes. I would like
to recall in that regard the Women for Peace campaign,
initiated by the spouse of the Prime Minister of Armenia,
which is an important example of an inclusive platform
for women and mothers to raise their voice for peace,
non-violence and reconciliation across dividing lines.
Armenia attaches great importance to advancing
the women and peace and security agenda in the
framework of its national policies aimed at ensuring
the political and public participation of women, their
empowerment and the promotion of gender equality. In
February, in close cooperation with civil society and
international partners, the Government adopted the
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, thereby
consolidating national policies and strategies with the
aim of making them more coherent and coordinated.
The national action plan focuses on prevention,
protection, participation, relief and recovery with clear
objectives, timelines and performance indicators. It
identifies a concrete set of measures to increase the
engagement of women in the security sector, including
in peacekeeping missions, and to promote the political
participation and economic empowerment of women
in the context of conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding. It places particular emphasis on
the protection of the rights of vulnerable population
groups, such as women residing in border communities
and women affected by conflicts.
In the light of the upcoming twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the five-year milestone
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
next year will be a critical moment in scaling up the
realization of gender equality and the empowerment of
all women and girls.
The Commission on the Status of Women, the
main United Nations policymaking body in the area
of the empowerment of women, is also a particularly
important platform for advancing the women and peace
and security agenda. As Permanent Representative of
16/35

29/10/2019

Armenia and Chair of the sixty-fourth session of the
Commission, I look forward to contributing to gendermainstreaming in security sector governance and
reform and the substantial involvement of women in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia’s
firm commitment to further enhancing the
empowerment of women in its reform agenda and
ensuring their inclusion and active participation in
political and public life as important prerequisites for
promoting peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): This open debate is
being held on the eve of significant landmarks and
anniversaries. Next year we will celebrate the seventyfifth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations. We will mark 25 years since the adoption of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
This is therefore an opportune time to reflect on our
achievements, as well as on lost opportunities, and to
consider a course correction where needed.
While we have made considerable progress on the
normative front, the world remains a very dangerous
place, especially for women and girls who find
themselves caught in the vortex of pain and suffering
caused by seemingly unending wars, protracted disputes
and foreign occupation. Despite our best intentions and
efforts, they continue to suffer disproportionately with
lasting consequences. According to the recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800), more than
50 parties in various conflicts around the world are
suspected of having committed or instigated patterns
of rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations
that are on the agenda of the Security Council.
Women not only remain the primary victims of
hostilities and sexual violence in conflict situations;
they also face multiple practical and institutional
barriers that prevent them from participating fully and
substantively in peace processes.
Resolution 1325 (2000) marked a watershed in
placing women’s issues at the centre of the global
conflict-prevention debate within the larger context
of international peace and security. While the agenda
has sought the feminization of peace in a post-conflict
environment, a greater effort will be needed to
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

safeguard and protect countless women whose suffering
we continue to discount or ignore owing to exigencies
of realpolitik or geopolitical interests.
We need to reaffirm that this agenda applies to
all women in conflict situations, especially in cases
of foreign occupation, such as in occupied Jammu
and Kashmir. For almost three months, the world has
witnessed in horror as India’s cruel clampdown on
all civil liberties in occupied Kashmir and its illegal
annexation of the disputed territory, in gross violation
of international law and several Security Council
resolutions, have exacerbated and compounded the
suffering of people, especially women and girls.
The anguish of Kashmiri women is further
compounded when their family members, including
children, are kidnapped in midnight raids, illegally
detained and then tortured by occupying forces and
when unremitting restrictions on movement and
communication condemns women in occupied Kashmir
to seeing their children suffer and die as a result of the
lack of medical help. The continuing lockdown has
not only made access to health care, food supplies
and even communication with loved ones next to
impossible; it has also made women more vulnerable
to abuse as they are left at the mercy of occupying
forces enforcing an inhumane curfew. Rape, after all,
has long been used there and confirmed in the reports
of international human rights organizations as a brutal
tactic to humiliate an entire community and people.
This travesty of justice must end. The Security Council
must live up to its responsibilities and address this dire
and unacceptable situation.
Peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel,
as we all know very well, remain the most visible
representatives and symbol of the United Nations
working directly with communities every day. They
have a critical role to play in mainstreaming gender
perspectives in peace and security. Among the world’s
top troop-contributors to United Nations peacekeeping,
my country, Pakistan, for its part is not only training
its Blue Helmets along those lines, but it has also
increased the number of its female peacekeepers and
met the United Nations target of 15 per cent women
in our troop contributions to the United Nations — a
target that we met with great pride.
Finally, as this is my last statement as the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan in the Security Council, I
would like to conclude by saying that giving women

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

a key role not only brings fresh perspectives but can
also be a game-changer in contributing significantly to
building a foundation for lasting and sustainable peace.
I am the first woman from my country in 70 years to
represent the Islamic Republic of Pakistan at the United
Nations. It has been a great honour and privilege,
especially to speak in this Chamber. I am confident
it will not be another 70 years before Pakistan sends
another woman to represent our great country.
The President: I am sure that Pakistan has heard that
a woman must be the next Permanent Representative.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I thank the South
African presidency of the Security Council for
convening today’s important and timely open debate
on women and peace and security. I express my warm
appreciation to all the briefers as well as civil society
representatives for their determined efforts aimed at
championing the women and peace and security agenda.
We also welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2493 (2019) today, which we fully endorse.
Despite commendable strides, we witness the lack
of opportunities for women to assume leadership roles
in times of conflict and peace alike. As the SecretaryGeneral underscored in his recent report (S/2019/800),
ensuring the meaningful participation of women in
all phases of United Nations-backed peace processes
remains a challenge. While, on the one hand, this is
due to violent conflicts becoming more complex and
fractured with the proliferation of non-State actors,
there is, on the other hand, an existing gap between
intentions and the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda in many key areas.
Supporting the six proposals in the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report, we make the following five
additional recommendations.
First, greater focus should be given by troop- and
police-contributing countries to providing special
gender-sensitive training and to including more women
in their national deployments to field missions. This
approach must be accompanied by the appointment
of gender specialists in every peacekeeping operation
unit, including human rights, rule of law, security
sector reform and humanitarian units.

19-3395017/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Secondly, Member States should fully implement
the Secretary-General’s policy of zero tolerance for
infractions by United Nations personnel.
Thirdly, efforts should be redoubled to support
women in grass-roots organizations working for a
culture of peace, community-based reconciliation and
an end to all forms of impunity. Women must be given
leadership training to raise political awareness and
conduct peace education, as well as to engage in social
reconstruction and integration activities.
Fourthly, women should be involved in the
management and security of camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons, especially women and
girls, and assist in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.
Fifthly, women should be increasingly engaged in
the women and peace and security agenda for conflict
prevention and resolution and in transformative change
across the three pillars of the United Nations. Likewise,
Member States should decisively mobilize the Council’s
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security;
the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund; the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network; and
the Peacebuilding Commission’s gender strategy.
Kazakhstan strongly believes that the education
of women and girls, especially in rural areas, should
be provided as a key to true progress on women’s
empowerment to bring about social transformation.
Last year, together with the European Union
and the United Nations Development Programme,
Kazakhstan launched an education programme to train
Afghan women in Kazakh universities. This month, the
first group of 30 women began an eight-month Englishlanguage course leading to admission to Bachelor’s,
Master’s and technical programmes in four very eminent
Almaty-based institutions. It is our principled position
that Afghanistan should not be viewed as a source of
challenges but as one of opportunities based on its
economic integration into Central Asia and through
connectivity and investments in regional infrastructure,
trade and transit-transportation projects. As part of the
country’s rich human capital, women must be active
in these processes, and we are privileged to be able to
help. We encourage and appeal to donor countries to
allocate more scholarships for women and girls from
conflict-affected countries.
18/35

29/10/2019

Kazakhstan is working to achieve the highest
world standards in gender policy and strengthen the
role of women in its sociopolitical and economic life
by formulating new strong pro-women policies in its
2050 Strategy. The aim is to achieve gender parity in
decision-making at all levels.
In response to the Secretary-General’s call to
achieve greater gender balance in peacekeeping
operations, Kazakhstan has since 2018 begun deploying
women peacekeepers to the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara and United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. We plan to increase this
number further.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing
support to ensure that women can be powerful catalysts
and agents of transformation on all fronts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I would like to commend
South Africa for having convened this important
debate. We truly appreciate your presence here today,
Madam President. I also wish to thank the briefers for
their insightful contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to made by
the representative of the European Union and with the
statement to be made by the representative of Canada
on behalf of 56 Member States.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we must redouble
our efforts to fully implement the women and peace and
security agenda, in order to fill the remaining important
gaps that were clearly highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report (S/2019/800). Italy strongly
supports the Secretary-General’s call to action to the
United Nations system, the Security Council and all
Member States as well as the proposals he made.
We are implementing our third national action plan
on women, peace and security, which was elaborated with
the active engagement of civil society organizations,
academia, non-governmental organizations, the private
sector and trades unions, and received public funding
from the Italian Parliament. The plan envisages a
monitoring and evaluation mechanism and periodic
reports on the state of its implementation. A similar
approach is inspiring the drafting of our fourth national
action plan.
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

In keeping with our commitment to empower
women as vital agents for peace, fostering women’s
participation in mediation was one of the major
priorities of our recent term on the Security Council
and our presidency of the Group of Seven. In October
2017, we launched the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network. We are very proud of the results
it has achieved so far: new members have joined; the
first two local antennae, in Cyprus and Turkey, were
established; training, capacity-building and networking
opportunities were provided; and fruitful synergies
with the United Nations, the African Union, other
regional networks and various Member States were
developed. The latest achievement is the creation
of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator
Networks, which was successfully launched in New
York on 26 September.
The next step is the organization in Rome of two
events. On 3 and 4 December, in collaboration with
UN-Women, we are hosting, at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, an international seminar on strengthening
women’s participation in peace processes, to consider
the roles and responsibilities of Member States.
Indeed, alongside the United Nations, Member
States have a responsibility to advance the full and
effective participation of women in mediation and
peace processes, and we would like to encourage
further commitments to that end. The next day, in the
framework of the Mediterranean Dialogues, we will
hold the third session of the Women’s Forum.
The protection and promotion of women’s
rights and the fight against all forms of violence and
discrimination against women remain key priorities of
Italy’s international action. Promoting gender equality
and women’s empowerment also means fighting all
forms of violence against women, and vice versa.
Indeed, we attach the greatest importance to the fight
against all forms of gender-based violence, in particular
harmful practices such as female genital mutilation and
child, early and forced marriages. We support several
humanitarian initiatives aimed at preventing genderbased violence and protecting victims of abuse, as well
as providing victims with education, livelihoods and
other tools that allow them to become agents of change
and build resilient communities. We also support with
determination the important role of women human
rights defenders in promoting and advocating the
realization of all human rights.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

Italy is stepping up its efforts to increase the
number of female peacekeepers. Over the past few
years, our Ministry of Defence has incorporated gender
perspective into its policies and training curricula,
appointed a Gender Advisor and established a Joint
Council on Gender Perspectives. In order to increase
the female presence within the armed forces and the
Carabinieri, the Ministry of Defence has commissioned
sociological research to identify the appeal of armed
forces to young Italian females. This report should
identify possible ways to increase the number of recruits.
Italy is devoting an increasing number of resources
to implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. The funds allocated to our national action
plan help civil society and academia to realize many
interesting projects. Beyond the annual core contribution
to UN-Women, this year the Italian Development
Cooperation Agency provided financial support to the
UN-Women flagship Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund established in 2014. This multi-donor global
facility is designed to support women’s and men’s equal
leadership and participation in shaping peace, security
and humanitarian action. The Italian Development
Cooperation Agency also provided ad hoc in-kind
contribution through our Junior Professional Officers
programme, under which we deployed a women, peace
and security analyst to UN-Women in Kinshasa.
Italy has been a staunch supporter of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) since the first stages of its
negotiation. The ATT is the first arms-regulation
treaty to recognize the link between conventional arms
transfers and gender-based violence, particularly with
regard to the disproportionate impact of small arms and
light weapons on women and girls. We strongly support
the provision contained in article 7.4 as a concrete way
to address the potential risk of serious acts of genderbased violence that could be generated by arms transfer.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that Italy will
continue to play its part in matching commitments with
actions, thereby making full implementation of the
entire women and peace and security agenda a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Konieczny (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General for his very comprehensive
annual report (S/2019/800). I also wish to express our
gratitude to South Africa for having convened this
debate as part of its presidency of the Security Council.

19-3395019/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

29/10/2019

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
that will be made by the representative of the
European Union.

Declaration and Platform for Action on the occasion of
its twenty-fifth anniversary — Beijing+25 — should
also be taken into account.

The briefers who have enriched our debate today
have described the reality well. It is clear that we must
redouble our efforts in order to bridge the remaining
gaps in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions. The aim is not only to overcome
a series of obstacles to the effective participation of
women in peace and security processes, but also to
stem the deterioration of human rights worldwide. It
is unacceptable that, in 2019, the rights of women and
girls are still not sufficiently guaranteed, particularly
when it comes to accessing justice, socioeconomic
opportunities, adequate health care and protection of
sexual and reproductive health and rights.

The President: I now give the floor to the Principal
Adviser on Gender and the Implementation of United
Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000)
on Women and Peace and Security of the European
External Action Service.

To date, 81 States Members of the United Nations
have adopted national action plans on women and peace
and security to implement resolution 1325 (2000). Let
us build on the positive momentum engendered by
the twentieth anniversary of the resolution in 2020 to
remove obstacles and aim for more ambitious results.
We urge all countries that have not yet done so to
establish national action plans to implement resolution
1325 (2000) by next year. Only by joining forces can
we achieve the objectives of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Luxembourg is among those States that have
recently adopted a national action plan. Our plan
follows a comprehensive, government-wide approach.
It sets out measures not only in the areas of diplomacy,
defence, national security and justice, but also in the
areas of health, education and development cooperation,
with the aim of ensuring the full empowerment and
emancipation of women and girls in the long term.
That comprehensive perspective is necessary in
order to address the many cross-cutting obstacles faced
by women and girls. In this regard, we welcome the
fact that the report of the Secretary-General refers to
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights defenders, the Arms Trade Treaty
and the gender strategy adopted by the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2016.
We are convinced of the need to consider and
implement the women and peace and security agenda
in a broader context. All the rights of women and girls
must be strengthened. From that perspective, the results
of the review of the implementation of the Beijing
20/35

Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
We would like to thank the presidency of South
Africa for choosing this topic for this year’s debate
and for so successfully initiating an early start to the
stocktaking of implementation efforts ahead of next
year’s twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. We already have a
robust framework of policies in place. More than words,
what is needed now is decisive action.
The European Union (EU) has already adopted
a new strategic approach on women and peace and
security, as well as a revised action plan reaffirming
our determination to pursue implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in a holistic
fashion. Our strategic approach supports actions
by Governments and civil society alike to engage,
empower, protect and support women and girls through
concrete commitments, with particular emphasis on
our aim to achieve sustainable and lasting peace and
security through the promotion of gender equality and
women’s empowerment.
In the European Union, we endeavour to lead by
example. The key objectives of our action plan on
women, peace and security are to increase women’s
leadership, to reinforce their full, equal and meaningful
participation and to firmly emphasize the centrality
of gender analysis and the mainstreaming of gender
perspectives, the prevention of conflicts and conflictrelated human rights violations, the promotion of full
accountability policies and institutional reforms, the
protection of women’s and girls’ rights, better access to
justice and the promotion of institutional mechanisms
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

to help prevent all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence and support effective relief and recovery.
We insist on the urgency of ensuring full access to
comprehensive, coordinated and quality services,
including sexual and reproductive-health care,
psychological support and legal counselling.
Our commitment to promoting regional and global
leadership and practice in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda cannot be
fulfilled without close cooperation with multilateral and
regional organizations, civil society, academia, think
tanks and the private sector. Tomorrow, we will take
a step forward in terms of scaling up our international
cooperation on women, peace and security at a regional
level. Together with the United Nations, the African
Union and NATO, and with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe as an observer, we
will launch a joint initiative on regional acceleration of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We believe
that this unique initiative will, among other benefits,
prove the advantages of multilateralism in moving the
women and peace and security agenda forward faster.
The European Union is founded on the universal
values of respect for human dignity, freedom,
democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for
human rights. We note with concern the renewed efforts
in many parts of the world to curtail the space for civil
society. We appreciate the emphasis that the SecretaryGeneral places in his report (S/2019/800) on women’s
organizations, peacebuilders and women human rights
defenders as key political constituents who play pivotal
roles in efforts relating to conflict prevention and
resolution and peace maintenance.
We share the Secretary-General’s grave concern
at the increase in attacks and threats inflicted on
those actors. This is unacceptable, and we will take
further specific steps to protect them, including through
sustainable funding and by paying particular attention
to those who experience multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination and therefore are particularly
at risk, namely, for example, persons with disabilities.
We continue to engage proactively in the promotion
of women’s leadership through bilateral and multilateral
diplomacy, as well as through regular consultations
in EU-led and EU-supported processes with women’s
organizations and women human rights defenders
working in conflict-related settings, conflict prevention,
preventing violent extremism and radicalization,

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

peace negotiations, mediation and peacebuilding,
humanitarian action and development programmes.
In our civilian and military missions and operations,
we reiterate our commitment to a zero-tolerance
policy towards misconduct and abuse, and we aim to
improve our response to sexual exploitation, abuse and
harassment through a new European Union policy.
The instruments, strategies and political
commitments are already in place. Our focus now
should be on implementation, with more and better
targeted action in order for us all to demonstrate the
significant progress that is long overdue ahead of
next year’s important anniversaries. However, time is
against us, and we must step up our game collectively.
This mission is not for women and girls alone, but also
for men and boys, who need to be fully engaged as
positive agents for change.
Finally, in view of the upcoming twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020, the
European Union reiterates its commitment to helping
the United Nations in efforts aimed at achieving a faster
and more ambitious implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. In this regard, we look
forward to tightening our European Union-United
Nations cooperation in all areas. Together we must
work on better gender analysis, more sex-disaggregated
data, improved gender expertise, greater leadership
accountability and enhanced resources. The United
Nations can always rely on the European Union’s
unwavering support, not only in New York but around
the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank the President of the Security
Council for convening this open debate as we approach
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
I welcome the briefings by the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the other briefers.
Colombia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Canada today on behalf of 56
Member States.
Today’s meeting is undoubtedly a good opportunity
to share best practices in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda and to
take effective actions to ensure the participation

19-3395021/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

29/10/2019

and leadership of women in the various aspects
of peacebuilding.

that women’s rights form part of the agenda of all
branches of public authority.

Colombia has set an example in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), recognizing that, in order
to achieve a peaceful and inclusive society based
on the principles of legality, entrepreneurship and
equity, political and economic empowerment and the
promotion of women’s leadership are indispensable.
My Government is convinced that the participation of
women in peacebuilding is a matter of priority that will
contribute to achieving the transformations that our
“Peace with legality” policy proposes to offer women, in
particular those in rural areas: better living conditions
that will translate into their economic autonomy, as
well as the creation of working environments with
decent conditions that break the cycles of violence that
violate women’s rights.

The recent local elections saw the largest number
of women candidates to date, which is an example that
our efforts to ensure the participation of women in
decision-making positions are bearing fruit. We will
continue advancing along this path, recognizing that
women and girls play a fundamental role in Colombia’s
peacebuilding journey.

Accordingly, a high-level gender-equality unit was
set up by the Vice-President of Colombia, Ms. Martha
Lucía Ramírez Blanco, in January, in order to advance
the implementation of the 51 gender indicators included
in the framework plan for the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. Furthermore, the relevant
entities have submitted their work plans, reporting a
progress rate of 96 per cent in the 51 gender indicators.
These plans are vehicles for the promotion of gender
equality and will ensure more and better opportunities
are created for women, especially those who have been
victims of violence.
Another
step
forward
is
the
National
Reincorporation Council’s technical round tables on
gender, composed of women Government officials and
ex-combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, which are held weekly
to ensure that the gender component is included in each
productive project approved in the framework of the
reincorporation process.
President Duque is committed to advancing the
participation of women in the leadership of the various
political spheres. The Government has the first-ever
cabinet with parity between men and women in the
history of Colombia, and our national development
plan includes a chapter dedicated to the promotion
of women’s equity, known as the Pact for Equity for
Women, whose objectives include the establishment
of a national women’s network that will bring together
policies, strategies and instruments adopted to ensure
22/35

Before concluding my statement, and in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
I wish to inform members of the Council that the
Commission has compiled and submitted a document in
written form that we think will be important for today’s
debate, in line with our mandate as an advisory body to
the Security Council, and which we know will be very
useful for the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I am pleased to address
the Security Council for the first time, as the new
Permanent Representative of Australia, on a topic
of such vital importance as the women and peace
and security agenda. We thank South Africa for its
strong leadership on this agenda, and we welcome the
Secretary-General’s renewed commitment and call to
action. We also welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the subject (S/2019/800) and commend the
work of the experts who contributed to it.
Australia has a proud history of contributing to
international peace and security. Since 1947, Australia
has deployed troops to more than 60 operations overseas,
including long-standing contributions to some of the
oldest United Nations peacekeeping efforts. Today, all
Australian Defence Force personnel deployed to fragile
and conflict-affected contexts are trained in women
and peace and security. We also have 166 Australian
Defence Force gender advisers who can be deployed on
military, humanitarian, relief and recovery operations.
The women and peace and security agenda reflects
the fact that conflict continues to disproportionately
affect women. Women’s needs, contributions and
agency in conflict and peacebuilding situations are too
often an afterthought. The rights of women and girls
underpin the fundamental components of the women
and peace and security agenda. The convergence of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Platform
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

for Action and the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) provides an opportunity to highlight the
intersections of these two important agendas.
Women and girls are central to the success of
efforts to prevent, respond to and resolve conflict
and to build peace. However, women are too often
excluded from conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
security operations. This situation puts peace and
stability at risk and compounds negative outcomes for
women and girls. To deliver on this agenda, we must
address the root causes of gender inequality, including
harmful norms and inequitable structures. We must
promote and protect women’s rights, including sexual
and reproductive-health rights. We must commit to
improving gender composition in our peacekeeping
missions and our national security services. We must
commit to the Secretary-General’s sustaining peace
agenda and its important actions on women and peace
and security.
In Australia, the women and peace and security
agenda is indivisible from our work on humanitarian
response and disaster relief, on development assistance
and on peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. We
have seen the difference that gender advisers have
made in reconstruction efforts. It is life-changing. It is
transformative to the way in which we do business.
Australia’s second women and peace and security
national action plan, to be released this year, is
underpinned by a commitment to human rights, inclusion
and women’s meaningful participation in all aspects of
peacebuilding, crisis response and prevention.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

to be insufficiently represented in peace processes
and their involvement in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts has not been guaranteed. In addition, we
are very concerned by the finding of the SecretaryGeneral’s report that women are currently targeted by
record high levels of political violence.
Nowhere is the gender gap more evident than
in field missions, particularly United Nations peace
operations. Despite clear evidence that the meaningful
inclusion of women in peacekeeping missions improves
their efficiency and effectiveness, women represent
only 4.2 per cent of United Nations military personnel
in the field.
We need international mechanisms that overcome
the structural barriers that exist and ensure women’s
meaningful participation in all peace and security
decision-making processes. We need to properly
finance the women and peace and security agenda and
invest in women peacebuilders. And we need men to
stand up and support that cause as resolutely as women.
Albania has made significant progress in
empowering women and achieving gender equality,
including in the security sector. Albania currently has
the fifth most gender-balanced Cabinet in the world,
with 53 per cent women ministers, including the
Minister of Defence. While women constitute 18 per
cent of the total armed forces personnel, in June for the
first time Albania sent two women to serve in a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in South Sudan.

Ms. Kadare (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union. I wish to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.

A year ago, we approved our first national action
plan for resolution 1325 (2000). In order to ensure its full
implementation, we have established a technical group,
composed of gender focal points, which drafts periodical
reports, as well as a political group, composed of highlevel representatives from the Ministries for Foreign
Affairs, Defence, Health and Social Protection, which
monitors progress by assessing the reports. Every year
the conclusions are discussed at the National Council
on Gender Equality, with the aim of improving national
policies as well as holding the leadership accountable.

Despite the progress made to date and the
development of an extensive normative framework on
women, peace and security, implementation is lagging
behind, while many barriers and challenges persist.
As the Secretary-General puts it, there remains a stark
contrast between rhetoric and reality. Women continue

Between October 2018 and May 2019, we
organized, in close cooperation with non-governmental
organizations, 12 training sessions for military and
police staff, focused on gender issues in military/police
operations, the handling of post-conflict situations and
violence against women and girls.

We look forward to continuing to work with the
United Nations, its Member States and civil society to
accelerate implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in 2020 and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.

19-3395023/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The appointment and promotion of women to
leading positions in the police and the army remain a
priority. More generally, the Albanian Government has
put a clear focus on policies aimed at boosting women’s
meaningful engagement in public life. We believe that
fundamentally women’s political empowerment can also
significantly boost gender-equal decision-making of all
kinds, including on peace and security issues. Albania
will continue to champion the women and peace and
security agenda, which has been included among the
priorities of our chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2020, as well as
of our bid for membership of the Security Council for
the term 2022-2023.
In concluding, I would like to reiterate that
women should not only be consulted. Women also
need to be heard. Their expertise, experience and
ability to understand the needs of communities
should be acknowledged and have a real influence
on all peace processes. The message that this debate
sends to the world must be crystal clear: no lasting or
sustainable peace can be achieved without women’s
meaningful engagement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Ms. O’Neill (Canada): I beg your indulgence,
Mr. President, because today I will deliver two separate
statements. The first statement is on behalf of 56
Member States representing all five regional groups of
the United Nations, including South Africa, I note as a
means of currying favour.
The group of countries thanks today’s briefers for
sharing their insights and experiences. We also thank
members of the Security Council for their efforts to
address more systematically women’s human rights,
gender equality and the gendered impact of conflict.
We commend South Africa for holding this open
debate on the important theme of the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. As the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2019/800) on this item makes clear, implementation
has made strides but persistent gaps and challenges
remain, making implementation far from complete.
The group emphasizes that meaningful action on
women and peace and security requires committing to
the full and effective implementation of all elements
of the women and peace and security agenda and
24/35

29/10/2019

recognizing their interrelated, inseparable and mutually
reinforcing nature.
The group welcomes the recommendations and
suggested actions described in the Secretary-General’s
report as a means to close gaps. We emphasize the
importance of the ongoing monitoring and tracking of
progress. The group would like to highlight the vital
role played by civil society in all aspects of the agenda,
including the monitoring of implementation.
Women remain continuously underrepresented
and excluded from peace and security efforts,
including peace negotiations. The group stresses that
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
must be in place in all aspects of peace and security,
including all formal and informal decision-making
processes at all levels. That must be safeguarded and is
non-negotiable. We underscore the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on enhancing support and resources for
women’s meaningful participation in peace and
security processes.
Political violence targeting women continues to be of
grave concern, inhibiting women’s ability to participate
in public life and decision-making processes. The
deliberate targeting of women peacebuilders and women
human rights defenders remains a major concern. The
group condemns in the strongest possible terms acts that
constitute violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian
law and hinder the achievement of full gender equality,
peace and sustainable development.
Ensuring women’s full and meaningful participation
in the security sector, including in peacekeeping
operations, is another area where progress must
still be made. While there have been some positive
developments, progress is too slow. The group welcomes
innovative measures taken to increase the full and
meaningful participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, including the uniformed gender parity
strategy 2018–2028. The group also underlines the key
role that mission leadership must play in integrating
gender perspectives across all mission components.
This must be a top priority for the United Nations
leadership, troop- and police-contributing countries
and all Member States.
Devastatingly, sexual and gender-based violence
remains prevalent in situations of armed conflict
worldwide. It continues to be a tactic of war and
terror and must be addressed as a key security issue.
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

The group calls for further strengthening of justice
and accountability measures to address sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict. Recognizing the
importance of providing timely assistance to survivors
of sexual violence, the group urges United Nations
entities and donors to provide non-discriminatory
and comprehensive health services, including sexual
and reproductive health, psychosocial, legal and
livelihood support and other multisectoral services for
survivors. In addition, we call on the Security Council
to incorporate sexual and gender-based violence as
a criterion for sanctions and to assess the gendered
impacts of sanctions.
In closing, as other speakers have noted, 2020
will be a landmark year for the women and peace and
security agenda, with the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) championed by Namibia. Now
is not the time to be complacent with the status quo,
but rather to be more ambitious and to address the gaps
for further implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in its entirety. The Group calls on
all United Nations entities, the Security Council, all
Member States and all other stakeholders to use this
opportunity to move from words to action and to ensure
the full and effective implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
I would now like to switch to French and say a few
words in my national capacity as the representative
of Canada.
(spoke in French)
I would like to thank South Africa for having
submitted resolution 2493 (2019) which was adopted
today. As the President of the Council remarked this
morning, it is nice to have a return to consensus. We
salute South Africa’s emphasis on full implementation.
Like several others, we would like to have heard stronger
language with regard to women human rights defenders,
civil society and sexual and reproductive-health law.
To achieve real results, what does implementation
look like? For Canada, it is a question of transforming
current methods of collaboration.
(spoke in English)
The first of three ways Canada is doing that is
through partnership. The women and peace and security
agenda demands that we break out of institutional and
social silos. Within Canada, for instance, our national
action plan is a partnership among the nine ministries

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

and agencies, including many with primarily domestic
mandates. We recognize that peace and security are not
just foreign policy or defence issues. Women around
the world face intersecting forms of violence and
discrimination, including in Canada, and particularly
among indigenous women, girls and two-spirit people.
Partnerships based on mutual respect with other
countries are equally important. In 2020, Canada will
co-chair the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points
Network with Uruguay, building on the excellent
work of the current Chair, Namibia. Through the Elsie
Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, Canada
partners with Ghana, Zambia and Senegal to assess
and address barriers and to design bold interventions
to make a difference for women in police and military
institutions. Canada’s Chief of Defence staff is also
now chairing a women, peace and security-focused
United Nations network of his counterparts and invites
all Chiefs of Defence staff to join.
It could not be clearer — no country and no region
has a monopoly on good ideas. By working with
partners, we look forward to the day when, instead of
saying we need to do more, we can say we did it and
it worked.
The second way that Canada is transforming how
we work is by funding those who need it most. The
hard work of implementation is done by women’s rights
organizations that are underresourced. Movements
need funding. We create barriers to implementation
when we demand that transformational work happen on
short funding cycles and sparse budgets. That is why
Canada doubled its commitment to the Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund. It is why earlier this year
we launched the Equality Fund to bring in partners,
including the private sector, to provide unprecedented
levels of sustainable resources to women’s organizations
and movements. And that is why we made a three-year
$650 million commitment to closing the gaps in support
for sexual and reproductive health.
Sexual and reproductive health is not a bargaining
chip. We cannot use women’s lives and their bodily
autonomy as language to be negotiated away. Sexual
and reproductive health and rights is core to the agenda
and must continue to be as we recommit our efforts to
full implementation.
Finally, we must be intentional about inclusion.
Where are the young people, the indigenous women,
the LGBTQI communities, among others? Frankly

19-3395025/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

speaking, the price of exclusion is too costly for us to
continue with the status quo. The Security Council
consistently says that women deserve a seat at the
table and yet there are crises around the world where
women are shut out from decisions that affect their
lives. For long enough, we have demanded that women
justify their participation, that they provide the data
and explain their special contributions. It is time to put
the burden of justification on those who continue to
exclude half the population.
Civil society is a true leader in making
implementation inclusive. Its groups are not just
stakeholders but equal partners and are the ones
showing us, in practice, how to push back on the push
back. In this spirit, Canada formalized our relationship
with civil society through our national action plan and
continue to look to them to hold us accountable. In the
light of today’s resolution, we especially thank the NGO
Working Group for bringing the remarkable Alaa Salah
and, through her, the voices of Sudanese women to the
Council and for the Group’s leadership in pushing us to
sustain our shared vision of the agenda and reminding
us that our gains are still precious.
If elected to the Security Council in 2021, Canada
will continue to champion the full women and peace
and security agenda and work both inside and outside
this Chamber to make the transformational aspirations
of the agenda a reality. We must do that work now, and
we must do it together.
Ms. Plepyté (Lithuania): Allow me to start by
commending South Africa as the President of the
Security Council for the month of October for convening
today’s important debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2019/800), recommendations and encouragement.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and delivered on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone in our
collective efforts to advance gender equality around
the globe. However, as we are preparing to mark the
twentieth anniversary of the resolution next year, we
still have miles to go on the uneven and challenging
road of implementation, which means that, despite
achievements over the past 19 years, the objectives
of the resolution have not been fully achieved, and
significant work remains to be done.
26/35

29/10/2019

Violence against women and girls, attacks on
their human rights continue to occur in conflict and
post-conflict settings. Representation of women at
decision-making levels and inclusion of women in
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
remain insufficient. It is equally worrying that political
will is not always consistent and that the international
community often falls short of its ambitions. We must
not allow for any regression and backtracking on this
important agenda. We must therefore consolidate all
political will to maintain course towards goals that
were set almost 20 years ago.
We were encouraged and welcomed recent
decisions made by the Security Council to expand
the designation criteria for sanctioning individuals
who perpetrate sexual and gender-based violence in
the context of armed conflict. We would like to see
this practice developed further so that sexual and
gender-based violence becomes a standard element of
sanctions regimes.
The protection and promotion of human rights for
all women and girls and their empowerment is a longstanding priority for Lithuania. My country remains
firmly committed to the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. We are fully aware that
the scale and complexity of the implementation of the
agenda requires coherent and comprehensive efforts. In
this respect, the pivotal role of civil society, including
women’s organizations, should be fully recognized. We
express our concerns for the increase in attacks and
threats against civil society, particularly against women
human rights defenders, whose safety and protection
are essential, as they are our key allies in moving the
women and peace and security agenda forward.
Lithuania is currently working on its second national
action plan, wherein the means and instruments for the
continuous implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda are foreseen. While drafting the
plan, we are working closely with the representatives
of the civil society. We do not merely consult; we are
drafting the plan together. We believe that it is vital to
engage and cooperate with experts, many of whom we
find in civil society. Civil society can also help us look
for innovative ways to promote the women and peace
and security agenda and address numerous challenges.
Lithuania supports such high-impact initiatives aimed
at searching for innovative ways to move forward as the
Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund. My country
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

supports the work of the Fund and has just allocated
another voluntary contribution to its important work.
Lithuania remains a strong advocate for the
integration of gender perspective in all aspects of
peacekeeping operations. Increased numbers of women
peacekeepers, deployment of women’s protection
and gender advisers, and human rights and genderawareness training have all proven successful and should
be further advanced. Nationally, my country is striving
to deploy peacekeeping troops with greater gender
balance and continues to encourage female police and
military women to apply. Mandatory predeployment
trainings in Lithuania on gender sensitivity, preventing
sexual exploitation and identifying and responding
to indicators of conflict-related sexual violence have
moved beyond abstract concepts towards more practical,
scenario-based learning. We encourage all troopcontributing countries to ensure that predeployment
and in-mission trainings meet the highest standards of
the United Nations guidelines on gender sensitivity and
sexual violence.
Despite some positive trends, the progress made
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda remains too slow, and further work
is needed to achieve our objectives. This debate is
an important contribution to this effort and serves
as an opportunity to share good practices, articulate
achievements, identify barriers and put forward bold
proposals. Ahead of the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we need to move forward in a
steadfast manner by leaving no one behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the delegation of Canada on behalf of a
group of countries.
We thank South Africa for having convened this
debate. In the context of the tenth anniversary of the
establishment of the post of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Argentina wishes
to reiterate its support for the work that has
been accomplished.
Achieving gender equality and the full
empowerment of women and girls in all their diversity,
as well as ensuring that gender becomes a cross-cutting
issue across the peace and security agenda, are sine qua

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

non conditions to effectively prevent conflicts, find
peaceful solutions and build sustainable peace. In that
respect, we must redouble our efforts to increase the
representation, participation and leadership of women
throughout all peacebuilding and conflict-prevention
processes, at all levels of decision-making.
Sexual violence in conflict is one of the most
appalling and terrible violations of human dignity and
represents an impediment to the greater involvement
of women in conflict resolution and the building of a
sustainable peace. We therefore wish to strengthen our
commitment to the prevention and eradication of and
accountability for such crimes, placing victims at the
heart of our action and pooling our efforts to address
the underlying structural causes that make women so
vulnerable and puts them at risk.
Concerning measures aimed at the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), this year the Ministry of
Defence of Argentina trained 450 military staff using
instruments related to gender and gender-related
violence. Anonymous surveys were also carried out
to identify situations in which rights were being
violated, and the results were used in the context of the
trainings. These surveys made it possible to update, on
an ongoing basis, the framework of the training module
for such personnel.
In order to strengthen the role of women in regional
peacebuilding, in August the Argentine Minister
submitted to representatives and ambassadors of the
Southern Cone, during the second meeting of the
Federal Network of Mediators, a proposal to establish
a regional network of female mediators in the Southern
Cone so as to enhance and increase the resources
available for the training of female mediators, as well as
promote the empowerment and significant participation
of women in decision-making forums.
To conclude, I wish to stress that we must guarantee
ongoing access to safe education during conf lict.
This is a fundamental goal that will contribute to
shielding women and girls from the risks of armed
conf lict. I should therefore like to draw attention to
the significant role of the Safe Schools Declaration,
an initiative led by Norway and Argentina, and I
invite States to endorse the Declaration, a non-binding
instrument that also contributes to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.

19-3395027/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I wish first to thank the
South African presidency for having convened this
very important open debate and for focusing the debate
on the implementation aspect of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Twenty years have passed, and extraordinary work
has been done in transforming the perception of the
role of women in peace processes. However, we are
concerned that women continue to be underrepresented
at all stages of peace processes and remain vulnerable
during and after conflict. Much needs to be done to
fully translate the objectives of the agenda into tangible
results on the ground. Moving forward, we wish to
highlight the following points.
First, it is necessary to strengthen and sustain
the political will of Member States. Unwavering
commitments and concrete actions on the part of all
nations are decisive factors for the success of the
agenda. Cooperation among the United Nations and
regional organizations could help to enhance its
implementation. Within the United Nations system,
effective coordination and coherence is essential,
taking into account the cross-cutting nature of gender
equality and women’s empowerment. The General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, each with a unique role, need to work
together in a complementary manner and in compliance
with their respective mandates.
Secondly, we strongly emphasize the participation
of women at every stage of peace processes, including
post-conflict reconstruction. The aspect we want to
take as an example is mine action, which has often
been overlooked in our discussions. In Viet Nam, an
estimated 800,000 tons of residual explosive remnants
of war remain, severely affecting millions of people,
particularly women and children. To highlight the
problem, the Government of Viet Nam pays special
attention to the participation and contribution of
women in mine action, as women are the best educators
in terms of imparting knowledge to their children, their
families and the wider community. The Vietnamese
Women’s Union plays an important role in this regard.
With the support of international partners, the Union
has actively engaged women in the process of raising
awareness on mine risks, giving assistance to victims
and restoring mined lands to help ensure the safety
of and development for local people and sustain
their livelihoods.
28/35

29/10/2019

Last but not least, we call for greater attention to
be paid to monitoring and measuring our progress. A
holistic approach to the implementation of the agenda
needs a comprehensive set of indicators to assess its
performance. Such indicators were developed 10 years
ago but have not been used to their full advantage. The
upcoming anniversary is a good opportunity to find
ways and means to bring the indicators into full play.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms our strong
commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda and will work closely with Member States
and other relevant stakeholders towards a meaningful
commemoration of the agenda next year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
the Republic of South Africa for having convened
today’s annual open debate on women and peace and
security, a topic of the utmost priority for the United
Arab Emirates, as it should be for us all given the
stark evidence of the gaps that remain, as outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/800). We were
pleased to also co-sponsor resolution 2493 (2019),
which you, Mr. President, proposed today.
There is widespread recognition of the fact that when
women meaningfully participate in peace processes,
peace is 35 per cent more likely to last 15 years or
longer. Despite this recognition and an abundance of
conflicts around the world, not enough countries have
taken the necessary steps towards implementation.
Between 1990 and 2017, women constituted only 2 per
cent of mediators, 8 per cent of negotiators and 5 per
cent of witnesses and signatories in all major peace
processes. We believe that these statistics must be
improved in favour of women and girls, and not just at
the finish line. How do we do that?
First, the inclusion of women in peace processes
should not just be a box-ticking exercise of how many
women are present at the final agreement. Women
should be an integral part of both formal and informal
negotiations from start to finish and in the aftermath of
conflict resolution so as to ensure that women are not
excluded at critical points of a peace process, including
in the initial backroom negotiations on how the process
itself will run. Early planning, based on gendersensitive conflict and political analysis, must inform
all peace and security interventions.
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

Secondly, there is no substitute for financing and
visibility in the procedures and budgets of security and
peace actors. That is the most tangible way that Member
States can reflect meaningful change. The United
Arab Emirates strongly supports that a minimum of
15 per cent of all United Nations security and peace
spending explicitly targets gender equality and
women’s empowerment, and we encourage all donors
to go beyond that required minimum. We further call
for prioritizing financing mechanisms that specifically
address the important role of women in humanitarian
and conflict responses. That could be done through
mainstreaming gender considerations in the provision
of post-conflict assistance or disbursing funds for that
specific purpose.
We therefore support meaningful budget line items
for protection in the humanitarian and peace work of
the United Nations, in line with the outcomes of the
Oslo Conference on Ending Sexual and Gender-Based
Violence in Humanitarian Crises, which we co-hosted
in May. We also strongly support the mandatory
application of gender and age markers across all United
Nations programming.
Thirdly, we simply physically need to increase
the number of women in peacekeeping operations, as
everyone has said again and again. How do we do that in
practice? An example from the United Arab Emirates is
our partnership with UN-Women to organize a military
and peacekeeping training programme for 134 women
from the Arab region this year to equip women with the
skills and networks to serve and lead. As a result of the
success of the programme, the United Arab Emirates
recently announced a second round for mid-January
2020, which aims to widen the scope to also include
women trainees from Africa and Asia. The programme
will support regional strategies in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda and support
the training of women in the military and peacekeeping,
not only in our region but globally, as well.
Fourthly, electoral reforms around the world
should be prioritized to enable women safe political
participation as voters and candidates, including the use
of quotas, where needed, as we have done in the United
Arab Emirates, resulting in a 50-50 gender balance in
our recent parliamentary elections.
Lastly, we believe that a focus on the inclusion
of women in post-conflict reconstruction will have a
multiplier effect and needs to remain a priority. I am

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

therefore pleased to announce that, on the sidelines
of today’s debate, the United Arab Emirates and the
Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security
launched a panel discussion series on the role of women in
post-conflict reconstruction, one of the core dimensions
of resolution 1325 (2000). Drawing on the findings of
that collaboration, at this time next year, we will release
an action plan for the United Nations community, with
a shortlist of some key reforms needed to ensure that
gender is mainstreamed across United Nations services
to post-conflict and recovering communities.
As we have heard today, implementing the women
and peace and security agenda is not only morally
imperative for women’s empowerment and gender
equality, it is also critical to preventing conflict and
building sustainable peace. Women are our first
responders, our community and family pillars and
agents of change. The United Arab Emirates remains
committed to that vision. In line with that vision, I
would like to note that the inclusion of women from
conflict zones, particularly youth, in briefings on
relevant issues is of great importance for the women
and peace and security agenda and would demonstrate
a real commitment to it here in the Chamber.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important debate
on women and peace and security. Let me also thank
the briefers for their insights and reflections.
The global study conducted by UN-Women in 2015,
put together in the context of the fifteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), came to the conclusion
that a peace agreement is 35 per cent more likely
to last at least 15 years if women were a part of the
negotiations. Over the past years, women have achieved
great success in waging peace, every time they were
given the opportunity. There are important lessons to
be learned from the engagement in peace processes
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau, Colombia and many other places.
Evidence shows that belligerents often trust women to
be honest brokers in peace processes, in ways that help
bridge divergent views. In a number of cases, women
peacekeepers are the only ones able to make contact
with the local female population, which provides
United Nations missions with precious information on

19-3395029/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

how to better protect civilians, as well as on how to
fulfil mission mandates as a whole.
We must also recall that women made an invaluable
contribution during the elaboration of the Charter of
the United Nations, perhaps the most long-standing
peace effort of all time. Brazil takes pride in the fact
that one of the four women delegates who took part in
the San Francisco Conference was a Brazilian biologist
and politician, Bertha Lutz, who signed the Charter on
Brazil’s behalf.
In March 2017, following the Council’s
recommendations, Brazil joined a growing group of
nations that have adopted a national action plan on
women and peace and security. By adopting our action
plan, which was renewed in 2019 for an additional
four years, we committed to pursuing clear guidelines
in support of the full participation of women in
international peace efforts. Among other commitments
that have translated into policy, the plan has been
instrumental increasing the proportion of women
military and police officers in our contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping. In the same spirit, Brazil
welcomes the priority attached by the Secretariat and
the Department of Peace Operations to that objective,
most notably to the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy
2018-2028, which is part of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
As a long-standing troop- and police-contributing
country, Brazil is entirely committed to the success of
that strategy. While we are proud to have taken concrete
steps towards fulfilling the targets for women military
and police officers, we recognize the need to address
the structural challenges resulting from the fact that
only recently have women taken on combatant roles in
our armed forces. Brazil is willing to work closely with
the Department of Peace Operations to find ways to
overcome that challenge together. As an example of its
commitment to increasing the participation of Brazilian
women in peacekeeping operations, Brazil will host
the 2021 United Nations Female Military Officers
Course. It is the first time the course will be offered in
the Americas. Moreover, our integrated peacekeeping
training centre has also been developed and will
soon host a course aimed primarily at non-combatant
military, with a view to preparing more female officers.
Another commitment from Brazil’s national
action plan is the inclusion of the women and peace
and security perspective in cooperation projects in
30/35

29/10/2019

peacebuilding contexts. That guideline has been
essential, for instance, in framing our engagement in
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). Brazil commends and encourages
efforts to better integrate the women and peace and
security agenda into United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in the field. The adoption of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s 2016 gender strategy was a positive step
in that direction, while also making the PBC the firstever intergovernmental body to adopt such a document.
We welcome the consideration of the women and peace
and security dimension in the engagement of the PBC
in country configurations, as well as in the elaboration
of programmes financed by the Peacebuilding Fund.
We also fully support calls to enhance the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in discussions about
women and peace and security. Last June, the PBC
was briefed by Brazilian Commander Marcia Braga,
recipient of the United Nations Military Gender
Advocate of the Year Award for 2019 for her work
in the Central African Republic. As a follow-up to
Commander Braga’s briefing, the PBC advised the
Security Council to encourage exchanges by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic with women
leaders in local communities, as a means to better
understand violations, enhance the Mission’s earlywarning capabilities and provide a more tailored
approach to the protection of civilians.
In conclusion, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the time is right
for deeper reflection on the unmistakable progress the
international community has made on the women and
peace and security agenda over the past two decades.
However, we must also look ahead in order to keep up
the momentum and make even further strides. Going
forward, Brazil would like to see the Peacebuilding
Commission play a greater role in the context of the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
women and peace and security agenda has always
provided us with more material for discussion than the
Security Council could possibly process. In the PBC,
on the other hand, we could, for instance, organize a
women and peace and security week aimed at taking
stock of the numerous lessons learned and good
practices emanating from women’s engagement in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

Mr. Kickert (Austria): We thank South Africa for
convening this open debate on the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which we also view as the starting point for
the run-up to the twentieth anniversary of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) next October.
Austria aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
Austria has been a vocal supporter of the women
and peace and security agenda ever since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). We are constantly working for
the promotion and realization of the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. We are doing so at the national level, through
international cooperation with partner countries and
civil society, as well as through our support for the
United Nations, notably UN-Women.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/800) and its recommendations. We note
with concern that agreed commitments have not
been matched by action. Let me refer to just a few
examples: the meaningful participation of women in
peace negotiation processes is still a distant reality in
many conflict regions; violence against women, and
in particular women human rights defenders, is on the
rise; and sexual and gender-based violence continues to
be used by conflict parties as a weapon of war.
We thank Ms. Lina Ekomo and Ms. Alaa Salah
for their truly moving and impressive testimonies this
morning. We applaud their courage and that of all
women fighting for peace every day. We hear their call
and that of the Secretary-General telling us to focus on
the full implementation of all aspects of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Let me briefly underline three components
of Austria’s engagement in the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
First, as financial resources often fall short of
political commitments and funds often fail to reach
the most vulnerable, including women’s organizations
working to prevent violent conflict and build peace,
we are a proud donor and supporter of the Women’s
Peace and Humanitarian Fund to support local
women’s networks and engage in conflict prevention

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

and peacebuilding, inter alia in Iraq and, more recently,
in Uganda.
Secondly, Austria deems the role of civil society to
be paramount to the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, both as actors on the
ground and as monitors of the overall implementation
of the agenda in the Security Council. In that regard,
as part of a series of events leading up to the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), Austria is proud
to be hosting a global civil society forum on women and
peace and security in Vienna in early 2020.
Lastly, Austria is endeavouring to increase the
number of Austrian uniformed women in peace
operations, and we will also foster a gender perspective
among all deployed personnel. We have been deploying
gender advisers to the peace operations of regional
organizations, including the European Union, NATO
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, as well as other United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Austria will continue
to deploy qualified experts in this important domain in
the future.
More than ever, it is our conviction that women are
agents of change for peace and security. As we look
forward to the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), let us actively follow up on our pledges in order
to further advance the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda through a collective effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to thank South Africa for convening this
important meeting and giving us the opportunity to
speak before the Council. I also commend South Africa
for its efforts in presiding over the Council for the
month of October. I thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable briefing and report (S/2019/800) and all of the
briefers for their insights, which have served to enrich
our discussion today.
Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the historical resolution 1325 (2000).
That gives us the chance to reflect on what we have
achieved so far in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda and other relevant subsequent
Council resolutions. With respect to the participation
of women at all decision-making levels, which is a key
pillar of Egypt’s 2030 vision for the empowerment of

19-3395031/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

women, I should like to briefly address the national
efforts we are making to promote the role of women in
the area of peace and security.
The Egyptian Government adopted an initiative in
May with a view to developing an integrated national
action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). That plan is aimed at ensuring the full
participation of women in achieving peace and security.
To that end, Egypt is currently deploying 48 Egyptian
women — and working to increase that number — among
our forces participating in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in various parts of the world. In that context,
Egypt fully endorses the Secretary-General’s agenda
of a zero-tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Egypt was one of the first countries to join the
Secretary-General’s initiative to prevent and respond
to sexual exploitation and abuse. We also joined the
Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network and the voluntary compact on preventing and
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse.
Since 2017, Egypt has been proposing that the
General Assembly adopt a resolution to include an
agenda item on this issue. We have constantly promoted
a comprehensive approach to responding to the crimes
of sexual exploitation and abuse at the level of the United
Nations system as a whole. We also stress the importance
of ensuring accountability for perpetrators of those
crimes and providing all necessary assistance to their
victims. In that context and for the sake of prevention,
the Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding provides training
courses for military and police components, including
for Egyptians, Arabs and Africans who contribute to
United Nations peacekeeping missions, in cooperation
with specialized United Nations agencies, such as UNWomen and the United Nations Population Fund. Those
courses provide military and police components with
the information and necessary training to deal with
sexual abuse and exploitation in conflict regions. They
also raise awareness of participants on the various
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
Egypt has placed the implementation of women
and peace and security agenda at the top of its list
of priorities during its current chairmanship of the
African Union. We are working to launch programmes
with a view to building the capacities of brotherly
African nations through cooperation with relevant
African organizations, including the Network of
African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation,
32/35

29/10/2019

the League of Arab States and relevant regional
organizations, in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. We are also working on launching
an Arab women mediators network in order to ensure
the integration of all efforts at the national, regional
and international levels.
In conclusion, Egypt is committed to pursuing its
serious and relentless work to ensure the empowerment
of women at the economic, social and political levels,
as we firmly believe that women play a robust, effective
and necessary role in transformation and building
processes towards the achievement of peace, security
and sustainable development. I wish to close by once
again thanking you, Mr. President, and South Africa for
convening this meeting and giving us the opportunity
to speak before the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having convened this important open debate.
Despite the achievements of the international
community in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, the statistics and
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General before us today (S/2019/800) make
it abundantly clear that, regrettably, we are still falling
short of our objectives. There is a pressing need to
intensify international efforts to overcome all the
challenges that currently stand in the way of the effective
involvement of women in peace and security activities.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
State of Qatar has been working hard to support the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda at all levels, together with our support for all
peace efforts. We contributed to the global review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which concluded that the involvement of women in
peace operations has a lasting and positive impact on
promoting and sustaining peace and on preventing
conflict. In that context, we need to redouble our
efforts to implement the recommendations contained
in that important study, as well as the provisions of
all the resolutions pertaining to the women and peace
and security agenda. Such action will contribute
directly to achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

The commemoration of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) represents an
important opportunity for us to mobilize global action
towards the implementation of every aspect of the very
extensive normative framework surrounding the women
and peace and security agenda. It is also important on
this occasion to consolidate our efforts to implement
women and peace and security agenda and the youth
and peace and security agenda, which was adopted with
resolution 2250 (2015), which referred for the first time
to the vital contribution of youth to lasting peace.
For the sake of unifying efforts and demonstrating
the linkage between the two resolutions on the
ground, on the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, the State of Qatar will host the
second International Symposium on Youth Participation
in Peace Processes. The Symposium will focus on the
participation of young women in peace processes, both
in panel discussions and by ensuring gender parity in
the course of the preparation for all the Symposium’s
phases. We are currently working with the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth with a view to making an
effective contribution to the implementation of the two
resolutions on the ground. The Symposium will also
take place against the backdrop of the first International
Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes,
which the State of Qatar co-hosted with Finland and
Colombia in March.
My country intends to do its utmost to strengthen
the role of women in peacemaking through practical,
pragmatic actions. For example, we sponsored
inter-Afghan dialogue on peace and security and
ensured that Afghani women were included in the peace
discussions. The Doha Intra-Afghan Peace Conference,
which we successfully co-hosted with the Federal
Republic of Germany in July, enjoyed the participation
of distinguished Afghani women in its various meetings
and groups, including the Government, the Peace
Council, civil society and youth.
In conclusion, we emphasize the commitment
of the State of Qatar to maintaining our cooperation
with all relevant parties involved in the women and
peace and security agenda at the national, regional
and international levels. We also intend to provide
the support necessary to ensure the implementation
of the agenda on the ground, which will contribute

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

to achieving lasting peace and security throughout
the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia thanks you most
sincerely, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate today. We are encouraged, as always, by the
overwhelming support for this open debate. We also
welcome the Security Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2493 (2019), the tenth resolution on women
and peace and security.
We are fast approaching the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The
historic mindset shift towards finally recognizing
the immeasurable and constructive role that women
can play globally in the crucial pursuit of peace and
security set us on a great path of hope and progress.
While we appreciate that we have made some progress
over the past 19 years, Namibia, as an initiator of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), notes with a
sense of disappointment that there are still too few
women peacekeepers in the world today. Currently,
only 4.2 per cent of the military personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping missions are women. Namibia
has peacekeepers, both military and police personnel,
deployed in three missions: the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. I am happy to report that
Namibia has female police officers deployed in all
three missions.
Another important issue that needs to be addressed
is the greater inclusion of women in conflict prevention,
peace processes and mediation. We welcome the
formation of women mediator networks, notably the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, which act as a direct response to current
obstacles to women’s meaningful participation and
influence in all aspects of peace processes.
Women continue to be underrepresented in arms
control and disarmament forums, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800). In 2017,
only one-quarter of the participants in multilateral
disarmament meetings at the United Nations were
women. There is an urgent need to mainstream the
women and peace and security agenda in disarmament.

19-3395033/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

As of September, 82 countries had adopted and
were implementing national action plans on women
and peace and security. These plans provide a valuable
tool for States to implement their commitments to the
women and peace and security agenda and to detail
their actions and obligations under the Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security, of which
there are now 10. Namibia launched its first national
action plan earlier this year. Our plan is forwardlooking and incorporates emerging issues, trends and
threats to peace and security, such as climate change,
cybersecurity and the traffic of persons, while also
looking at how those issues impact the overall women
and peace and security agenda.
Regional and subregional organizations must also
take stronger measures to ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda is implemented at those
levels. Namibia welcomes the launch of the African
Union Continental Results Framework for Monitoring
and Reporting on the Implementation of the Women,
Peace and Security Agenda in Africa. We strongly
believe that monitoring, reporting and accountability
are important tools to ensure the post-2020 meaningful
implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
In April, Namibia organized the third meeting of the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network. The
Network enables closer coordination among Member
States and facilitates the annual sharing and exchange
of best practices and lessons learned. At the meeting,
participants discussed the importance of having a
youthful voice on this agenda and how the convergence
of the women and peace and security agenda and
disarmament can be translated into national actions
at the local, national and regional levels. The meeting
underscored that access to information, youth networks
and the use of technology, including social media,
can play a crucial role in promoting and supporting
the active engagement of women and young people in
peace and security. A total of 85 countries are currently
members of the Network and we strongly encourage all
countries to join. We look forward to handing over the
chairmanship of the Network to Canada and Uruguay
next year.
Next year, the international community will mark
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). That should be an opportunity for Member
34/35

29/10/2019

States to outline and/or renew commitments made to
ensure that women are adequately represented in peace
and security matters. In that regard, I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate Namibia’s intention
to establish an international women’s peace centre
in Windhoek. We are diligently consulting with our
various stakeholders and partners in establishing this
centre, as we intend to launch it in 2020 as part of our
commitment. We look forward to welcoming everyone
to the centre and to hearing the commitments of other
Member States for 2020.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Darisuren.
Ms. Darisuren: I am glad to be here today to talk to
the Council about the preparations of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OCSE) for the
approaching twentieth anniversary of the women and
peace and security agenda.
As the world’s largest regional security
organization, with a long track record on conflict
prevention and management, we in the OSCE see the
women and peace and security agenda as a fundamental
element in our conflict toolbox. The OSCE study on
the progress made in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in the OSCE region will
be published early next year. I would like to highlight
some of its findings.
Let me start with the creation of national action
plans in our region. Following a global trend, the
number of national action plans in the OSCE region
has continued to grow steadily during the past five
years. Over 60 per cent of OSCE participating States
now have a national action plan. These plans continue
to identify women’s participation in peace and security
as a main priority. We see a trend whereby recently
developed national action plans are responding to
the recommendations made in Preventing Conflict,
Transforming Justice and Securing the Peace: A
Global Study on the Implementation of United Nations
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which called
for more attention to be paid to conflict prevention. It is
essential that the women and peace and security action
plans recognize that addressing deeper, underlying
root causes of conflict, such as prevailing structural
inequality, which particularly affects women and girls,
is crucial to any conflict prevention effort.
The lack of budgeted funding continues to pose
a major challenge to the implementation of national
action plans. Our assessment shows that over 80 per
19-33950

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

cent of the current national action plans make no or
only minimal reference as to how the implementation
of action plans will be funded.
In 2020, the OSCE will offer a series of
events to provide platforms to Government and
civil society representatives and our international
partner organizations to discuss the findings and
recommendations of our study and develop ways
forward to implement the women and peace and
security agenda. Regional organizations are well suited
to supporting the national-level implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in coordinating,
setting agendas and carrying out initiatives that support
the work at the national level.
I would like to say a few brief words on OSCE
initiatives that provide data, tools and capacity-building
in this field. The OSCE-led survey on the well-being
and safety of women in South-East and Eastern Europe
illustrates how regional organizations can assist in
promoting the women and peace and security agenda.
By making available data on the prevalence and patters
of violence against women, the survey helps to highlight
the need to respond to and prevent violence. That in
turn can help States to strengthen measures to combat
violence against women.
In December, the OCSE will launch a toolkit on
the inclusion of women in effective peace processes
that will complement the efforts of the United Nations
and other organizations to address the unacceptably
low level of women’s participation in decision-making
at peace tables. The OSCE also offers concrete
tailored capacity-building for security service actors

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 1)

in our participating States. The OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights has
supported the armed forces of Ukraine in developing
a set of recommendations to military commanders.
These are aimed at assisting them in efforts to foster
a gender-sensitive institutional culture that addresses
discrimination, harassment and abuse. Furthermore,
we have provided recommendations on measures that
could be used to help prevent gender-based violence in
the families of armed force personnel.
In Central Asia, the OSCE has provided longterm support to border management and services in
Turkmenistan and Tajikistan, including on building
skills and knowledge on how to gender mainstream the
work of border services. A training workshop on gender
aspects of border management was conducted jointly
for Turkmen and Afghan law enforcement officers. We
look forward to continuing to work with our Government
and civil society partners to develop ways to address
the remaining challenges in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on the list for this meeting. I intend to
suspend the meeting now, to be resumed at a date and
time to be announced in the month of November, under
the presidency of the United Kingdom.
On behalf of the Council, I would like to thank
the interpreters, information and publicity officials,
engineers and security officers for donating a total of
23 minutes to advance the cause of women and peace
and security.
The meeting was suspended at 6.05 p.m.

19-3395035/35
