V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
l4_9

Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, the World Food Programme, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund
and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to Swaziland, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in his efforts to organize an effective international programme of assistance and to report to him by
mid-1985 on the steps they have taken and the resources
they have made available to help that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations as well as international financial
institutions to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance for Swaziland or,
where one is already in existence, to the expansion of that
programme;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of international
assistance for Swaziland;
(b) To keep the situation regarding assistance to Swaziland under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, the specialized agencies, regional and
other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session
of 1985, of the current status of the special economic
assistance programme for Swaziland;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Swaziland and in organizing and implementing
the programme of assistance for that country in time for
the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its
fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/195. Special economic assistance to Chad
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/214 of 20 December 1983
and its previous resolutions on assistance in the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Chad, emergency humanitarian assistance to Chad and special economic assistance to that country,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
on special economic assistance to Chad, relating, inter a/ia,
to the economic and financial situation of Chad, the status
of assistance provided for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country and the progress made in organizing and executing the programme of assistance for that
country, 106
Gravely concerned by the unprecedented drought which

is wreaking havoc in Chad at the present time, compounding the already precarious food and health situation
and thus compromising all the country's efforts at reconstruction,
Considering that the drought has occasioned a massive
displacement of population,
Taking note of the appeal of the Secretary-General dated
l November 1984 107 and the numerous appeals launched
I06 A/36/261, A/36/739, A/37/ 125 and Add. L A/3812 I 3 and A/39/392.
sect. III.

by the Government of Chad and governmental and nongovernmental organizations regarding the gravity of the
food and health situation in Chad.
C·ons1dering that Chad is one of the least developed
countries and therefore entitled to the benefits provided
for in the various relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly,
Recognizing the need for emergency humanitarian
assistance to Chad,
Also recognizing the need for assistance in the reconstruction and development of Chad,

Taking note of the intention of the Government of Chad
to organize in 1985, with the assistance of the United
Nations Development Programme, a conference of donors
and contributors of funds, as agreed at the International
Conference on Assistance to Chad, held in November
1982.
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States and governmental and non-governmental organizations which
responded and are continuing to respond generously to the
appeals of the Government of Chad and of the SecretaryGeneral by furnishing assistance to Chad;
2. Further expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to make the international community aware of the difficulties of Chad and to mobilize
assistance for that country;

3. Appeals to the international community to provide
the necessary emergency humanitarian assistance to the
people of Chad who have suffered from the war and the
drought:
4. Renews the request made to States, appropriate
organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and international economic and financial institutions
to contribute to the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Chad:
5. Again requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme to give all the necessary
assistance to Chad for the preparation and organization of
the conference of donors and contributors of funds, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 38/214;
6. Invites States and governmental and non-governmental organizations to take part in the conference of
donors and contributors of funds and to accord particular
attention to the projects to be presented there with a view
to financing them;
7.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To continue his efforts to organize the special programme of economic assistance for Chad;
(b) To monitor, in close collaboration with the humanitarian agencies concerned, the humanitarian needs, particularly in the areas of food and health, of the people displaced by the war and the drought;

(c) To mobilize special humanitarian assistance for
persons who have suffered as a result of the war and the
drought and for the resettlement of displaced persons;
(d) To keep the situation in Chad under review and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
107 A/39/627; see also Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtr·
n,nth 'ie,swn Plenary Meetings, 4 7th meeting, para. I.
•
•
