General Assembly-Thirty-sccond SPssion

162

can Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at
Port Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extraordinary session devoted to the question of Western
Sahara, 3
Recallíng also its resolution 3412 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 regarding co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
l. Reafjirms its commitment to the principie of
self-determination of peoples in accordance with the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Expresses the hope that a just and lasting solutior :o the problem ur Western Sabara will be speedily
achieved, in accordance with the principies of the
Charter of the United Nations, at the extraordinary
session of the Organization of African Unity dcvoted
to this question, to be held shortly in accordance with
the decis-ions taken at thc thirteenth 3 and fourteenth 4
ordinary sessions of the Assembly of Heads of Statc
and Governmcnt of the Organization of African Unity;
3. Decides to resume consideration of the question
of Western Sahara at its thirty-third session;
4. Requests the Spedal Committec on the Situation
with regard to the Implemcntation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Indepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs to keep developments in this matter
under review and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
5. Requests the Administraüve Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to inform the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of the progress
achieved in the imp!ementation of the decisions of
the Organization of Afr.ican Unity concerning Western
Sahara, and invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to report on the question to the General Assembly as soon as possible and not later than at its
thirty-third session.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/23.

Question of the Gilbert Islunds

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert 1slands,
Having examined the relevant chaptcrs of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peopks,5
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Dcclaration on thc Granting of Indepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Having heard the statcmc'.lt of the administering
Power relating to developmcnts in th.~ Territory,H
3 See A/31/136-S/12141, annex 11, rc:so!ution AHG/Res.81
(XUI). For the printed text, see Ofjici11l N.ccords of the Security Council, Th;rty-first Yt·ar. S11ppleme111 Jor Ju/y, August
and September 1976.
4 See A/32/310, annex !l.
5 Official Records of tlz~ G encral Assembly, Thir:y-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 23 ( A/32/23/Rev. l ), vol. 1, cha p. 111.
and vol. Ill, chap. XIX.
6 !bid., Thirty-seconcl Srssion, Fourth Commiltee, 12th meeting, paras. 12-2 l.

Noting with satisfaction that the Gilbert lslands attained ful] interna] self-government on 1 January 1977,
to be followed by a general election to be held no later
than 13 August 1978 and by a constitutional conference prior to independencc,
Notinrt further that the constitutional confercncc to
be hcld in preparation for indcpendence, to which repfl'sent:Hivcs of thc fümaban community will be invited,
will t;ike into account the special rights and interests
of the Banaban community,
Bearing in mfnd that the phosphate resources of the
Territory will soon be exhausted,
1. A 1,proves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implement:1tion of the Dcclaration on the Granting of
Indepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to thc Gilbert Tslands; 7
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gi:bert Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Grantirig of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Exnresses the hope that the constitutional conference will lead to independence for the Gilbert 1slands in accordance with the Decbration and that the
constitution to be agreed upon will respect the special
rights and interests of the Banaban community;
4. Requests that steps be taken towards diversifying
the economy of the Territory and that the administcring
Power continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within thc United
Nations system, as well as of regional bodies, in thc
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the Gilbert lslands,
including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission in consultation with the administering Power,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session on thc implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/24,.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the repon
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Dcclaration on the Granting of Inclependence to Colonial Countries and People~, 8
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting nf
lndcpcndcnce to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, ancl
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations rdating to American Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of thc administering Puwer relating to developments in American Samoa.1'
7 !bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplcment No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rcv.1), vol. 111, chap. XIX.
-' //,id .. vol. 1, chap. 111, and vol. Ill, chap. XXI.
11 /bid .. Thirt\·-,1ccond Session, Fourth Commitlce, 17th meeting, paras. 47-50.
