S/PV.7473

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7473rd meeting

Friday, 26 June 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Hampe
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-19684 (E)
*1519684*

S/PV.7473

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf. I quote:
“The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern regarding the grave security and political
situation in Burundi against the backdrop of the
forthcoming, communal, presidential and senatorial
elections and for the impact of the crisis in the
region. The Security Council strongly condemns
all acts of violence and human rights violations and
abuses and recalls that those responsible for such
violence should be held accountable and brought to
justice.
“The Security Council welcomes the regional
and subregional efforts aimed at addressing the
crisis, and in this regard takes note of the East
African Community (EAC) summits, held on
13 May and on 31 May 2015 in Dar es-Salaam,
of the communiqué issued by the African Union
Peace and Security Council after its Summit, held
on 13 June 2015 in Johannesburg, South Africa, and
of the letters sent by the Government of Burundi to
the Security Council.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the
relentless efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Said
Djinnit, and recalls that Burundian stakeholders
had made some progress in a difficult dialogue,
thanks to Special Envoy Djinnit’s able facilitation.
“The Security Council takes note of the
African Union’s (AU) statement that the political
dialogue has not produced expected results and that
the current situation could jeopardize the important
gains recorded following the signing of the Arusha
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Burundi

2/6

26/06/2015

and the Global Ceasefire agreement of 2003, and
affect the stability of the region.
“The Security Council welcomes the resumption
of the dialogue between all the Burundian parties,
under the facilitation of the AU, the United
Nations, the EAC and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region. In this regard, the
Security Council welcomes the appointment of
Professor Ibrahima Fall by the AU, as the new
Special Representative of the chairperson of the
Commission for the Great Lakes region and Head of
the AU Liaison office in Bujumbura. The Security
Council also welcomes the arrival in Bujumbura
of the United Nations Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, which allows for the
international mediation to immediately assist all
Burundian parties to expedite the search for a
consensual political solution to the crisis.
“While acknowledging that further steps
must continue to be taken by parties to adhere to
the decisions taken by the EAC and the AU Peace
and Security Council, the Council calls on the
Burundian parties to urgently participate in an
inclusive dialogue which should focus, in the spirit
of the Arusha Agreements and the Constitution,
on the measures to be taken to create conditions
conducive to the organization of free, fair,
transparent and credible elections.
“The Council takes note of the statement in
the AU Peace and Security Council communiqué
of 13 June that the date of the election should be
set by consensus between the Burundian parties,
in the spirit of the EAC’s communiqué of 31 May
2015 requesting a postponement of the elections,
and on the basis of a technical assessment to be
undertaken by the United Nations.
“The Security Council emphasizes that the
dialogue should address all matters on which the
parties disagree. The Security Council further
emphasizes that this dialogue should address
concerns related to the reinstatement of private
media; the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, in particular freedoms of
expression and of peaceful assembly, including for
members of the political opposition to campaign
freely, as guaranteed by the Constitution of

15-19684

26/06/2015

The situation in Burundi

Burundi; the release of those arbitrarily detained
following demonstrations; the respect for the rule
of the law; and the urgent disarmament of all
armed youth groups allied with political parties, as
reflected in the conditions of the EAC communiqué
of 31 May 2015, conditions to be met prior to the
holding of elections.
“The Security Council welcomes the
commitment of the AU and the Chairperson of the
AU Commission to fully assume the responsibilities
stemming from its role as Guarantor of the Arusha
Agreement, as well as that of the region not to stand
by in case the situation deteriorates.
“In this regard, the Security Council welcomes
the decision of the AU to immediately deploy human
rights observers and other civilian personnel; to
deploy AU military experts to verify the process
of disarming of all armed youth groups allied
with political parties, which will submit regular
reports on the implementation of the disarmament
process, and to deploy an AU election observer
mission if conditions for the organization of free,
fair, transparent and credible elections are met. The
Council urges the Government of Burundi and other
relevant actors to extend their full cooperation to
these processes.
“The Security Council also welcomes the
AU Peace and Security Council’s decision to
send, by the first week of July, a ministerial
delegation including the Commission, to assess
the implementation of the conditions required by
EAC, the AU and the Council for the holding of the
elections.
“The Council calls on the Electoral Mission of
the United Nations in Burundi to fully and actively
pursue the implementation of its mandate in
accordance with resolution 2137 (2014), including
to swiftly report to the Security Council before,
during and after the elections
“The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the difficult situation of the Burundian
refugees who fled their country into the
neighbouring States, commends the host countries
(the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda
and the United Republic of Tanzania), as well
as humanitarian agencies, for their support to
the affected populations, and calls upon the
international community to provide the necessary

S/PV.7473

humanitarian assistance. The Council urges the
Government of Burundi to create the conditions
conducive to their early return.
“The Security Council calls on all actors in
the region to preserve the safety and security of
populations in the region.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/13.
I now give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Naturally, before I begin my statement, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
emergency meeting on the situation in Burundi, during
which the Council adopted a presidential statement
on the situation (S/PRST/2015/13). Allow me to also
welcome the presence of Mr. Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, with whom I meet often to
discuss the situation in my country.
The Government of the Republic of Burundi fully
appreciates the efforts undertaken by the international
community to support the Burundian people on their
path towards free, inclusive and peaceful elections. It is
within that framework that the Government of Burundi
welcomed the appointment of a new facilitator, namely,
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, after his predecessor, Said
Djinnit, was forced to step down by opposition parties
hostile to the holding of elections.
With respect to the electoral timetable, the
Government has accepted a postponement of the
elections three times, following recommendations by
various partners, including the Summit of Heads of
State of East Africa, which was held in Dar es-Salaam,
United Republic of Tanzania, on 31 May 2015. That
was done to provide the necessary time to the political
parties that had refused to participate in the elections
and, as a result, were not prepared for them.
Nevertheless, given the fact that, in any of the
countries represented here today, elections are the basis
for independent democracy, even if the Government
agreed to the principle of dialogue with all political
partners, such a dialogue could not take place outside
the parameters of the Constitution. If it did, the
authority responsible for holding the elections, in
other words, the head of State, would be accused of
high treason under article 117 of the Constitution, on
which, of course, he swore an oath before taking up his
functions as President of the Republic.

15-196843/6

S/PV.7473

The situation in Burundi

Furthermore, the people of Burundi, our political
partners and the political coalitions present on the
ground, which have been in full campaign mode for
more than two months now, are tired of the successive
postponements of the elections and are increasingly
impatient and eager to start the elections. They cannot
accept that their leaders’ civic rights are being violated
according to the whims of certain political parties and
certain ill-intentioned private individuals who wish
to further postpone this major electoral event in our
country.
Therefore, as already stated, the following
timetable is one that has been pushed back as far as
constitutionally acceptable to avoid a constitutional
vacuum and political disorder. First, the election
of communal counsellors and deputies will be held
on 29 June 2015, that is, on Monday. The electoral
campaigns for those communal administrative elections
ended today. Then the election of the President of the
Republic will take place on 15 July 2015 and the election
of senators on 24 July 2015. That whole calendar
takes into consideration the constitutional limits and
deadlines. Postponing the elections beyond those
dates would leave the Government in a constitutional
vacuum, which no one wants.
The Government of Burundi is surprised by the
behaviour of those politicians who dare to say that
they would like the elections to be postponed once
again. We wonder what kind of postponement they
want at this precise moment. They also say that they
want an electoral calendar based on a consensus
among all stakeholders. We would wish to inform you,
Mr. President, that the Constitution of Burundi makes
no provision for the consensual establishment by
politicians of the electoral calendar. It is the prerogative
of the Independent National Electoral Commission to
establish that calendar, as stipulated in article 91 of
the Constitution; any other approach would breach the
Constitution. The Commission, which is responsible for
organizing elections, has been able to comply with that
provision. It consulted the stakeholders on 8 June, and
the discussions at that meeting were taken into account
when the current electoral calendar, which is quite
simply the last one possible under the Constitution of
the Republic of Burundi, was drafted.
In accordance with the current electoral process and
taking account of the radical opposition’s intransigence
in wanting to postpone the elections at every turn,
the Government of Burundi had to choose one of two

4/6

26/06/2015

options. The first was to postpone the elections and
voluntarily accept being left in a constitutional vacuum,
the repercussions of which no one has so far been able
to predict. The second option was to proceed with the
elections as planned, in accordance with the calendar
resulting from the third postponement, which complied
with the recommendations and conclusions of the
ministers of the East African Community (EAC) and
South Africa, who visited Burundi on 16 June to assess
the implementation of the recommendations of the EAC
Summit, held in Dar es-Salaam, Tanzania. The Summit
recommendations were that the Government of Burundi
should follow the current timetable, because the first
two postponements were sufficient, and that it should
respect the constitutional deadlines on account of the
constitutional vacuum that could ensue after 7 July,
at the end of the term of the communal councils, the
only bodies authorized to elect members of Parliament.
All of the foregoing is by way of explanation of the
Government’s approach, which is to proceed with the
elections within the deadlines set in the Constitution.
With regard to the recommended political dialogue,
I would remind delegations that the Government’s
successive postponements of the elections and the
measure suspending the implementation of the
warrants for the arrest of the organizers of the violent
demonstrations are further proof of the Government’s
good faith, while the opposition has made no such
gestures in return. The Government, then, is making
every effort and many concessions, whereas opposition
groups, behaving like spoilt, demanding children, have
been unable to make concessions and their attitude has
become more uncompromising over time. They have
gone as far as to call into question Mr. Djinnit, not for
objective reasons but simply to delay the dialogue.
That dialogue, which is also part of the peace
process, will of course be held, even after the elections,
which are essential to lasting peace. The Government
is waiting only for the arrival in Burundi of the team
appointed at the Summit of Heads of State of the East
African Community to steer the dialogue so that it can
monitor the situation closely from Bujumbura.
As for the security climate of the elections,
the programme for the disarmament of the civilian
population is functioning as it should, and the
Government would like to point out that two
instructions were issued to the National Disarmament
Commission just after the Dar es-Salaam Summit: first,
to increase the rate of recovery of all weapons held by

15-19684

26/06/2015

The situation in Burundi

groups affiliated with the political parties. In addition
to the 100,000 weapons already recovered by the
forces of law and order, the Government has recently
been able to accelerate such recovery to stabilize the
security situation in the country for the establishment
of a favourable climate for the elections. Secondly,
to achieve even better results, the Government has
invited all social partners to contribute to that recovery
so that no one feels excluded from security matters,
particularly in this very sensitive electoral period. The
Government would like to assure the population and
the international observers that every effort has been
made to ensure security at every stage of the elections.
The part of the current electoral campaign that
concerns the administrative communes has finished,
but the campaign as a whole is ongoing, and all political
parties, or at least the majority, are participating, except
for the radical opposition. I can also inform you that
more political parties are participating in this campaign
than in 2010.
The Government is making particular efforts to
enable refugees to return. It has already dispatched
delegations, including at the ministerial level, to
neighbouring countries to encourage refugees, who are
fleeing not war but rumours, so that they can return.
Between 35,000 and 40,000 refugees have already
returned to Burundi, a considerable number.
Before I end my statement, I would like to return
quickly to certain aspects of the regional dimension,
something to which I repeatedly refer. A team of EAC
ministers, dispatched by the heads of State of the
region and South Africa, visited Burundi on 16 June
to evaluate the implementation of the recommendations
of the 31 May Summit. The ministers concluded that
the current electoral calendar should be respected and
that any further postponement would not be productive.
When proposals are received from outside Africa for
the postponement of the elections, which are due to
be held in 48 hours, we can only wonder why there
are such divergences in regional positions. Since the
ministers who recommended adherence to the current
calendar were dispatched by the heads of State, to
contradict such special delegates would call into
question those heads of State. It is important that the
decisions of regional stakeholders be respected. No one
can claim to love the Arusha Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Burundi more than the Tanzanians.
The Agreement was negotiated and signed in Arusha,
Tanzania, and the Tanzanians are its guarantors. They

S/PV.7473

know us; we were once refugees in Tanzania, so no
one can claim to uphold the Agreement better than the
Tanzanians, South Africans or others in the region. If
the Tanzanians, therefore, propose a calendar on behalf
of EAC, it should be accepted by everyone, because the
Tanzanians know the region better than anyone.
I must also mention one important point very
quickly. You know what is happening in our country;
sometimes we read about it on the Internet, sometimes
we read reports, but a certain amount regarding the
situation has been left unsaid. We are aware of what
I might describe as macabre plans, drawn up by some
of our partners — a minority, since the majority of our
partners act in good faith — with a view to applying
in Burundi the same plan as in Burkina Faso. That
plan consists in provoking violent demonstrations,
which are to be followed by chaos and, subsequently,
a coup d’état to resolve the chaos, followed in turn
by a transitional Government, precisely in line with
the model used in Burkina Faso. Burundi, however,
resisted the 13 May coup d’état, and the plan, designed
to establish a transitional Government and impose on
Burundi the leaders favoured by those partners, failed.
We have documentary proof to that effect. Their current
plan is also designed to apply the approach followed in
Côte d’Ivoire. It would consist in endlessly postponing
the elections in Burundi in order to bring about a
constitutional vacuum. That vacuum would culminate
in a very weak transitional Government, which could
lead to rebellions breaking out left and right, which
would ultimately lead to the kind of situation that
occurred in Côte d’Ivoire, and we all know how that
worked out.
In such a situation, the Government of Burundi is
responsible for the security and peace of its people. It
cannot resign itself to collapsing into an institutional
vacuum and the abyss that would clearly result. That
is why we will press on with our elections on Monday
in order to enable the overwhelming majority of the
population — more than 95 per cent wish to see the
elections held — not to be held hostage by a radical
minority that does not want elections and that wants a
transitional Government, so it can take office without
going to the polls. That is the situation. Those are the
two plans that exist, as can clearly be seen. I wanted to
share that with the Council rather than keep it to myself.
In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
that, unfortunately, some of our troops deployed with the
African Union Mission in Somalia have been attacked

15-196845/6

S/PV.7473

The situation in Burundi

and have died on the field of battle. Our soldiers have
done excellent work in Somalia in order to help our
brothers there restore peace, and we are always ready to
sacrifice our troops in order to achieve our shared goal
of restoring peace in brother countries such as Somalia.

6/6

26/06/2015

Such attacks, rather than discouraging our troops, have
worked to redouble their energy and determination to
help eliminate Al-Shabaab.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

15-19684
