UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... .. .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12066) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1919/Rev.l)

S/PV. 1919

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters corn- s
bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
DeciGons of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1919th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 12 May 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD

I invite him to take a ulace at the Council
to make his statement.-

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union pf Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. Mr. MEDANI
(Sudan): Mr. President, we are
fortunate that the Security Council is considering the
situation in the occupied Arab territories under your
able and wise leadership. Your country has contributed
objectively and actively in the efforts to achieve a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. Therefore, we are
confident that under your guidance the Council will
take appropriate action on the item on the agenda.

agenda (S/Agenda/l919/Rev.l)

of the agenda
4. I should also like to join previous speakers in
welcoming Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union
back to the Council. I wish him and Mrs. Malik
complete recovery and happiness. Indeed, we are
happy to see him resume his activities and enrich the
Council with his valuable contribution.
My delegation would like also to welcome the representative
of Japan and to wish him every success.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12066)
The meeting

Adoption

table and

was called to order at 3.30 p.m.

5. Since the Council meetings in March, developments in the Arab occupied territories have become
immensely and increasingly grave and serious. The
attempt by the Israeli authorities to establish new
Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab lands, which
the United States itself has criticized as an obstacle
to resolving the Middle East problem, was the immediate cause for the demonstrations
on the West Bank
by the Palestinian people in which Arab students,
women and even children have been and are being
brutally assaulted and killed by the barbaric Zionist
regime.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
]tetter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent Reprei
sentative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12066)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from ,French):
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council
earlier [1916th to 1918th meetingsf, I shall now invite
the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Yemen, as well as the representative of
the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
(PLO),
to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.

6. Yet regrettably the representative
of Israel, in
his statement of 5 May [1917th meeting], failed to
explain the barbaric attacks of Israeli soldiers on
unarmed Palestinians.
Rather than explain to the
international community the behaviour of his Govemment, he tried, as usual, to distract the Council’s
attention from the crimes of his Government in the
occupied territories and the illegal occupation of Arab
lands by giving his preposterous interpretation
of
events in Lebanon-the
country where his Govemment has been killing people and destroying property,
acts for which it has so many times been condemned
by the international
community.
He described the
uprising of the Palestinians as some sporadic stonethrowing in the West Bank, while in past weeks newspapers and newscasts have been filled with reports
of Israeli atrocities against the Arab population in the

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. fferiog
(Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Council table and Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hussen
(Somalia),
Mr. Medani (Sudan), Mr. Allaf (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr. Sallam .(Yemen) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker is the representative of the Sudan.
1

West Bank: strikes are spreading in the cities, violent
street clashes are continuing,
curfews are being
imposed, local and foreign journalists are not allowed
even to enter the scenes of violence and some are
arrested in attempting to do so.

Palestinians to liberate themselves from the yoke of
imperialism
and Zionism. The result of the municipal
elections has shattered the myth and plans of the
Zionists. Once again the Palestinians have affiimed
their unequivocal support of and commitment
to the
PLO, the only authentic representative of the people
7. In the issue of Newsweek of 10 May, Mr. M. S. ’ of Palestine.
Rusan asked a very valid question. He said:
10. The vast majority of Member States have, at
“Do you really want us to believe that the
certain intervals in their history, experienced foreign
Israeli paratroopers
shot and killed
six Arab
occupation and foreign influences. We were then told
many. similar tales of prosperity and progress under
demonstrators because they were ‘fearing for their
lives’? Would they have done the same if the
the benevolent guidance of our masters which we
demonstrators
were Israeli Jews? No, Sir. Arabs
would not have enjoyed if left to ourselves. But history
has shown the fallacy of this conception. It has shown
in Israel realize that racism is a fact of life in this
often hailed ‘democracy’.”
that foreign occupation was the real evil and,the real
cause that retarded our political progress and economic
development.
Further, he said:
11. It is obvious, on this subject, that a similarity
between the Israeli argument and that of the racist
regimes of South Africa and Rhodesia cannot escape
anyone in the Council. The racist regimes of South
Africa and Rhodesia have constantly used the same
distortion to- justify their occupation and exploitation
of the indigenous peoples of those lands. Only last
April the Prime Minister of South Africa paid a visit
to Israel and to the occupied Arab territories and
exchanged views and experience with Israeli leaders
on the ways and means of maintaining and prolonging
occupation in their respective regions. The visit was
condemned .by all peace-loving nations and peoples
in the world. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CissC, representative of Guinea and Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid,
condemned the visit on 7 April,
expressing the hope that:

“Of course the Egyptians and other Arab countries are inciting
the people...
Of course the
Palestinian
Liberation
Organization
is actively
calling for disturbances.”
Yet, The New York Times, a newspaper not known
particularly to favour the Arabs against Israel, reported
on 25 March that:
“The disturbances are a genuinely indigenous
phenomenon
that reflects the accumulated
grievances of a population that has been under occupation for eight years.”
8. On the other hand, the representative
of Israel
again tried to mislead the Council by giving us a rosy
picture of developments
and conditions in the West
Bank and Gaza, saying:

“all Governments and organizations will condemn
the actions of the Government of Israel in developing
closer collaboration
with the Pretoria regime in
defiance of United Nations resolutions, warn the
Government
of Israel that the Governments
and
peoples opposed to apartheid and racism cannot
.ignore such collaboration,
and exercise their
influence to persuade the Government of Israel to
desist from the present course.”

“We are proud of the fact that there has been a
real growth in the gross national product in both
territories of an average of 18 per cent annum;
that per capita income has increased by 80 per cent
in the West Bank.” [Ibid., pat-u. 991.
Only last week the representative of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization reminded the Council of the
October 1970 report of the Ministry of Defence Unit
for Co-ordination
of Activity in the Administered
Areas, which includes the following:

12. Once again the Israeli representative
tries to
appeal to the members of the Council by himself
posing as the innocent victim among the majority
of Arabs when he talks of the Arab representatives
speaking one after another. If the Arabs take the
initiative in bringing to the attention of the Council
the problems of the occupied Arab territories, they do
so because what is at stake is the future of a nation,
the future of the Palestinian people-and,
therefore,
the future of the United Nations, the Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

“The areas are a supplementary
market for
Israeli goods and services, on the one hand, and a
source of the factors of production,
especially
unskilled labour, for the Israeli economy, on the
other.” [Ibid., para. 179.1
9. The contention of the Israeli representative that
the occupation is humane and has provided political
and economic advantages to the oppressed people of
Palestine is irrelevant and extremely superficial. The
general strikes and demonstrations
in the occupied
territories are a reflection of the determination
of the

13. On the other hand, any casual observer of the
international
scene must be aware that the majority
of Member States consider the conflict in the Middle
2

conflict. Lasting peace and a settlement cannot be
achieved without the recognition of the inalienable,
rights of the Palestinians and the establishment of an
independent
Palestinian
authority.
The withdrawal
of Israel from all occupied territories is a sine qua non
condition for a genuine peace in the Middle East. The
present Israeli policy of continued occupation,
the
establishment of new settlements and the practice of
terror and suppression against unarmed Palestinians
constitute a real threat to international
peace and
security, in contravention
of the Charter an resolutions of the United Nations. The Security Council
cannot remain silent about the crimes and aggression committed
by the Zionist regime against the
Palestinians.

East to be an integral part of their own struggle.
With the exception, perhaps, of a very few, no one is
any longer indifferent
to the aspirations
of the
Palestinian
people for liberation,
national independence, and sovereignty. It remains for those so very
few to see the struggle in its true perspective.
14. In Africa, the visit of the Prime Minister of
South Africa to Israel was widely condemned.
In
Ghana, for example, the Daily Graphic and the
Ghanaian Times strongly condemned the visit in their
editorials of 13 April. The Ghanaian Times stated in
its editorial:
“It is not in vain that the United N&ions had
described racism and Zionism as being two sides
of one coin, two symptoms of the same disease,
two evil birds of the same feather.”
The Daily Graphic

17. In its issue of Monday last, The New York Times
reported that the Israeli cabinet had decided that the
ultra-nationalist
settlers encamped in the heart of the
occupied West Bank must move to a new site. The new
site would be determined in the following weeks. The
newspaper added that the Israeli cabinet had called for
intensified Israeli settlement in the occupied .West
Bank. This is new evidence confirming the intransigent
position of Israel and its determination
to maintain
and consolidate its policy of occupation and exploitation in contravention
of one of the principles of the
Charter and resolutions
of the United
Nations
-namely,
the inadmissibility
of the acquisition
of
territory by war.

said also:

“The world must see the Zionist-apartheid
co.operation for what it is-a pursuit of common
racist interests that must be condemned for the
,dangers they pose to Africa and the Middle East,
and for the danger they pose to world peace in
general.”
The Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, in a statement
issued on 7 April, revealed that the Zionist regime is
prepared to forget Nazi crimes against the Jews if
they can obtain the friendship and support of another
isolated, racist and condemned regime. The statement
suggests that:

18. In this connexion I find it apt to quote the
representative of Jordan, who said before the Council:
“Where the Arab parties right to come again to
the Security Council? What is the alternative? One
possibility is to rely exclusively on what is happening
in the occupied territories, which is the subject of
this debate, until it achieves its purpose: ending
Israeli occupation. The resistance is going on there,
and it is not deterred or defused by inaction or
obstruction in the Council. But the cost in lives...
is high, and it is the duty... of the Council to seek
a peaceful alternative.”
[2917th meeting, para. 34.1

“Vorster was detained by South Africa’s wartime Government for being a self-confessed follower
of Hitler and for engaging in pro-Nazi sabotage
activities. Silence over Vorster’s Nazi past when he
is courting Zionist support for the suppression of the
.African majority in Azania.. . will render as sham the
continuing
outcry against the Nazi massacre of
6 million Jews.”
15. Only this morning The Christian Science Monitor,
under the heading “Israel’s dangerous course”, stated:

19. It is therefore extremely urgent that the Council
condemn the expansionist policy of Israel and its
repressive measures against the Palestinians.
Israel
must be compelled to abide by the fourth Geneva
Convention,’
the Charter
and United
Nations
resolutions.

“‘Friends of Israel will be mystified as to why
that nation should deliberately opt for a course of
action that invites conflict and tension. Yet the
Israeli Government’s
plan to establish still more
settlements in occupied Arab territory, induding
the volatile West Bank, does just that. This shortsighted move can only aggravate an already serious
problem and pose a further barrier to the achievement of a final peace settlement with the Arabs.”

20. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Somalia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.

16. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the position
of Sudan which I outlined in the Council last January
[1877th meeting]. It is the firm belief of my country
that the question of Palestine is the core of the conflict
in the Middle East. It is crucial to the Arab-Israeli

21. Mr. HUSSEN
(Somalia): Mr. President, may
I at the outset express my delegation’s congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of May.
3

22. On this occasion allow me also to address a word
of welcome to Comrade Yakov Malik, representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,’ on the
resumption of his normal activities after an unfortunate
car accident which kept him away from us and from his
offrce for some time. I should like to ask him to be
kind enough to convey my best wishes for a speedy
recovery to Mrs. Malik, also a victim of the accident.

2,000 years ago. This premise poses a chronic threat
to the peace of the Middle East and to international
security. It explains not only the past but also what is
happening today. It explains, for example, why Israeli
troops provided protection
for the thousands of
Zionists who marched arrogantly through occupied
Arab territory only a few weeks ago, claiming that
Jews should be allowed to settle wherever they like
in the so-called land of Israel. It explains the feverish
effort to change the religious, cultural and demographic character of occupied Jerusalem and the
determination
of the Zionists to annex a city that-is
as sacred to Islam and to Christianity
as it is to
Judaism. It explains too why more than 60 Jewish
settlements have been deliberately planted throughout
occupied Arab territory and why 50 million Israeli
pounds were spent last year alone on the secret
purchase by an Israeli government agency of Arab
lands in the occupied West Bank.

23. With your permission, may I extend my delegation’s warm welcome to the new representative
of
Japan, Ambassador Isao Abe, who has taken the
place of another well-respected figure, Ambassador
Shizuo Saito, who during his tenure of office earned
the admiration and respect of his colleagues at the
United Nations. I am confident that Ambassador
Abe will make a useful contribution
to the work of
the Organization
in the supreme interest of intemational peace and co-operation.

27. It is no secret that Arab communities
have been
uprooted,
Arab property expropriated
and Arab
homes, villages and towns destroyed. These facts of the
Israeli occupation are admitted by the Israelis themselves and have been widely reported by the intemational news media. We are all aware of these facts,
but it is important, as I said before, that we continue
to see them within their historical context.

24. My delegation asked to be permitted to take part
in this debate for two reasons. One is the Somali
Government’s
long-standing opposition to the illegal,
unjust and expansionist policies of Israel in tbe Middle
East. The other is our belief that the latest manifestations of those Israeli policies are storm warnings that . .
should not be treated lightly or ignored by the intemational community.
We therefore wish to state our
support for the view that the Security Council must
once more concern itself directly with the fact and
consequences of Israel’s occupation of Arab territory.

28. The current phase of the Zionist expansion in
the Middle East did not, of course, appear over night
on the international
scene. It began immediately
after
the war of 1967 and has already been the subject of
considerable debate in the Secbuity Council and other
bodies of the United Nations. A series of Council
meetings less than two months ago dealt with substantially the same question again before us today.
The wide support for the draft resolution which
emerged from those meetings [S/12022], calling on
Israel to end its illegal and repressive measures against
Arab territory and peoples, showed that the members
of the Council are fully aware of the facts and the
significance of the worrisome developments
in the
occupied Arab territories. They know that the Israeli
administration
callously
disregards Geneva Conventions to which Israel is a party and ignores the
norms of international
law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Even the United
States veto--obviously
motivated by internal politicshad an air of unreality, since the United States position
as outlined by its representative
was basically in
accord with the provisions of the draft resolution.

25. When dealing with Middle East problems it is
always difficult, if not impossible, to avoid going back
to the past. While it is not my intention to tax the
Council’s time and patience with a historical survey,
no one can consider these problems realistically
unless he sees them within a context that has not
fundamentally
changed since the first decades of this
century. It is important to realize, for example, that the
attainment of a new level of repression and inhumanity
towards the Arab people of the occupied areas and of
Israel itself is part of a continuing process which
began when the Zionists decided to establish an
exclusively
Jewish State in Palestine.
The main
obstacle to that goal has always been and continues to
be the fact that the land coveted by the Zionists has
been inhabited for many centuries by another people.
The Zionist attempt to overcome the obstacle of a
stubborn people which refuses to be eliminated has
taken many forms. We have seen attempts
at
partitioning
the land, armed provocation,
mass
terrorization
and expulsion of the people and armed
aggression and illegal conquest directed against Arab
States. All these policies have been employed in pursuit
of the Zionist objective.

29. Since that series of Council meetings in March
there have been several highly significant developments. One is that the Arab people of the occupied
territories have shown in no uncertain manner their
abhorrence of the occupation and their opposition to
the creeping annexation of their land. They have
thereby given the lie to Israeli attempts to have the
world believe that they are happy under Israeli
domination.
Another
development
has been the

26. In short, it is as relevant today as it was 30 years
ago to remember that the Jewish State was established
on the strange premise that the Jewish people had
a superior title to Palestine because of its religious
history and because of a previous tenancy almost
4

bitter expression by Arabs in Israel itself of their
resentment at being third-class citizens in a racist
State which is attempting to reduce their status even
further by the expropriation of their land.

also increases the danger that these regimes will
together develop and deploy nuclear weapons for the
defence of their racist strongholds.
33. When the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session decided that Zionism was a form of racism
[resolution 3379 (XXX’)], there was a loud outcry from
some quarters, but the majority of third-world countries and other peace-loving nations at the United
Nations held their ground, confident in the accuracy of
their assessment. Today it is clear that third-world
assessment has been vindicated:
Israel and South
Africa’s minority
regime have come together in a
natural alliance of two regimes which have established
the doctrine of racial exclusiveness as the centre of
their national philosophy. They also have in common
their contempt for the system of international law and
respect for human rights-the
basic principles and
the ultimate goal of the United Nations. These observations are closely relevant to the question before the
Council
because the Zionist
delusion
of racial
superiority and exclusiveness underlies Israeli policies
towards the Arab people of the occupied territories
and towards the Arab population in Israel.

30. It is important to note, too, that the Israelis have
shown their determination
to suppress the legitimate
protest of the Arabs, both in Israel and in the occupied
territories, with the harshest and most brutal measures.
The Israeli occupation has always entailed extensive
infringements of the human rights of the Arab people,
and this fact has been carefully substantiated every
year for the past seven years in the report of the
Special Committee
to Investigate
Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories. However, recent manifestations
of Israeli brutality, directed even against women and
children and involving many cold-blooded
murders,
have reached new depths of cruelty and inhumanity.
The shooting of six Arabs and the wounding and
imprisonment
of hundreds of others for demonstrating
against the expropriation
of Arab-owned land in
northern Galilee were examples of the true nature of
what has been self-admiringly
called the “only
democracy in the Middle East”. It cannot escape the
Council’s attention that the Palestinian
population
under Israeli rule is rising in anger and protest against
armed occupation and unjust treatment and that new
fuel has been added to an already explosive situation.

34. I am sure that Council members are aware that
recent developments in the Middle East have increased
the chronic tensions of that area and their potential
for threatening world peace and security. I doubt
whether anyone will be taken in by the attempt of
the Israeli representative to make light of recent events
in the occupied Arab territories and in Israel or by his
attempt to draw red herrings across the path of this
debate. His performance called to mind the common
practice of the lawyer whose client has a poor case,
or no case at all, and who therefore tries to discredit
the witnesses.

3 1. Perhaps the most significant development that has
taken place since March has been the overwhelming
confidence in the leadership of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
expressed by the people of the West
Bank in the recent municipal elections there. The
Israeli representative has often tried to persuade the
Council that the PLO is not a valid political entity or
that it is without significant support among Arab
peoples. Yet despite the threatening Israeli military
presence the people of the occupied West Bank came
out in full strength to show their unequivocal support
of the PLO as their sole legitimate
representative.
In that respect it is worth quoting from a statement
made by an influential
figure in the West Bank
Municipai Government, Mr. Karim Khalaf, as reported
by the semi-weekly review of Agence France Presse
of 16 April Speaking of the representativeness of the
newly elected officials, Mr. Khalaf said, “We are
not political men, and we are not trying to speak in the
name of the Palestinians. It is the PLO which represents us.”

35. As I indicated earlier, in March an overwhelming
majority
of Council members showed their deep
concern over the serious situation caused by the
continued Israeli occupation of Arab territory. Even
the representative of the United States admitted that
Jewish settlements in Israeli-occupied
Arab territories
were an obstacle in the search for peace between
Israel and its neighbours. The question is whether
the determination
of the majority of the members of
the Council to take positive action will again be
thwarted
because of considerations
which are
irrelevant to the basic problems of the Middle East.
36. My delegation shares the belief of the majority
of the Member States in both this Council and the
world Organization that a just and durable peace in the
Middle East can,be established only when the Israeli
occupation of Arab territory is ended and when the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination
and national
independence
are
accorded under the leadership of their choice-the
PLO. The Palestinian people have shown unequalled
courage and determination
over the years in their
struggle for justice and the recognition of their right
to nationhood.

32. Finally, it must be noted that since March we
have seen the culmination
of the progressive movement of Israel towards an open and unashamed alliance
with the white minority
regime in South Africa.
Mr. Vorster’s visit to Israel last month, during which
he was accompanied by South African military experts,
will undoubtedly
re-sult in increased co-operation
between these two usurpers in their common opposition to the liberation struggle of the peoples of the
Middle East and South Africa. This collaboration
5

37. In my delegation’s view, it is the inescapable
duty of the Security Council to act in support of the
oppressed victims of Israeli aggression and to use both
its moral authority and the means provided by the
Charter to compel Israel to respect the principles of
international law and to abide by the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and by world public
opinion. Any further delay on the part of the Council
in taking adequate and urgent action to remove the
basic cause of this long-standing and grave situation
will further increase the tension in the area and augment
the possibility of further military confrontation.
38. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.
39. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): We have sat through the
usual barrage of Arab slander and abuse, and I cannot
restrain myself again from asking this body: to what
purpose? Do you really expect any sovereign State to
react favourably to such statements? Would any of you
here be moved to accommodate your opponents on the
basis of the idiom which is used in these debates?
Is it not time that someone had the courage to get up
and say: “Enough; this is not the way to solve disputes,
whether human or international”?
40. As I pointed out during the last Council debate
in which I participated in March, I am not disturbed
by the repetitive debate. On the contrary, if I could
encourage my Arab colleagues to persevere in this
policy I would do so, because nothing can demonstrate
more clearly the hypocrisy of the Arab representatives
and the true intent behind their remarks than the
repeated diatribes to which we have to listen in these
debates. Admittedly,
they are tiresome,
boring,
repetitive;
they are counter-productive,
they are a
waste of time and they are personally inconvenient
to many of us. In short, they are a nuisance. But they
do serve a purpose: whatever failings we Israelis may
have in our public relations efforts, we are given
invaluable
help by our Arab colleagues at these
debates.
41. Let me draw the Council’s attention, once again,
to the terrifying and sinister fact that not once has the
word “negotiation”
been mentioned in this debate
so far, except by the representative
of Israel-and
this despite the Charter, which calls for the settlement
of international disputes by negotiation; despite resolution 338 (1973), which called for direct negotiations
between the States which are parties to the conflict.
Is it not a sad and sombre commentary on the state
of the world today that the Council,
instead of
promoting peace and security in the world, as befits
its function, is becoming an active tool in the hands of
Arab intransigence, has turned into a function of the
internecine inter-Arab struggle and is becoming an
element opposed to negotiation and to peace efforts.
42. Instead, we have been subjected to the rewriting
of history by the Syrian representative, as witness his

remarks in connexion with the Jewish nation’s rights
and position in the Middle East. The unbelievable
contradiction
in the Arab world and the amusing
impasse into which my Arab colleagues have manmuvred themselves is best expressed in the following
official broadcast a few days ago, on 4 May, on
Damascus Radio:
“What is happening between Cairo and the
Security Council is a joke. Sadat, who claims to be
the president of science and faith and who is (in
fact) president of ignorance and heresy, has decided
to flatter.. . the Arab nation... and the Palestinian
people, whose rights he had trampled underfoot.
“In a demonstrative and childish act he instructed
his representative to the United Nations to request
an urgent meeting of the Security Council to discuss
Israeli actions in the West Bank.
“Where
submitted
twice?”

was Sadat when the Syrian working paper
to the Security Council was changed

That was not an Israeli broadast; that was a Syrian
broadcast on Damascus Radio just eight days ago.
43. Perhaps I really should not be too hard on my
Syrian colleague. He has provided us after all with
some of the lighter moments in this dreary session.
I refer to his remarks at the last meeting castigating
Israel for not encouraging
Ambassador
Jarring’s
mission in the Middle East. To the best of my
recollection, Ambassador Jarring was not received in
Damascus. Indeed, I doubt if he even set foot in Syria,
because the Syrian Government at that time rejected
the very basis of his mission, which was resolution 242
(1967). I am indeed moved by his crocodile tears.
44. I do not mind, as I say, contemplating
the
continuation of this exhibition, including the rewriting
of history. But what purpose does it serve? Is it
bringing us any nearer to peace? We were summoned
here urgently by the Egyptian representative
to a
meeting which is so obviously purposeless and which
is being dragged out because it has no direction. It
has no direction because my Egyptian colleague is
apparently
still awaiting his instructions.
Those
instructions are in turn dependent upon inter-Arab
developments. And those developments are dependent
upon the growing confrontation
between the PLO
and the Syrians, confrontations now being complicated
by the activities of the Egyptians. And that vicious
circle has brought us all here to this table.
45. So why don’t we all let our Arab colleagues
spend just a little longer resolving their Byzantine
intrigues in the area, and then when they are ready
we will, on their instructions,
ail come back and
take up the discussion again. Indeed, if the issues in
the Arab Middle East are becoming too involved,
perhaps the Council ought to send out a mediator to
help them to solve their own problems.

46. Despite what has been said at @is meeting, thedevelopments in Lebanon are most relevant to this discussion. We were offtcially informed yesterday by the
PLO representative on the spot in Beirut that they are
actively involved in the struggle against the Syrian
attempts at hegemony in Lebanon. I apologize to the
Chinese representative for borrowing a term on which
he appears to have a copyright. This we have asserted
all along, despite the PLO denials, and it is gratifying
to be proved correct.

ment of Israel to the fringe group led by Rabbi Kahane
was clearly stated only this week by our Foreign.
Minister, Mr. Yigal Allon. He denounced in unequivocal terms the threats issued by that organization,
pointing out that they were not only despicable in
themselves
but were also sabotaging the Jewis
people’s struggle for emigration from the Soviet Union
and against the persecution of Jewish activists. These
shameful threats made by a small and irresponsible
group must not be confused with the efforts. of the
Jewish people to ensure the freedom of Soviet Jewry
to emigrate and to be reunited with their families
abroad in accordance with the spirit of the Final
Act of the Helsinki Conference, which was agreed
to by the Government of the Soviet Union.

47. But, all this aside, the grim, tragic and irrefutable
fact is that while the Security Council, supposedly
devoted to the maintenance of peace and security in the
world, has been engaged in this futile debate on isolated
instances of stone throwing in the West Bank, since we
began this meeting over 500 Lebanese have been
killed, and thousands wounded, and yet not a word is
heard from the Council or from this world body. To
put things in perspective, in the whole period of nine
,years of Israeli administration
of the West Bank and
Gaza-since
1967-there
have been fewer Arab and
Jewish casualties together than in any given average
hour in Lebanon during the past year. And those few
casualties would not have occurred were it not for
active external incitement.

51. Let me reiterate part of the statement made by
our Foreign Minister this week, in which he called
upon the Jewish people “to reject in spirit and in
practice the reprehensible
methods
adopted by
Kahane’s
group”.
Indeed,
he was reiterating
statements made in the past by representatives of the
Government of Israel. Let me state quite unequivocally
that the Government
of Israel rejects any form of
terrorism by whomever it is carried out. To this date,
no such statement has been issued by any Arab representative about the wave of terror which has beset the
world. Moreover, some Arab Governments actively
arm, support and finance these activities and then give
haven to the perpetrators of the terrorist atrocities.
They are known to us all.

48. Here I would suggest to the representative of the
Soviet Union that, before he engages in unwarranted
distortions when he talks about “racial genocide” and
shootings, arrests and “the persecution of thousands
and thousands of peaceful Arab inhabitants”
[191&h
meeting, para. 441, he verify the facts before he
makes such baseless statements. I suspect that the
representative of the Soviet Union gets his facts from
the verbatim records of the Security Council. I submit
that this is not the most reliable and credible source
for anything. Indeed, he has a very good opportunity
to verify the facts now from the Soviet delegation
which, as reported in the press, has currently been
visiting Israel, together, incidentally, with hundreds of
thousands of other tourists-including
thousands’ of
Arab tourists. That delegation from the Soviet Union,
which recently attended the annual memorial in the
Red Army Forest in the Jerusalem hills commemorating the Allied victory over Nazi Germany, will
doubtless be able to apprise Ambassador
Maiik
of the true state of affairs in the West Bank.

52. A few days ago, as I recounted at the 1917th
meeting, a bomb was placed in a public thoroughfare
in Jerusalem. Those injured included Jews, Arabs
and diplomats, notably the Greek Consul-General and
his wife. The PLO offtcially claimed credit for this act
of “heroism”
on 4 May in an official communique
issued by the PLO in Beirut. I ask the representative
of the Soviet Union how he reacted. Did he condemn
this indiscriminate
act of violence against diplomats,
about whom he quoted the Latin classics, or did he and
most of his colleagues here vote to seat those who
claimed credit for the act of terrorism? How did the
Security Council and how did he himself react publicly
when American and Belgian diplomats, bound hand
and foot in the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Khartoum,
were shot in cold blood on direct orders from Yasser
A&at,
as revealed by President Nimeiri of Sudan’!
Were there speeches of condemnation
at this Council
table? Not one. Instead, the man who gave the order
to murder those diplomats was invited to address the
General Assembly.

49.’ Indeed, it is very sobering for me personally to
reflect that while many of us here, including myself,
were engaged actively in- the Allied forces in the
struggle against fascism and Nazi Germany, many of
those for whom Ambassador Malik expresses so much
concern today were actively supporting the Fascist
and Nazi forces which caused such losses and misery
to the Soviet Union.

53. When Israeli diplomats were shot in various parts
of the world, when Turkish, Bolivian and Spanish
diplomats were shot down in Paris, when an attempt
was made on the life of the Jordanian Ambassador in
London by the PLO, what was the reaction? Did not
the Soviet delegation join hands with the Arab
delegates to kill and bury the item on international
terrorism in the Sixth Committee
of the General

50. The representative of the Soviet Union reacted to
my raising the question of terrorism at this meeting,
and he cited a number of threats which had been
received by his delegation. The attitude of the Govem7

I

Assembly? The record is there for everybody to see
and read.

that they can find a better solution. That is why
certain representatives and States show a stubborn
disinclination to permit direct negotiations between
the interested parties and are trying to interfere in
and, unfortunately, to hinder those negotiations.”

54. A distinguished Soviet statesman, Maxim
Litvinov, once said that peace was indivisible. I submit
that terrorism too is indivisible; you cannot be selective
about it. The nations of the world will either join hands
to destroy this scourge which affects mankind today,
or they will be destroyed by it. It is not enough to
raise your voice in horror only when it affects you.
If terrorism is bad, it is bad for everybody, in every
case, and must be eliminated.

[664th meeting,

paras. 95 and 96.1

59. This was the voice of reason. This, I submit,
is the only way. Until we, the representatives of the
Arab Governments and the representative of Isreal,
begin to sit down and negotiate across the table,
instead of maligning each other across the table,in this
purposeless manner, we shall never advance towards
peace.

55. I could go on at great length to refute the baseless
and vicious allegations being made here. They are all
too familiar. Every member of the Council, I am
convinced, can now repeat them by heart. Nothing
could emphasize more clearly the absurdity of this
whole debate than the efforts of the representative of
the Sudan to lecture us, in a Council which literally
ignored the massacre of half a million black Christians
in the southern Sudan only a few years ago. What a
sombre reflection: the representative of a Government
whose hands are soaked with the blood of half a million
black Christians sits here and lectures us.

60. The PRESIDENT (interpretation.from
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt.
I invite him to be seated at the Council table and to
make his statement.

61. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): We have listened
just now to an insulting statement by the Israeli
representative. This is not unusual from him; The
Israeli representative has had the gall to speak about
Ambassador Jarring’s mission. Does he not know his
.-Government’s answer to the aide-memoire of Ambas56. Indeed, no debate took place in the Security i sador Jarring [S/10403 of 30 November 1971, annex I]?
Council then, for the same reason that no debate is (: I should like to remind him that the Isreali Governtakingplace today on the Christian tragedy in Lebanon.
ment, in its answer to Ambassador Jarring [ibid.,
If this is not sufficient to emphasize the incongruity of annex ZZZ], insisted on keeping the occupied Arab
these proceedings, then we have the spectacle of the territories and refused to return to the i967 borders.
representative of Somalia, a country which has become I thought he would have avoided such a subject.
a threat to the maintenance of peace and security in
the area and the central subject of concern to its 62. Who here is shedding crocodile tears over the
peaceful neighbours. It too feels free in this atmosphere Jarring mission? The Israeli representative, certainly,
to sermonize.
as Council members have themselves- witnessed, and
I advise him to save some of these crocodile tears
57. I ask again: can any sensible person imagine that because he will need them often in the future to
all this childish and puerile repetition is going to have justify his Government’s policy.
an effect on anybody, least of all on Israel?
63. I should also like to advise the Israeli representa58. Since the representative of the Soviet Union took tive not to try again to play on the differences among
the position he took in the Council, let me quote again the Arab countries. I think I have done. so before,
a statement made by one of his predecessors at but I am doing so again. I want to assure him and every
this very table, Deputy Foreign Minister Andrei
representative around this table that the peoples of the
Vyshinsky, who said in the Council on 29 March Arab world, especially the Egyptian and Syrian
1954:
peoples, are united to liberate their Iand from Israeli
occupation, and that, Egyptian and Syrian blood
“You can submit whatever resolutions you like.
having merged during the October war of liberation,
But life does not call for resolutions; it calls for
the Egyptian and Syrian peoples will again go hand in
decisions which can promote the settlement of
hand against Israeli occupation, expansionism and
important international questions which are still
terrorism. The best words for the Israeli representaoutstanding.
tive are those which the Chairman of the Foreign
Correspondents’ Association in Israel used to the
“What is the proper method for this? The method Israeli Government two days ago: “Shut up”.
is that of direct negotiation between the interested
parties. On one side we have the representative of
64. Every day that passes proves to the whole world
Isreal” -this was in 1954-“and on the other the how Israel and its leaders are afraid of the truth. The
representative of Egypt; they are sitting opposite Israeli representative tried unsuccessfully to deceive
one another. Let them sit down together at one table the Council about his Government’s policies and
and try to settle the questions which the Security measures in the occupied Arab territories and against
Council cannot settle now. I am deeply convinced
the civilian population of those territories. In my
8

statement of 4 May [1916th meeting] I referred to the
harsh treatment by the Israeli authorities, military and
political, of foreign newsmen and television crewmen,
and though this is- consistent, standard Israeli policy
and behaviour, it has nevertheless become blatant
during the last year. Physical measures have been used
to intimidate foreign correspondents, including
detention, arrests, roughing up by soldiers and the
destruction of equipment and films. AI1this contradicts
the Israeli representative’s vain efforts to convince the
Council and the world at large of how democratic his
Government is and how it cherishes freedom of the
press, and so forth. In fact, the Israeli authorities
went very far in using absurd arguments, such as their
accusations that foreign newsmen had asked the
Arabs on the West Bank to stage demonstrations in
exchange for payment. The utter absurdity of that
ahegation was evident to everyone.

will become known. The Israeli at@iorities have also
used the same tactics in Gaza fey tlie past several
years, but in vain, seeing that the truth cannot be
barred whatever the occupying Power tries. The
Nazis in the Second World War used every measure
to hide the fact of .the resistance in. the areas they
occupied, but the more they tried the more they failed.
So I advise the Israeli representative once: again not
to belittle the intelligence of Council members by
pretending that his country is not afraid &the truth
and that it is the champion of freedom of the press
and freedom of expression.
68. The Israeli manceuvres go--on- and on. unabated.
In the middle of the Council’s debate, the Israeli
Government is trying to piacate Council members
by pretending that it is changing its policy on the
settlement issues. According to press dispatches, the
decision the Israeli Government is making a big,fuss
about is that barring 30 families of settlers near
Nablus in the occupied West Bank from establishing
a permanent settlement there. But 3 wonder who the
Israeli Government is trying to fool. In the same
statement announcing this decision, the Israeli Ciovemment called for intensified Israeli’settlement in the
occupied West Bank. These settlerswilleven be given
another site in the West Bank by the Israeli Government to establish a settlement: It is significant, however, that these settlers are living now in, an army
camp, that is to say that they are shehered; financed,
fed and guarded by the Israeli Army itself. So it is
nonsense to say that the Israeli Government is
embarrassed or is- in a delicate position concerning
the settlement issue.

65. But the foreign press association in Israel was
swift and decisive in answering such’s silly allegation
and issued an official statement accusing the Israeli
authorities of waging a calculated campaign blaming
foreign reporters for Arab demonstrations and telling
the Israeli officials to “put up or shut up”. Mr. Steve
Delaney, Chairman of the Foreign Correspondents’
Association, challenged the military authorities quoted
in the Israeli press either to back up these charges or
to drop them. The Israeli authorities declared only a
few days ago through a military spokesman that
an American television network correspondent,
Mr. Avron Saritsky, the NBC Bureau Chief in Tel
Aviv who was arrested on 7 May while filming children
burning tyres, had accused the Israeli army of holding
him at the Military Governor’s headquarters in Jenin
before telling him that he had been arrested for filming
inside a closed area. Mr. Saritsky charged that a
soldier had hit one of his television crew members in
the chest with a rifle in a struggle to take his camera
away.

69. Settlements are being established with the
complete knowledge of the Israeli Government, if not
directly by it. This setttement policy. cannot find- any
support outside Israel. GnIy recc~nt@ @e Foreign
Minister of the Netherlauds, Mi. $%n%ierS$er; joined
other statesmen in warning of the: consequences of
such a policy when he told Mermchem Begin, the
leader of the fascist Herut party in Israel, that his
Government did not support Israel’s settIement policy
and was in fact concerned about it. However, it seems
that the Israeli Government is bent on ignoring, as
usual, such opinions or such advice, however friendly
they are. In its blind course it tries to bmsh aside
all the words ofzwarning about the consequences-of this
policy. Mr. Michael Adams, the. well-known British
journalist, described inclearterms theseconsequences
when he said:

The New York Times of 8 May said that in recent
weeks Israeli authorities have barred reporters- from
entering cities in the West Bank when disturbances
were under way. It went on to say that if violent
clashes broke out while cameramen were there, they
were ordered to leave the area or to stop ffiming.
Even the Israeli Government’s own newspaper, The
Jerusalem Post, found it difficult to swallow the
absurd charges which have been made and about which
it was very sceptical. This is what it said:

66.

. .

“In retrospect it seems clear ‘that neither the
Israeli TV crews nor their foreign colleagues contributed to the friction. in fact, the recent West
Bank unrest flared up long before many newsmen
reahzed its seriousness. Nonetheless, officials found
it easier to make a scapegoat of the media than
to analyse where their own concepts went wrong.”

“The search -for peace inthe~Mi~Zh&East involves
circumventing or surmouuting mtiniobstacles. None
of them is more formidable than the barricade which
the Israelis have deliberately erected and to which
they are hurrying to put the finishing touches in the
shape of some 60 Israeli settlements in the occupied
Arab territories. The establishment of more and
more settlements in the territories, from which the
world has long since decided that Israel wilT have to

67. It is clear now that these measures did not
succeed in hiding the truth which Israel is very afraid
9

1

withdraw, is futile and self-defeating. It perpetuates
the very hostility which it should be Israel’s object
to disarm.”
No wonder Lord Caradon referred in The Times of
London of 1 July 1975 to the 50 Israeli settlements,
before they mushroomed and became almost 70, as
“the 50 sign-posts to destruction”.
70. So the latest Israeli manmuvres will deceive
nobody, for more and more people are aware, as we
are in Egypt, of such manoeuvres. The Israeli policy
of establishing settlements in Egyptian occupied
territory is well known to us. Immediately after the
1967 aggression the Israeli authorities carried out a
plan of establishing several settlements in Sinai, but the
appetite of the Israeli Government grew stronger and
stronger. Thus, by the beginning of 1973 a project
of unprecedented ambition had begun to take shape in
north-eastern Sinai, where plans had been drawn up
for the creation of a new town, called Yamit, the
centre-piece of a complex of settlements between El
Arish and the Gaza Strip. Yamit was the vision of
Moshe Dayan, the then Minister of Defence in the
Government of Golda Meir, where Dayan himself an
the Minister without Portfolio, Israel Galili, were the
principal enthusiasts for the colonization of the
occupied territoriesdf course, with the blessing and
encouragement of Mrs. Meir herself. The plans for
Yamit, on a scale so grandiose that they aroused
anxious debate inside Israel even before the shock of
the October war, were prepared in secret by Dayan’s
Defence Ministry and only revealed to the Knesset in
September 1975. They envisaged a city. of a quarter of
a million inhabitants, which would make it the third
largest city in so-called Greater Israel, with a major
deep-water port, an international airport, a nuclear
power station and great potential for tourist development along the unspoiled coasts of northern Sinai.
If these projections, even in the euphoric days of
Israeli self-confidence before the October war, seemed
inflated to the point of fantasy, Dayan was perfectly
hard-headed about the political objective that Yamit
was designed to achieve. As one of his collaborators
explained to The New York Times of 26 December
1972:

“The new town would serve as an Israeli buffer
between the concentrated Arab population living in
the Gaza Strip and Egypt. A substantial Israeli
presence there would prevent collaboration between
the Gazans and the Egyptians.”

71. After the war Dayan. continued to develop this
theme, insisting that Yamit, like any other Israeli
settlement, had “an essential role to play in the Israeli
programme of colonization”. He was reported by The
Jerusalem Post to have told an election meeting at the
end of December 1973:
“Borders are not set by markings on a map;
borders are determined by settlement, and I say that
we must establish the city of Yamit.”
The Yamit project also involved conspicuously cruel
disregard for the rights of the.people of &hearea. The
whole project and the establishment of the complex
of settlements involved the eviction and displacement
of a very substantial number of-persons. the process
began as long ago as 1969, when as area of 3,000 acres
was expropriated. At the beginning of 1972 further
confiscations took place with total disregard not only
for the rights of the inhabitants but also for the most
elementary humanitarian considerations. According:to
Mr. Ammon Kapeliouk, an Israeli journalist and the
author of the book La fin des mythes, published last
year in Paris;
“The Israeli soldiers drove off some 10,000
farmers and Bedouins, bulldozed their crops and
filled in their wells. At that time, a further 8,800,acres
were expropriated and surrounded with’ a barbed
wire fence, which the dispossessed people were
forbidden to cross.”
72.. ,The Israeli Government, according to statements
by government officials to a correspondent of The
New York Times reported on 11 May, is drawing up
plans for the establishment of a large number of new
settlements in the occupied Arab te.rritories over the
next several years. The settlements will range from
small villages to industrial towns and will be along the
lines of the existing 68 settlements. The only difference
between estimates of the number of these new settlements, according to these off&&, is that some claim
that they will be hardly more than a dozen, while
others say that the programme will eventually include
several dozen. The New York Times correspondent
also revealed that the plans for these new settlements
were outlined during the Israeli Cabinet meeting on
10 May, complete with maps, charts and budget
estimates.
73. I wonder whether the Israeli representative needs
more facts than these to demonstrate his Government’s
policy against peace-he uses that word too much.
And whom should we believe? The Israeli representative or the Government of Israel?

In other words, Yamit itself, to be built on occupied
land, would be used to extend Israel’s borders westwards and to consolidate the Israeli hold on another
occupied area, the Gaza Strip. Dayan himself confirmed this when he tolcllisteners to the Israeli radio
a few weeks before the October war: “I have proposed
the establishment of Yamit so that it may serve as
one of the factors enabling us to establish the border
further to the west.”

74. Today an editorial in The Christian Science
Monitor put this dangerous Israeli policy in its true
perspective. It has been quoted earlier by my colleague,
the representative of Sudan, but allow me to quote it
again:
10

“Friends of Israel will be mystified.as to why that
nation should deliberately opt for a course of action
that invites conflict and tension. Yet the Israeli
Government’s plan to establish still more settlements
in occupied Arab territory, including the volatile
West Bank, does just that. This short-sighted move
can only aggravate an already serious problem and
pose a further barrier to the achievement of a final
peace settlement with the Arabs.”
The New York Times yesterday was similar
indignation when it said in an editorial:

77. But none of these measures, practices or policies
will undermine the will of the Arab peoples to liberate
every inch of their territories, and Israel will one day
have to pay dearly for everything it has looted from
these territories, if it really wants to live in peace in
the area. No matter how the Israeli Government tries
to establish fait accompli situations, this will not deter
the Arabs from liberating their lands and the Palestinians from regaining their national inalienable
rights.

in its
78. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

“By underscoring a misguided determination
to
move ever more ‘Israeli settlers into the occupied
Arab territories.. . the Rabin Government
is only
piling up problems for future policymakers and for
the course of Israel-United
States relations.”

79. Mr. ALLAF
(Syrian Arab Republic):
Insults,
insults, insults directed at everyone-at
the Arab
States, at the members of the Council and even at the
Council itself, which was described as being an active
tool in the hands of the Arab States. By now we are
accustomed to this traditional Israeli reaction to every
single debate or discussion of Israeli crimes in the
occupied Arab territories. Time and again the Israeli
representative has asked: “For what purpose are you
meeting? Why are you wasting your time in discussing
what we are doing in the occupied territories? Leave
us in peace. Give us time to complete the settlement
of the occupied territories and to finish the number of
settlements and colonies that we want to put there.”

75. That is only a general outline of the Israeli policy
of trying to establish faits accomplis is one part of the
occupied Arab territories or another. In my statement
I have already outlined other aspects of this deliberate
Israeli policy. But it seems that instead of stopping
this dangerous and provocative
policy, the Israeli
Government is determined to ignore all warnings about
the consequences of the course it is following. It also
seems to be anxious lately to encourage marches by
extreme elements to the occupied territories to provoke
the local Arab inhabitants, like the one last month by
the so-called Gush Emunim
movement,
whose
advertisements
in Israeli newspapers read: “Owners
of fire-arms and musical instruments are asked to bring
them”, or merely to stand by while, as Newsweek
of 26 April described, “a group of armed vigilantes
from the Kiryat Arba settlement went to Hebron and
unleashed trained attack dogs on teenage Arab
demonstrators”.
It is exactly like what the Nazis did
when, among other measures, they used to intimidate
any resistance by unleashing attack dogs against
civilians or organizing armed marches in the areas
they occupied.

80. What the Zionists are doing in the occupied territories is no longer a secret. It is on the first page of
every newspaper every morning, including the Zionist
newspapers, the Jewish newspapers. I have before
me the Jewish Press of today, which has a large headline, “Israel
plans dozens of new settlements”,
accompanied by an explanatory
map. Why should
the Security Council discuss this matter? That would
hinder the expansionist efforts of the Zionist regime
and of the Zionist establishment. Please do not disturb
them. Let them proceed with their creeping expansion
and let them complete the control and usurpation of
every inch of the Arab territories.

76. It seems also that the Israeli Government is continuing in its policy of contempt and disregard for the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole.
During the Council’s debate on the situation in the
occupied Arab territories,
the Israeli Government
found fit to demonstrate publicly its policy of the
depletion of natural resources of the occupied territories by announcing the signing of an agreement with
a foreign company to explore and exploit oil resources
in the Sinai. The irony in this is that the only opposition to this agreement came from some opposition
members in the Knesset. They were not opposing it
because it would mean exploiting
and depleting
Egyptian oil or because it would contravene United
Nations
resolutions,
but because some foreign
investors would take a share and they preferred that
all the loot should go to Israel alone-another
clear
analogy with Nazi practices when they looted the
natural resources of the areas they occupied.

81. As usual, the Zionist representative
did not
mention even one word about why the Council was
requested to meet. What is the fate and the future
of the millions of Arab Palestinians, of the millions of
human beings who are either under the yoke of ugly
Zionist occupation or in refugee camps? Those millions
of people do not exist as far as the Zionist regime is
concerned.
82. The Israeli representative wondered how Syria,
which did not receive Ambassador Jarring, could
mention the Jarring efforts. But the Israeli representative himself furnished the answer right away. Syria at
that time did not receive Ambassador Jarring because
at that time it did not accept resolution 242 (1967).
When Syria did accept that resolution, it accepted
11

it with two conditions, conditions which the Zionist
representative constantly prefers not to remember.
Syria said it would accept resolution 242 (1967) only if
the following two conditions were met: the liberation
of every inch of Arab territory and the restoration of
all the national rights of the Palestinian people. We did
not accept that resolution until we were given
assurances that that resolution would lead to the
fulfilment of those two conditions.
83. We have now been proved right. That is what
the Council decided during its debates in January.
Everyone here agreed that resolution 242 (1967) was
not sufficient by itself to ensure the establishment of
ajust and lasting peace and that there was an important
element missing from that resolution, namely, the
rights of the Palestinian people. That has been repeated
time and again in every debate since then. The three
basic principles for the establishment of ajust peace in
the region are Israel’s withdrawal from all the occupied
territories, the restoration of the full national rights of
the Palestinian people and guarantees for the States
then in the region to live in peace.
84. But the Zionist regime accepted resolution 242
(1967), as did some other parties to the conflict. Therefore, if we did not receive Ambassador Jarring at that
time or if we did not send a reply-in fact, he did
not even address a question to us-it was because we
were not committed to that resolution. But the
Zionist regime was committed to resolution 242
(1967). They repeat over and over that the Arabs do not
want to implement resolution 242 (1967). So, having
accepted that resolution, why did they respond
negatively to the aide-memoire of Ambassador Jarring?
85. It is amazing that the representative of the most
terrorist regime now existing in the world, apart from
the regime in South Africa, should describe the heroic
resistance of the Arab inhabitants as terrorism.
Perhaps Mr. Herzog is an expert on the matter,
because he himself was the Military Governor of the
occupied West Bank, and at his hands thousands of
Arabs were tortured, expelled and uprooted and
suffered what Mr. Herzog and his regime learned
during their tragic experience under the Nazi regime.
But that is the tragedy in Palestine now. The people
who suffered the most from Nazi crimes are applying
those same methods and even crueller methods against
the Arab population. I am not the only one who says
this; several non-Arabs, including Professor Toynbee
and some of the Israelis themselves who have a free
conscience, have been wondering how a people that
suffered so much from Nazi crimes can now repeat
those crimes against the Arab Palestinians.
86. Resistance and the heroes of resistance movements cannot be described as terrorists except by
aggressors and racists, and you yourself, Mr. President, as one of the heroic French people who fought
against Nazi occupation, and most of the members
here-be they from Western Europe, the Soviet Union

and the socialist countries, which fought against Nazi
aggression, or from African countries that have
participated in the struggles of, national liberation
movements-very well know that acts of resistance
against the occupier and the aggressor are heroism and
not terrorism. They are terrorism only to those racist
regimes, those aggressors who want to usurp the
territory and control the people.
87. I wonder what Mr. Herzog is doing here, speaking
on behalf of a regime installed in Palestine. Why does
he not return to Dublin, whence he came? Those who
now address the Council about Palestine and what is
happening there are Palestinians. They were born in
Palestine. They are not aliens in that land. But
Mr. Herzog himself, as well as many of the leaders
of his regime, are aliens who come from South Africa
or Poland or the Soviet Union or the United States.
They have nothing to do with &hePalestinian territory.
Here are the people of the territory of Palestine, and
they are the ones requesting the Council’s help.
88. Time and again the Israeli representatives try to
avoid the real issue; they repeat themselves and speak
about external matters, matters not under consideration by the Council. The. Israeli representative
repeatedly refers to what is happening in Lebanon and
continues to say that there the Christians are being
subjected to genocide; the Moslems are fighting the
Christians; the Christians are fighting the Moslems.
I think I can understand that coming from the representative of.a racist regime, which is completely and
wholly based on religious exclusivlsm and discrimination. He would think that everywhere else in’ the
world, even in the neighbouring Arab countries,
things are like that: Christians are against Moslems,
and Moslems are against Christians. That is not true.
Everybody knows it. Tragically, what is happening in
Lebanon is aconflict between brothetsbelonging to the
same country, between people from the right and
people from the left. Many among the rightists are
Moslems; many among the leftists are Christians; and
they are not fighting because of their religion or faith.
89. As for my delegation, it contains two Christian
diplomats and many non-Christian non-diplomats from
Syria. The man seated beside me at this table, who
represents the struggling heroic Palestinian people, is a
Christian. We do not know the difference between
Christians and Jews and Moslems. That is the basis of
the Israeli State, which is based on racism and religious
discrimination. It is not the basis for Arab thinking or
Arab tradition. On the contrary, most of our tragedies
and sufferings have come about because of Arab
tolerance. The Arab countrieshave right been from the
beginning, and still are, a haven for all minorities.
We have Druses; we have Christians; we have
Armenians; we have Moslems; we have Jews. Everybody lives in harmony, and we all coexist, because
there is an Arab saying which is very dear to us:
“Religion is for God, but the homeland is for everyone”. But the Zionist racists would never be able
12

representative
of the Sudan to lecture us, in a
Council which literally ignored the massacre of half
a million black Christians in the southern Sudan
only a few years ago. What a sombre reflection:
the representative of a Government
whose hands
are soaked with the blood of half a million black
Christians sits here and lectures us.” [Pm-u. 55
above.]

to understand that, because their State is based solely
and exclusively on the theory of the superiority of the
Jewish religion.
90. We, in our countries, honour Judaism. As a matter
of fact, Islam is, we believe, derived from Christianity
and Judaism, and in our prayers we daily repeat the
names of the Jewish and Christian prophets. As
Moslems, five times a day we repeat the name of
Moses and the name of Jesus, together with the name
of Mohammed,
with all respect and honour, while the
Zionists believe in their superiority. Only last week,
in the Jewish Press, I read an editorial which said
that Mohammed
who gave us the Islamic religion
1,380 years ago brought to the world a racist religion.
So they do not respect even the religions derived
from their own. But we Moslems respect Judaism
and we respect Christianity.
What we are against is
racism and Zionism.

Out of respect for the Council I shall not sink so low
as the representative
of Israel did by using such
unbecoming language. I shall concentrate on the facts.
96. We do not claim that there was no problem in
Sudan. But once that has been stated, two facts must
be very clear. First, the problem was not of our
own making. It was the product of a long, welldesigned and calculated policy, which we inherited
on the eve of our independence. Secondly, the problem
was perpetuated and aggravated by foreign intervention, and especially the intervention
of the Zionist
rbgime. The representative of Israel is a general, and he
was in charge of his army’s intelligence. He must be
well aware of Israel’s part in and responsibility for that
conflict. He must be well aware also of Israel’s
intervention
in the internal affairs of many African
States which found it necessary to expel Israeli
representatives from their countries.

91. Again, the representative of the Zionists tried to
drive a wedge between brothers, between the Arab
countries. He referred to broadcasts from here and
press clippings from there saying that Egypt was
criticizing Syria and Syria was criticizing Egypt. I can
assure him of one thing: if we differ, we differ on one
thing, and that is on how to get rid of Zionist aggression and uproot it from our land, how best to deliver
our territory
and our people from Zionist racist
aggression.

97. Yet, in spite of all the difficulties,
challenges
and conspiracies-particularly
from the Israeli
regime- the people of Sudan, under industrious and
dynamic
leadership,
succeeded in an exemplary
manner in concluding the Addis Ababa accord in
1972-that is, almost five years ago-thereby
achieving
the unity of all the people of the Sudan by peaceful
means. Since then, the Sudan has been involved in
carrying out a gigantic economic development plan.

92. The Egyptians,
Syrians, Iraqis, Palestinians,
Jordanians, Libyans, Moroccans and Algerians who
shed their blood together on the same ground in the
same battles in 1947, 1948, 1956, 1967 and 1973 will
continue to shed it in the unified and united battle
against Zionism and racism.
93. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The representative of Sudan wishes to exercise his right
of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

95. As usual, in an attempt to distract the Council’s
attention and international
public opinion from the
crimes his Government is committing
in the occupied
territories,
the representative
of Israel referred to
developments in certain Arab countries. In reference
to my country he said-and
I find myself compelled
to quote his words, which smack of racism and
contempt:

98. ,The representative of Israel, instead of directing
his attention to a problem which we have managed to
solve successfully and in an exemplary
manner,
should at least notice the positive decisions taken by
the Sudan regarding the Sudanese Jews. President
Nimeiri of Sudan, in his statement on 1 January 1975,
urged the Sudanese Jews who had emigrated to Israel
to return to their country and live under its constitution, which provides for equality in rights and duties
between Sudanese citizens without discrimination
of
any kind on the basis of origin, race, locality, sex,
language or religion. Some of the Sudanese Jews
responded; they left Israel and returned to live in the
Sudan. The decisioq of the Sudan Government which
appears in document SO.200 GEN., dated 8 March
1976, has been widely appreciated and commended.
That is an example of positive measures which are
desperately required to help in and contribute
to
establishing a lasting peace and a settlement in the
Middle East.

“Nothing
could emphasize more clearly the
absurdity of this whole debate than the effort of the

99. On the other hand, the negative and intransigent
attitude of the Israeli Zionist racist rkgime is well

94. Mr. MEDANI
(Sudan): In my statement this
afternoon I said that the representative of Israel had
failed to explain the barbaric and brutal assaults by’
his Government against the unarmed Palestinians. We
listened carefully to the statement he made a few
minutes ago, and again he failed to submit any justification for the crimes committed by his country against
the Palestinian people.

13

known to all Council members. I believe I do not
have to labour the obvious. It is sufficient to look at
the decisions taken last Sunday by the Israeli Cabinet
which call for the establishment of a large number of
new settlements in occupied Arab territories.
The
Christian Science Monitor of 11 May reported that
Professor Neeman suggested:

Moscow, by Prague, Budapest and Belgrade and
by China. It has been praised by all friendly States.
Needless to say, Israel has not been very happy about
that. Only in November of last year The Economist
of London went even further and nominated
the
President of Sudan for the Nobel Peace Prize.
103. Icould go on and quote many incidents and’many
quarters which have praised and hailed the accord
between the south and the north of the Sudan. It is not
actually their affair, but we never the less appreciate it

“We want to populate the West Bank with Jews
in order to make it impossible for the Government
ever to evacuate this area-even
in return for
peace.”

104. But what is Israel’s record? I am sure that the
Israeli representative will not find anything in Israel’s
record to cheer about. The Council is therefore excused
if it fails to follow the line of his fallacious reasoning.

That confirms the fact that the ultimate objective of
the Zionist racist regime is the perpetual occupation
of the Arab lands, and not, as the representative of
Israel would have us believe, peace in the Middle East.
Israel must understand
that the Arab nation is
determined. to liberate all the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem, whatever difficulties and sacrifices it may have to face.

105. The PRESIDENT
(interprefutionfiom
French):
I give the floor to the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, who has asked to speak
in exercise of the right of reply.

100. Only yesterday The New York Times described
this expansionist attitude of Israel in these words:

106. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I cannot fail
to draw attention to the strange way in which the
discussion is being conducted here by the Israeli
representative.
If we heed his judgement,
then
everything he says is the absolute truth and is fact,
while everything said by other representatives-in
particular by the representatives of the Arab cound
tries-is a barrage of untruth and fiction. With such an
approach it is impossible to discuss this matter in the
Security Council at all.

“Diplomatically,
the expansion of Jewish population centres into occupied territories contains the
roots of future conflict with the neighbouring Arab
States and the United States.”
The New York Times added:
“Whatever their emotional longings and frustrations, Israel’s leaders must ask themselves whether
they are really serving their country’s interests by
heading straight into such a confrontation.”

107. The Israeli representative
has reproached the
Soviet delegation for getting information and material
from the Council’s
verbatim records on acts of
terrorism committed by the Israeli occupying. forces
in the occupied Arab territories.
But if that is so,
is that criminal? Here we have listened to the official
representatives
of all States, including
the Arab
States, and we regard their statements as official
statements of their Governments. The-Council has no
reason to disbelieve the facts and the material cited
by them in their statements as proof of the terrorist
practices of the Israeli occupation forces in Arab
territories. Naturally,
those facts do not please the
Israeli representative.
But they do not cease to be
facts for that reason.

101. The representative of Israel is the last one who
can speak about human rights and religious freedom.
His country’s record is well known to United Nations
organs, which have condemned Israel so many times.
Israel’s violation of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War’
is common knowledge. I could submit a score of cases
of racial and religious discrimination
in Israel, but
I do not feel it necessary to do so at this time.
102. Again referring to the racial expressions used by
the Israeli general, I wish to confirm for his benefit
that what is now called the Addis Ababa accord of
1972 was hailed at the highest summit of the Organization of African Unity. It has been hailed, too, by all
the presidents in the continent of Africa. It has been
cited as an example, a model for solving internal
problems and affairs. But, of course, the Israeli
representative
cannot
understand-or,
rather,
swallow-such
a move. On the other hand, the AllAfrica Conference of Churches has hailed the accord.
Outside Africa too the accord has been praised-in
such respectable capitals of Europe as London, Paris
and Stockholm.
It has been praised also by the
socialist countries-by
the great Soviet Union in

108. Therefore,
let us cast aside this contrived
challenge of the Israeli representative
about where
we get this information
concerning the terrorism
practised by the Israeli occupying forces in Arab
territories. Everybody knows- about it. It has been
publishedeven in the Americanpress, which, as former
Vice-President
Agnew said yesterday or the day
before, was entirely in the hands of American Zionists;
A great deal has been published in The New York
Times concerning
the terrorism
and shooting of
demonstrators
in the occupied territories.
That is
where the facts come from. The entire world press
14

has written about it. That is why the question is now
being discussed in the Seicurity Council. Therefore,
no attempt on the part of the Israeli representative to
belittle the significance of the facts and arguments
which have been quoted and the statements of Arab
representatives can succeed.
109. He has referred to some Soviet delegation or
other which was recently in Israel. I would state here
that I have no information about such a delegation,
but I am quite certain that if that delegation was in
Israel at all, it was not there at the time when Israeli
occupation forces were firing on Arab workers at a
May Day demonstration.
110. On the question of terrorism, there are of course
various forms of terrorism. The forced eviction of the
indigenous population of a nation from its homeland
is also terrorism. That these expulsions are in fact
being carried out can be read by Mr. Herzog, in
today’s .issue of his favourite newspaper, The New
York Times. The representative of Syria showed us a
banner headline on the fust page of an American
newspaper to the effect that Israeli occupation forces
are expelling the indigenous population from the Arab
territories. and populating ‘those parts with Israeli
citizens. That is one form of terrorism. The forced
annexation ofland belonging to someone else-is that
not also terrorism? Seizing the property of the Arab
population is also a form of terrorism. Their expulsion
and deprivation of their means of livelihood are also
forms of terrorism. Furthermore, it is genocide. It
means that people expelled from their hearth and
homeland are doomed to die because they have no
means of livelihood. That is Israel’s policy towards
the population in the occupied Arab territories, and
no ploys on the part of the Israeli representative
to try to justify this policy by referring to other States
will help.
111. We are not discussing the situation of other
States; we are discussing and condemning the pblicy
of Israel in the occupied Arab, territories. That policy
has been frequently condemned by the United Nations,
both in resolutions of the General Assembly and
decisions of the Security Council. But Israel has
ignored them. The Israeli representative referred to
a quotation from the late Andrei Vyshinsky, but I do
not think that that quotation can justify Israel’s actions
or will help him to find any justification for them.
It makes a clear distinction between resolutions and
decisions of the Organization. The Israeli representative, as a new representative, perhaps, is not
sufftcientIy informed. But, according to the Charter,
a decision of the Security Council is binding upon
Member States. Many such decisions condemning
Israel’s policies and requiring certain action on the
part of Israel have been adopted in the Organization,
but they have all been ignored by Israel. Therefore,
when Israel speaks about words and deeds and resolutions and decisions, it should be so good as to
implement the decisions already adopted, decisions

binding upon all Member States. It should show us
deeds and not simply indulge in verbal tricks, because
they cannot convince anyone.
112. You use the term “persecution of Jews” in
the Soviet Union. This is a hostile, inaccurate and
vicious fiction on the part of the Zionists. There is
no persecution of Jews in the Soviet Union, there
never has been and there never will be. We are a
multinational State: we have more than 120 nationalities in our country. To cite an example, I am a
Ukrainian and I represent the Soviet Union. One of
my alternates is an Armenian, another a Jew. This
demonstrates the equality of nationalities in the Soviet
Union. Furthermore, any discrimination, any refusal
to respect other nationalities, is punished strictly
according to the law in our country. Therefore, to
attribute to us any persecution of Jews in the Soviet
Union is a vicious and hostile fiction invented by
American, Israeli and international Zionism. It is
designed to distract our attention from the terrorism
-from the aggression-practised by Israel against
the Arab States. But the entire world surely understands the falsity of those assertions.
113. We condemn terorrism in all its forms and
manifestations. We reject out of hand the fiction
propagated by the Zionists that the Soviet Union
represses Jews and that Soviet diplomats, in America
and elsewhere, should therefore be killed. We
condemn this policy encouraged by Zionism, Zionism
which has turned into a terrorist organization and
preaches terrorism.
114. Zionism has included terrorism in its~arsenal.
The statements of the Soviet delegation in the Security
Council produced unequivocal and incontrovertible
facts. The head of the terrorist band calling itself the
Jewish Defence League, Rabbi Kahane, was quoted.
But here is a communique from the Daily News
Bulletin of 11 May:
“Kahane warns Jewish militants in USA may
kidnap Soviet diplomats in an effort to aid Soviet
Jews.*‘*
That is what the Zionist terrorists say from Tel Aviv.
Apparently, Kahane was there. Israel showed
hospitality to this terrorist. He is a criminal. He was
imprisoned, then released and sent to the United
States in order to organize trouble among American
Jews, with the wild, invented slogan of “Let my
people go”.
115. What right have American and Israeli Zionists
to call Soviet, British, American or French Jews “their
people’*? Soviet Jews are not American or Israeli
citizens. They are Soviet citizens, and it is we who
have the right to speak for them, not American or
Israeli Jews.
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

15.

116, By claiming. to represent Jews throughout the
world the. Israeli Zionists are showing their own
racism-preaching the racist theory of a “chosen
people”. The United Nations was quite correct when
it condemned zionism as a form of racism and racial
d-iscriminatiqn. It- is borne out by your policies. In
New York, fo.r instance, someone is financing young
people, boys and girls, paying them to participate in
picketing, giving them lists of select Russian swear
w.ords, transcuibed phonetically, which they yell at the
top of their lungs as they stand in the streets. This
isshameful to-decent Jews and to the American people.
Furthermore, these boys and girls gather on the
balcony and roof of a synagogue opposite the Soviet
Mission to yell these select Russian swear words.
There are Soviet- women and children passing by, but
obviously the organ&em of this criminal spectacle have
sunk so low in. their cultural and moral level that they
do not even take this into account. How can one
conceive of a synagogue, which is a house of prayer,
which. is respected by every Jew, being used as a
platform for such vile invective? One might say that
the words were in Russian, not understood by
Americans, but they are still invective. Thus that
house of prayer, that synagogue has been turned by the
Zionists into a house of foul abuse. One can stoop no
lower than that, Yet the Zionists encourage this,
justifying it by the hostile invention that there are
allegedly repressi-ons of Soviet Jews in the Soviet
Union. Malicious lies, hostile inventions. Jews enjoy
an extremely privileged position in the Soviet Union.
As a Ukrainian, I can say that among the Ukrainian
population there are fewer people with higher
education, perhaps, than among the Jews in the Soviet
Union. Where is-the discrimination? The Jews work as
journalists, for the newspapers, on television, radio
and in educatianal.institptions; 99.9 per cent of them
are white-collar workers; they are not involved in
ag,ticuIture; they do not work in the coal mines. And
youaccuse us of persecuting them? When they arrive
in Israel and are sent. to a Kibbutz, they make a
fuss and run back home to the Soviet Union.

aggressors and occupiers are spoken to only in this
way; they have to be condemned for their actions.
Therefore, let them not expect any thanks fro-m the
Arab representatives; let them not expect the Atahsto.
thank them for their occupation and for usurping their
lands, for expelling people from their homeland and
for confiscating their property, for terrorism. Would
you have thanked the aggressor if you had been in
the Arabs’ shoes? Would you have thanked those who
had occupied your territory? Of course not; you would
have condemned them. So resign yourself to these
condemnations and draw the appropriate conclusions+
instead of abusing them.
119. The Israeli representative spoke about negotiations; he stated that in Security Council discussions
no one had referred to talks. That is wrong; I myself
spoke about talks, and 1 referred to the machinery
for such negotiations. I spoke about the conditions for
the conduct of those negotiations. I said there were
three conditions.: first the withdrawal of Israeli. troops
from the territories occupied in 1967; secondly,
recognition of the legitimate and inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to exist and to create their
own State; and thirdly, a guarantee of the independence and freedom of all States in the Middle East.
But he was silent about those proposals. So on what
basis can we speak with an aggressor and occupier?
120. We were victims of aggression: I have some.idea
of what aggression means. Hitler’s troops were close
to Moscow, Leningrad and Stalingrad; they broke
through to the Caucasus. If Hitler bad at that time
proposed talks, what would the conditions have been
for us and for him? He had .almost half of the most
densely populated and economically developed part of
our country, and all we had. were losses and defeats..
Therefore, before negotiating with an aggressor, one
must speak about the basis for such talks. The basis
set forth in the statement of the Soviet Government.
of 28 ApriI [S/12063] is a realistic and reasonable one,
but Israel rejects it. In order to undermine the negotiations in Geneva Israel thought. up a pretext: nonrecognition of the Palestinianpeopleand its inalienable
rights; because it does not wish to conduct these
negotiations. Together with its patrons, Israel has tried
to substitute shuttle diplomacy and a step-by-step
solution for talks. But what has shuttle diplomacy and
a step-by-step approach produced? It has simply
produced a deadlock and has made the position even
more complicated. The situation has not been improved
by this diplomacy and this approach; rather it has
deteriorated. The explosive situation is now even more
dangerous than it was before that shuttle dipl.omacy.
These are the facts, and everybody. knows them.

Il7. We are fighting criminals. It is the right of every
State to fight criminals, What were we supposed to
do with the group of Zionist criminals who tried to
hijack: a plane from~ Leningrad; thank them for it?
Kiss them. for it‘? We condemned them, and we
imprisoned them.; That was consistent with the
legislation, of the Soviet Union. These laws are
applicable to criminals of any nationality, including
Jews. What right have. the American and Israeli
Zionists to interfere in our internal affairs? This is a
malicious policy of the Government of Israel and
its patrons.
11% Y.ou+ Mr.: Herzog complain that Arab representatives accuse: and &ndenm Israel for terrorism
in Arab territories. But how do you expect them to
speak to those who are aggressors and occupiers?
Do, you expect them to thank you, go down on their
knees, kiss you? You will not hear any other language;
16

121. So drop the verbai gymnastics, Mr. Hertog,
and agree with the basic provisions for the start of
negotiations. If you ceased-toobjectto the participation
of the Palestinians, those victims which have suffered
most from Israeli aggression, negotiations could start
tomorrow. But apparently this is notpart of your.plans.
.

You and your patrons are trying to keep on postponing
a solution to the main questions relating to a Middle
East settlement, and to justify this you put forward all
sorts of artificial arguments, even the new argument
that we have to wait until the presidential election
is over in the United States. Some have stated that
conditions for a settlement in the Middle East are not
yet ripe. It is obvious to anyone who is objective that
this is said simply in order to drag things out, and not
to enter into negotiations. In words you favour negotiations, but in deeds you are against them. This is your
position and the position of your patrons as well. This
strange practice has been applied in the work of the
Security Council recently, even with regard to the
question of the admission to the United Nations of
the People’s Republic of Angola, which now apparently
depends on elections taking place in one of the
Council’s member States. That is how things stand with
the Israeli position on negotiations.

civilian aircraft is the terrorism that is exercised by
States. It is similar to the terrorism exercised by
imperialist
States, which helped to fight against the
people of Viet-Nam
and against the people of the
Dominican Republic and other places. But it is even
more dangerous when we know that this terrorism
exercised by States is a continuation of the terrorism
exercised by a movement which has materialized into
a State.
126. We all recall the terrorism exercised by the
Zionist movement against its benefactor, the British,
the Mandatory
Power, and against its own people,
as I mentioned the other day, in the case of the ship,
Putria. This terrorism finds its origin in the teaching
of the father of Zionism, and I shall quote him: “We
shall try to spirit the penniless population across the
border.” Now, spiriting the penniless population of
a country across the border is, I think, the gravest
and most blatant form of terronism. It was not just a
statement made by Theodor Herzl, it is a concept that
is still being carried out. As I stated the other day
[1917th meeting, para. 141, on.25 December 1975 an
ex-commander
of Zionist paratroopers,
Dr. Davidi
Aharon, was lecturing at Arie Ben Eliezer National
College in Tel Aviv. Among other things, he said:

122. Stop these verbal gymnastics, Mr. Herzog, and
agree with the Arab party on the basis for negotiations, on the withdrawal of troops and on recognizing
the Arab people of Palestine as a fully fledged
participant
in the negotiations,
and agree that all
countries in the Middle East should be guaranteed
normal
conditions
for a free and independent
existence, peace without aggression and without one
another being attacked. We believe that in these
circumstances it would be possible to find some basis
for negotiations and to start those talks. If the Israeli
representative were to approach the matter in this way
then the problem could be resolved and the Security
Council could make its own weighty contribution
to
finding a solution of this problem.

“If we really want to spare Jewish and Arab
blood, then the final solution that we must strive for
is that of transfer, i.e., the removal of all Arabs from
here to the Arab countries, which should of course
be achieved by reasonable ways and means.”
This is terrorism-the
transfer of an entire population,
either of its own will or through force. We all recall
the massacre at Deir Yassin as well as other criminal
acts of the Zionists.

(interpretation from French):
123. The PRESIDENT
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make a statement in reply, and
accordingly I now call on him.
124. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
I should like to recall here that when Chairman Arafat
was invited to address the General Assembly in 1974,
the invitation was extended by 105 members of the
international
community
and of this Organization.
Mr. Arafat was invited as the representative
of a
national liberation movement. This national liberation
movement, the Palestine Liberation Organization, has
been granted full membership
in the Group of nonaligned Countries and in the Group of 77. This recognition of the PLO meant and still means greater
isolation of the Zionists and some of their friends.

127. It was said in the Council that Rabbi Kahane
was just one representative of one sector. I am not
concerned about Rabbi Kahane, but I am concerned
about the tactics of the Zionist movement. I recall
that, when the King David Hotel in Jerusalem was
blown up, the Jewish Agency almost condemned the
act. But what do we find out? When the Zionist
movement became a State, some of the perpetrators
of that crime became cabinet ministers. How can we
explain this, except by the fact that the Zionist movement itself is in concept a terrorist movement? What
our people is doing is exercising its right to live and to
resist being massacred. It is engaged in a campaign
against a planned genocide. If its fate is that it should
be spirited away from its country then it is its duty and
right to resist with arms.

125. The Council has been reminded of the debate on
terrorism in the Sixth Committee
of the General
Assembly. If I recall properly one of the recommendations which the Committee had to discuss was that the
most dangerous form of terrorism is that exercised by
States-and which are those States. The terrorism that
was translated into air raids over Lebanon,
the
terrorism that was translated into the bombing of

128. We have been told that nobody had spoken about
negotiations.
I cannot conceive of any negotiations
between the forces of invasion and occupation and
the oppressed people living under occupation. The only
language that could be understood between the forces
of occupation and the oppressed people, who are
bent on liberating themselves, is that of resistance,
armed resistance.
17

129. Ib’has been stated that there were some isolated
incid fs of stone-throwing in the West Bank. I would
remin.% e Council of the comment we made the other
day, that those isolated incidents of stone-throwing
would not necessarily call for curfews and for the
intervention
of paratroopers.
The fact is that this
resistance is not merely isolated incidents. It is fullscale, armed resistance against the forces of occupation. The question we have to deal with here is the
occupation and not what happens among Arab States.

exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.
134. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): I apologize for asking
to be allowed to speak again at this late hour, but‘
I could not help doing so in -order to refute the false
allegations directed by the representative of Zionism at
my country.
135. The Israeli representative charged my country
with being a threat to the peace in the area in which
we live and also to our neighbours. First of all, I must
categorically
reject this baseless allegation.
If this
allegation sheds light on anything, it sheds light on the
ignorance of the Israeli representative about the facts
of the situation in our part of the world. Contrary
to the false and malicious allegations and propaganda
spread in some quarters by some Governments in the
hope of achieving
certain pre-calculated
policy
objectives, my country has always followed a policy of
peace, justice and international understanding. Unlike
the racist Zionist authorities in the occupied Arab
territories, my Government has always had the fullest
respect for the principles of international
law and
human rights.

130. We have been told here something about the fate
of the poor Christians. The representative of Syria let
it be known here that I, the representative of the PLO,
am a ,Christian. I can claim no particular pride in
that-1 was born a Christian and I was raised as a
Christian-but
there is one thing I can pride myself
on. I have been knighted as a member of the Order
of the Holy Sepulchre for my defence of the faith.
This is just to let you know that Christians in the
‘: Arab world can also be appointed to represent their
countries in the United Nations. But I would remind the
Council about the concern of His Holiness the Pope.
I am paraphrasing, because I do not recall the exact
words, but His Holiness expressed great concern
about the future of the holy shrines in the Holy Land.
He expressed concern that those shrines would
eventually become museums for lack of worshippers.
What happened to those worshippers? They did not
become atheists. They were compelled to leave their
home towns. This in itself speaks clearly of how
the Christians are being treated under the forces of
occupation in the Holy Land.

136. I am sure that Council members can easily
understand that the real purpose behind the Israeli
representative’s
allegations against my country and
others is to divert the debate from the proper
perspective of the question at hand. The question
before the Council today is the usurpation and creeping
annexation by the Zionists of the illegally occupied
Arab lands. The representative of Israel cannot deny
the establishment of purely Jewish settlements in Arab
territories,
the uprooting of numerous Arab communities, the deportation of Arab peoples from their
qwn lands, the expropriation of Arab property and the
terrorizing and murder of Arabs, which are the doings
of his Government
and troops. These abhorrent
activities are the ingredients making the situation one
of tension and explosiveness, and it is because of this
tension and explosiveness that my delegation urges the
Council to take effective measures to compel Israel
to desist from its oppressive and fascist policies and
to abide by the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international
law.

131. The Zionists are not really the representatives of
the Jews. I have just been informed that the Zionist
authorities in Jerusalem have demolished the slaughterhouse of the Neturei Karta. They have a special
slaughterhouse where they use their particular ritual
for their religion, and the Mayor of Jerusalem-we
listen to him very often on the radio inviting people
to visit Jerusalem under his rule-has
decided to
demolish their slaughterhouse. These are the defenders
of the Jews-at least they claim to be so.
132. I sincerely hope that the Council in its deliberations will always take into consideration the point on
the agenda. That calls for consideration of the situation
in the occupied Arab territories.

The meeting

rose at 6.10 p.m.
Note

133. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The representative
of Somalia wishes to speak in

1 United

Nations,

Treaty

Series,

vol. 75, p. 287.

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

83-60801-September

1984-Z.200
