S/PV.7598

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7598th meeting

Wednesday, 23 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-45099 (E)
*1545099*

S/PV.7598

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

National Accord, once formed. The door is open and
the hand of friendship extended.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/1016, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2259 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2259 (2015). Through this adoption, the
Council gives its full support to the Libyan Political
Agreement signed last week, and its full backing to a
Government of National Accord based in Tripoli, as the
signatories of the Agreement have pledged to establish.
We welcome the process now under way to move to the
formation of that Government of National Accord in the
coming weeks, and we ask the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to
drive forward progress to that end. We urge all those
who have not yet signed to decide now to support
the Agreement and to work with the Government of

2/8

23/12/2015

The Agreement is the culmination of over a year of
complex negotiations among the Libyan parties. There
have been false storms before, but in this Agreement
we have a Libyan-led political solution that will address
the political security, economic and institutional crises
facing the country. We commend all those who have
worked and persevered together to seek consensus in the
interests of the Libyan people. I would also like to pay
tribute to the role of the United Nations in facilitating
the Agreement. I join with all of us in praising the
energy and enthusiasm that Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kobler has brought to the
process. I would also like to pass on my personal thanks
to all Council members and other delegations involved,
including the delegation of Libya, for their cooperation
in the drafting and negotiation of the resolution.
With the Agreement signed, now is the moment
for all Member States to cease support to and official
contact with any parallel Libyan institutions outside of
the Agreement that claim to be the legitimate authority.
Doing so is essential to maintaining the integrity and
unity of Libyan State institutions, including State
financial institutions and the National Oil Company.
That is the best way to ensure that those institutions
function for the benefit of all Libyans.
The Agreement and resolution 2259 (2015) come
at a crucial time for Libya. Instability and insecurity
have allowed terrorist groups, including Daesh and
Al-Qaida, to threaten Libyans and those in the region.
The humanitarian situation has got worse, and human
rights violations and abuses have increased. Criminal
gangs have prospered, exacerbating the migration
crisis in the Mediterranean. Arms and ammunition
have proliferated, escalating the violence and further
undermining stability and security. We therefore
strongly back the Security Council’s call on Member
States to support fully the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya to develop a coordinated
package of support to build the capacity of the
Government of National Accord. The United Kingdom
stands ready to play our part in that effort.
In adopting resolution 2259 (2015) today, we
have given a strong, collective sign of the Council’s
commitment to Libya and its sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity under a single
Government of National Accord. But this is just the start

15-45099

23/12/2015

The situation in Libya

of the process for Libya, and we must therefore redouble
our efforts to help ensure that the huge potential of the
Agreement is realized. In doing so, we can help deliver
a stable and prosperous future for all Libyan citizens.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for all of his leadership on resolution
2259 (2015).
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption today of resolution 2259 (2015), guided by the
need to find an immediate way to restore the sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity of Libya.
We thank our partners for having taken into
account concerns about ensuring the broadly
representative nature of the Libyan political process.
Russian representatives are actively participating in
international efforts to assist the intra-Libyan political
process, including within the Rome format. We are
convinced that, as in other crises in the Middle East and
North Africa, international support must be genuinely
collective. External players have a heavy responsibility
to help the Libyans to achieve domestic stability, acting
on the basis of consolidated positions.
We expect the Libyans to begin as soon as possible
to implement the Agreement concluded with United
Nations mediation. In our view, the priority task is for
the future Government of National Accord to reach
agreement with all influential political forces on the
formation of robust and inclusive organs of power. We
express our support for efforts undertaken under the
auspices of the United Nations. We believe that the
mission of our global Organization is to cooperate with
all patriotic forces in achieving the fundamental task
of ensuring national reconciliation in Libyan. Libyan
problems can be resolved only by Libyans themselves.
We call on all sectors of Libyan society to join
ranks to eliminate the terrorist threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist
organizations that are exploiting the prevailing chaos
and anarchy for their own interests. Restoring stability
and unity in Libya will help us to resolve the important
task of promoting sustainable development, which is
in the interests of the Libyan people and all of North
Africa.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2259 (2015). This
important resolution lends all the unanimous support

S/PV.7598

of the Council to the Libyan Political Agreement
of 17 December, as did several ministers with their
presence in Skhirat or Rome.
We pay tribute to the Libyan negotiators who
shouldered their responsibilities and who prioritized
the interests of their country above personal ambition.
They managed to find the compromises necessary to
finally offer their compatriots the prospect of ending
the crisis. We also congratulate Bernardino León and
Martin Kobler, who engaged tirelessly in supporting
the negotiations.
The political phase that is coming to an end is not
a point of arrival but a starting point. We all know
that the coming weeks will be decisive. The United
Nations and Member States have a crucial role to play
in giving their full support to the future Government,
including in terms of security, to stabilize Libya and
fight terrorism. France, in particular with its European
Union partners, will play its full part. Let us not fool
ourselves — the new authorities will soon put to the test
by all those who seek to undermine the process. To the
latter, we say that there is still time to join the positive
dynamic that has been launched, but that if they persist
in their obstructionism our Council will soon bring all
the consequences to bear.
I take this opportunity to personally commend my
five colleagues from Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania
and Nigeria who will soon be leaving the Council.
We will miss them but they can be proud of what they
and their teams have accomplished. I also wish every
success in the Council to the new members that will
join us on 1 January.
In recent times, the Council has demonstrated
its vitality and capacity to act. We end the year on
several notes of hope with the adoption of resolution
2259 (2015), which opens a fragile but genuine path to
peace in Libya; resolution 2249 (2015), which embodies
our total, collective resolve to eradicate the scourge
of Daesh; and resolution 2254 (2015), the first on the
political track in Syria since the crisis erupted there.
Let us work tirelessly together to nurture these seeds of
hope. If I may so say, let us be inspired by the spirit of
Paris — the spirit of resilience and unity that emerged
from the terrorist attacks on my country and that gave
birth to resolution 2249 (2015) against Daesh. It was the
spirit of Paris, too, that embued the twenty-first session
of the Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and made

15-450993/8

S/PV.7598

The situation in Libya

it a success that has been hailed throughout the world
and a fine symbol of the multilateral action that we all
cherish, in service to the ideals of the United Nations.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
welcomes the signing, on 17 December in Skhirat, by
most representatives of the various political parties and
tribal clans of Libya of the Libyan Political Agreement,
sponsored by the United Nations. The Agreement is
aimed at forming a Government of National Accord.
Jordan pays tribute to the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya; the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Martin
Kobler; and the brotherly Kingdom of Morocco and
the neighbouring countries that hosted and backed the
Libyan political dialogue.
Jordan voted in favour of of resolution 2259 (2015),
which was submitted by the United Kingdom, because
we are convinced of the importance of providing
international assistance for the Political Agreement and
the future Government of National Accord. We hope
that the Agreement will mark an important step forward
in restoring security and stability in Libya and in
achieving the aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people
to the reconstruction of the State and the maintenance
of its unity. We cherish the hope that the Agreement will
improve the humanitarian situation in Libya and help to
achieve economic development. In that respect, Jordan
reaffirms the importance of international support for
the Government of National Accord in all fields, as
clearly stipulated in the resolution and the declaration
adopted in Rome on 13 December, in accordance with
the priorities and requests of the Libyans.
The international community must ensure that there
is no political vacuum in Libya. We would also like to
reaffirm the importance of the current Government.
The international community should provide it with
the support and assistance necessary to manage
current affairs and meet challenges until the creation
of a Government of National Accord. We hope that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
take into account those concerns.
Jordan, in keeping with the resolution, urges the
Presidency Council in Libya to create the Government
of National Accord within 30 days and to develop
security measures to ensure its stability throughout
Libya. The forces of extremism and terrorism, in
particular Daesh and other evil-doers, have taken
advantage of the internal fighting and the deterioration

4/8

23/12/2015

of the situation to occupy significant strategic areas.
It is therefore important to oppose terrorism within
the framework of an international partnership with the
Government of National Accord and legal institutions
based on the Skhirat Agreement.
Finally, we would like to reaffirm the importance
of the sovereignty of Libya, as well as its independence,
security, and territorial integrity and unity. We wish
to underscore the importance of having the Security
Council continue to back the brotherly nation of Libya
for a better future in dignity, freedom, stability and
security.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): Spain applauds the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2259 (2015), which demonstrates the
international community’s recognition of efforts to
pursue dialogue with a view to bringing Libyans
together under the auspices of the United Nations.
Those efforts culminated in the 17 December Skhirat
Agreement, the signature of which was attended by the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation.
With today’s resolution, the Security Council
notes the broad domestic support for the Agreement
and gives it international legitimacy. The resolution
serves as a reminder to all parties and sectors of Libyan
society of the urgent need to join in the common project
represented by the Agreement. It also reminds us of the
need to hold accountable those who obstruct or disrupt
the transition process. In that vein, I would like to stress
three ideas.
First of all, it is important to strengthen the
Agreement by attaining the greatest internal consensus
possible. In our view, the letter circulated to the
Security Council today is not in alignment with the
constructive spirit that the international community
requires or expects of the relevant stakeholders in the
Libyan conflict. Secondly, it is critical that all parties
work together to implement the Agreement and create
a Government of National Accord. That is the only
way to resolve the serious humanitarian and economic
crises in the country, and to address the security threat
represented by the presence of Daesh and other terrorist
groups on Libyan territory. Thirdly, it is essential that
the international community, along with each of our
countries, remain ready to work to strengthen and
expand the support of all Libyans for the Agreement,
making it possible to establish a new Government in a
safe Tripoli, the capital of a united country.

15-45099

23/12/2015

The situation in Libya

Since the beginning of the crisis, Spain has firmly
supported the leadership of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, as well as the work of the two Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Mr. León
and Mr. Kobler. I wish to highlight the good work done
by Martin Kobler, who was able to go beyond the basis
provided by the Agreement and the names proposed by
his predecessor after extensive inclusive consultations.
The crisis does not allow for improvised solutions.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country’s
commitment to the Libyan people, which has been
demonstrated by our political support for the process,
aimed at achieving peace in and the territorial unity
of Libya, but also our commitment to humanitarian
assistance and to tackling human trafficking networks.
We stand ready to extend our cooperation to the
Government of National Accord as soon as it is formed,
so that it may achieve what was defined so accurately
by Martin Kobler as peace, security, and prosperity in
a united country.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2259 (2015). The
Libyan political dialogue process under United Nations
auspices has made important progress in recent days.
China welcomes the signing by various Libyan parties of
the Libyan Political Agreement and the announcement
of the expeditious establishment of a Government of
National Accord. That is a reflection of the ardent hope
of the Libyan people and various parties in Libya for
the stabilization of the domestic political situation and
for prompt realization of peace and stability.
China has always advocated for a political
settlement of the Libyan conflict and actively supports
and participates in the Libyan political dialogue, while
supporting the mediation efforts of the international
community, in particular that of the United Nations.
We hope that the parties to the Libyan conflict will
effectively implement the Political Agreement,
advance the inclusive political process, establish the
Government of National Accord, achieve comprehensive
reconciliation and restore national stability at an early
date. China is ready to join all parties concerned in
continued efforts to achieve peace and stability in
Libya and in the region.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2259
(2015). We believe that it is an important initiative

S/PV.7598

that expresses the entire Security Council’s political
commitment to supporting the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement signed on 17 December in
Morocco — the fruit of mediation efforts supported by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
We would like to acknowledge the efforts undertaken
by the various parties representing the Libyan people,
and especially, by the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General representing the United Nations,
Mr. Bernardino León and, currently, Mr. Martin Kobler.
Our country harbours every hope that the signing of the
Political Agreement will promote a definitive political
solution to the armed conflict in Libya, which has been
submerged in chaos and violence since the 2011 military
intervention that adversely affected every aspect of the
country, in particular the political and security spheres,
in addition to economic and social development and the
enjoyment of human rights in that brotherly African
nation.
Venezuela has always supported a political solution
to the conflict. In that vein, we wish to express our
support for the establishment of a Government of
National Accord that will ensure peace and stability,
address the major humanitarian, economic and security
challenges, and uproot the terrorist groups operating
in that country and North Africa, in particular the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Ansar al-Sharia
and Al-Qaida, which continue to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security.
The Government of National Accord that will be
formed in Libya must take every necessary measure,
with the support of the international community, to
put an end to the illicit trafficking in arms to terrorist
groups and non-State armed actors operating in Libya
and throughout the African continent and stoking
conflict in Iraq and Syria. The Security Council has
adopted resolutions in that area that must be strictly
implemented. Furthermore, the new Libyan authorities
should work decisively to ensure the promotion and
protection of the human rights of their citizens. In that
regard, we urge them to strengthen their cooperation
with the International Criminal Court in order to
facilitate the handover of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, so
that he can be brought to trial in an impartial manner in
accordance with due process.
Our country is aware of the grat challenges facing
the new phase of the Libyan process. The international
community must therefore redouble its efforts to help

15-450995/8

S/PV.7598

The situation in Libya

Libya resolve its grave institutional and security crisis
and thereby prevent an escalation of the conflict. We
urge the authorities of the new Government of National
Accord to guarantee the sovereign management of
its natural resources, in particular its oil, for the
benefit of its people, in order to help overcome the
country’s grave social situation. We call on the
international community to provide the Libyan people
with the resources necessary to alleviate the fragile
humanitarian situation, which continues to deteriorate
as a consequence of the prolonged fighting among the
various factions. Unfortunately, smugglers and human
traffickers have taken advantage of the situation to
profit from the pain and desperation of Libyans seeking
to escape the terrible conditions in which they live.
To conclude, we call on all parties to the Libyan
conflict to show their sincere commitment and political
will to reach a political solution to the situation. We
urge the parties that have not signed the Agreement to
join this effort for peace, stability and development.
The priority should be the well-being of the people,
the preservation of their human rights, respect for their
self-determination, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and national reconciliation among all Libyans, without
preference for any group and regardless of political,
ethnic or religious positions.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes the signing
on 17 December of the Libyan Political Agreement of
Skhirat, Morocco, which signals the acceptance by
Libyan leaders of a political solution to the conflict in
their country. Now, the people of Libya have chosen
the path of truth — the path to lasting peace — as
almost five years of conflict have proved that a military
solution is unattainable. The Agreement is a crucial
first step in stabilizing the country. The parties must
now begin to implement it in good faith.
Nigeria voted in favour of resolution 2259 (2015),
which the Council has just unanimously adopted,
with a sense of duty and responsibility. The resolution
demonstrates the Council’s commitment to the peace,
security and stability of Libya. It addresses the key
challenges that Libya faces, notably the threat posed
by the Islamic State and other terrorist groups to the
security of the country. Nigeria fully supports the
formation of a Government of National Accord to
unite the country and confront those challenges with
a renewed sense of vigour. The people of Libya must
seize the moment and the opportunity to rebuild their

6/8

23/12/2015

country. In that endeavour, all hands must be on deck to
support Libya’s comprehensive reconstruction.
The President: I shall now make a very brief
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.
Today’s unanimous vote welcomes an important
and historic step taken by the Libyan people. Over
the past year, with the tireless facilitation and support
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), a broad array of members of the Libyan
Political Dialogue have worked together to build an
inclusive and representative Government to lead the
country forward in its transition. That diverse group
included members of the House of Representatives and
the General National Congress, women, civil society
members, leaders of municipalities and political
parties, and independents. Through the adoption today
of resolution 2259 (2015), the Council affirms their
courageous efforts and welcomes the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat, Morocco, on
17 December. With this resolution, the Council sends a
clear message that the Government of National Accord
will become the sole legitimate Government of Libya,
as set forth in the Agreement.
The United States urges all Libyans to unite behind
the Libyan Political Agreement and to take advantage
of the opportunity presented by the formation of the
Government of National Accord by working together
towards peace, stability and the rule of law. As Special
Representative Kobler has noted, “The door will remain
open to those who wish to join on the road to peace”. As
to those who reject the path set forward by the Libyan
Political Agreement — who seek to undermine the
Libyan people’s hope for peace — the United States
will seek to work with the international community to
hold them accountable.
After so much turmoil, the Agreement offers Libya
a chance — a chance to reclaim the opportunities first
made possible by the 17 February 2011 revolution. We
all know that the new Government of National Accord
will have no shortage of challenges in the days ahead,
but the Libyan people will not face them alone. The
United States and other Member States will work
closely with the Government of National Accord and
its leadership to ensure the full implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement and to provide support to
the Government as it begins to serve and protect the
Libyan people. As the Government of National Accord

15-45099

23/12/2015

The situation in Libya

works to improve security, we will work closely with it
to defeat affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant in Libya and to eliminate the threat they pose to
our collective security.
Through this resolution, we recognize the Libyan
people’s enormous accomplishment in forging the
Agrement. We look forward to working together to see
it through, and we thank Special Representative Kobler
and the UNSMIL team for their heroic dedication to
this mission and to all the Libyans from all parts of the
country who worked tirelessly to make the Agreement
possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by conveying my gratitude to the Security
Council for affording me the opportunity to speak in
this very important meeting. I would like, of course,
to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for its
efforts in authoring resolution 2259 (2015), which the
Council adopted moments ago. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, in the Chamber. I thank him
and his team for the efforts they have always made to
help Libyans achieve consensus and to put an end to the
crisis in our country.
As today is the birthday of the Prophet Mohammed,
may the peace of God be upon him, I congratulate all
Muslims throughout the world and express the hope that
his birthday will remind us of his goodness, his respect
for all faiths and his rejection of violence and injustice.
I also congratulate all Christians upon the birth of Jesus
Christ, Son of Mary, may peace be upon him. I hope the
convergence of these two birthdays will lead to peace
and security for all peoples throughout the world.
There is no doubt that the Political Agreement
reached in Skhirat in brotherly Morocco on 17 December
represents a significant step forward in Libya’s history.
The Agreement is the result of the intra-Libyan dialogue
that has lasted for more than a year now. The dialogue
has been sponsored by the United Nations and advanced
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Although the Agreement is a compromise, given that it
was reached through negotiation and therefore cannot
meet the aspirations of all parties, it represents the
best of what we can achieve and the highest common

S/PV.7598

denominator on which the parties could agree for the
sake of Libya and all Libyans.
The significance of the resolution adopted by the
Council today derives from its support for the Libyan
Political Agreement and the institutions to be created
pursuant to it. Since those institutions will serve as
the sole legal authority in Libya, the resolution urges
all parties to join and implement the Agreement.
Needless to say, the Security Council is not imposing
anything on Libya or Libyans. It will not create its
Government or its Presidency Council. That is the fruit
of the agreement of the House of Representatives. The
Government of Abdallah Al-Thinni will continue to
exercise authority until the creation of a Government of
National Accord, in keeping with the provisions of the
Political Agreement.
Most and possibly all Libyans understand that the
Agreement is the fruit of 14 months of very difficult
negotiations and represents the only hope for restoring
State sovereignty and ensuring the survival of Libya
as a sovereign, unified State. The Agreement is the
only hope for ending the chaos and bloodshed and for
ensuring that reconciliation, understanding, justice and
the rule of law prevail following years of atrocities,
fear and insecurity, both inside the country and outside,
scattering Libyans as refugees and displaced persons. It
is high time that Libyans of all stripes understand that
their interest lies in backing the Government of National
Accord and the implementation of the provisions of the
Political Agreement.
The success of the Agreement will depend first
and foremost on the armed groups. They bear a heavy
responsibility to banish the spectre of war, especially
from the capital, Tripoli. Moreover, we urge all these
armed groups to agree to the security arrangements.
We wish to see the national police force resume its
functions now that it has the necessary weapons and
equipment, and the Government of National Accord
exercise its functions from its headquarters in Tripoli.
The Government of National Accord will undoubtedly
prioritize the integration of armed groups into the
security, military and civil institutions of State, in
keeping with international professional criteria.
All of the spoilers and troublemakers who wish
to prevent the implementation of the Agreement must
understand that their attempts will not succeed, that
history will judge them, and that they must place the
mother country’s interests over their own narrow,

15-450997/8

S/PV.7598

The situation in Libya

personal interests. They must understand that they
can achieve nothing outside the framework the Libyan
Political Agreement, which was achieved over a year of
negotiations, with the facilitation of the United Nations,
following all other attempts to end the bloodshed and
Libya’s failure to emerge from its crisis.
Under resolution 2259 (2015), if these troublemakers
were successful in preventing the Government from
exercising its authority and role from its headquarters
in the capital, they would be subject to international
sanctions. They have to understand that the international
community intends to help Libyans, under the guidance
of the Government of National Accord, and that it will
provide the assistance necessary to bolster security and
safety as part of the counter-terrorist struggle.
Daesh was able to take control of the city of Sirte
and to turn it into a colony for foreigners as a result
of the division and chaos in Libya, and the support
provided by certain States. It was able to ally itself
with elements of Ansar Al-Sharia and Al-Qaida and
to launch a campaign to recruit young, unemployed,
poorly educated individuals who are basically illiterate
but just about able to follow social networks and listen
to those who claim to be pious and to understand the
rules of Islam. Any delay in the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement will benefit terrorists and
extremists and promote their expansion throughout
Libya, allowing them to exploit its wealth. As a result,
the law of the jungle will prevail in Libya with the
assistance of foreign criminals from all over the world.
As a representative of Libya at the United Nations,
I can state unequivocally that all Security Council
members have a genuine desire to help Libyans
extricate themselves from their tragedy. Libyans yearn

8/8

23/12/2015

to see the creation of a Government of National Accord
as rapidly as possible. Members of the Council wish to
see the House of Representatives assume its functions
and operations and cooperate in the implementation of
the Skhirat Agreement.
Libyans must unite. They must reject hatred.
They must foster trust among themselves and reject
conspiratorial thinking. The international community
has never conspired against them, and they themselves
must not conspire with foreigners against their mother
country. They can only unite to expel foreigners who bear
arms and seek to control the country and its resources.
That is the only path towards the reconstruction of our
country and the forging of a better future for themselves
and their children.
By way of conclusion, I would like to thank the
five members — Chad, Chile, Jordan, Malaysia and
Nigeria — whose mandate will be complete at the end
of this month for their very effective and invaluable
contribution to the work of the Council.
The President: I take this opportunity to wish
Ambassador Dabbashi, his delegation and the Libyan
people peace over the next weeks as we head into the
New Year.
Again, I underscore what we said yesterday, when
we thought we were speaking for the last time, about
how invaluable the contributions our colleagues who
are leaving the Council have been. However, they are
not going far, and we know they will be a critical part of
maintaining peace and security and advancing United
Nations values more broadly. We have been so lucky to
work together.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

15-45099
