A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/145
7 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 93
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/604)]
49/145.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and its resolutions on
the status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, 1/
Reiterating the importance of the Convention, which is one of the most
widely accepted human rights instruments adopted under the auspices of the
United Nations,
Aware of the importance of the contributions of the Committee to the
efforts of the United Nations to combat racism and all other forms of
discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin,
Reiterating once again the need to intensify the struggle for the
elimination of racism and racial discrimination throughout the world,
especially its most brutal forms,
Emphasizing the obligation of all States parties to the Convention to
take legislative, judicial and other measures in order to secure full
implementation of the provisions of the Convention,
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted
by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2/ in particular
section II.B, relating to equality, dignity and tolerance, and General

1/

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

95-76495

/...

A/RES/49/145
Page 2

Assembly resolution 48/121 of 20 December 1993, in particular paragraph 9
thereof,
Calling upon States parties expeditiously to notify the SecretaryGeneral in writing of their agreement to the amendment to the Convention
regarding the financing of the Committee, as decided upon at the Fourteenth
Meeting of States Parties to the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on 15 January 1992 3/ and endorsed by
the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111 of 16 December 1992,
Welcoming efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure interim financial
arrangements for the financing of the expenses incurred by the Committee,
Stressing the importance of enabling the Committee to function smoothly
and to have all necessary facilities for the effective performance of its
functions under the Convention,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financial
situation of the Committee, 4/
1.
Commends the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
for its work with regard to the implementation of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 1/ and the Programme
of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination 5/ and its contribution to the preparations for the Third
Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
2.
Encourages the Committee to contribute fully to the implementation
of the Third Decade and its Programme of Action, 6/ including by convening a
joint meeting of the Committee and the Subcommission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities;
3.
Welcomes the beginning of communication between the Committee and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and encourages its
continuation;
4.
Welcomes also the innovatory procedures adopted by the Committee
for reviewing the implementation of the Convention in States whose reports are
overdue and for formulating concluding observations on reports of States
parties to the Convention;
5.
Commends the Committee for its efforts in the area of prevention
of racial discrimination, including early warning and urgent procedures, and
welcomes its relevant decisions; 7/
6.
Expresses its profound concern at the fact that a number of States
parties have still not fulfilled their financial obligations, as shown in the
report of the Secretary-General; 4/

3/

See A/49/499, annex I.

4/

A/49/499.

5/

Resolution 38/14, annex.

6/

Resolution 48/91, annex.

7/

See A/49/18, sect. II and annex III.
/...

A/RES/49/145
Page 3

7.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Committee on the
work of its forty-fourth and forty-fifth sessions; 8/
8.
Urges States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification
procedures with regard to the amendment concerning the financing of the
Committee;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure adequate
financial arrangements and appropriate means to permit the functioning of the
Committee;
10.
Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligations under
article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, to submit in due time their
periodic reports on measures taken to implement the Convention and to pay
their outstanding contributions;
11.
Strongly appeals to all States parties that are in arrears to
fulfil their outstanding financial obligations under article 8, paragraph 6,
of the Convention;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to invite those States parties
which are in arrears to pay the amounts in arrears, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fiftieth session;
13.
Decides to consider at its fiftieth session, under the item
entitled "Elimination of racism and racial discrimination", the report of the
Secretary-General on the financial situation of the Committee and the report
of the Committee.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

8/

A/49/18.
