S/PV.9267

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9267th meeting

Wednesday, 22 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier/Ms. Gatt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2023/109)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05536 (E)
*2305536*

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

and Somalia remains on track to complete the debt
relief process in 2024. Through regular meetings
of the National Consultative Council (NCC), His
Excellency President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud has
undertaken efforts to prioritize Federal Government
and federal member state relations and to advance
State-building priorities.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2023/109)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Anita Kiki
Gbeho, Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; Mr. Mohamed El-Amine
Souef, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia; and
Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UNWomen.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/109, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gbeho.
Ms. Gbeho: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to brief it on this situation in Somalia at
this meeting held on the important theme “Somalia — a
women and peace and security perspective”. I am pleased
to do so alongside the recently appointed Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), Ambassador
Mohamed El-Amine Souef, with whom I collaborate
closely, as well as the Executive Director of UNWomen, Ms. Sima Sami Bahous.
Since the previous Security Council meeting on
Somalia (see S/PV.9125), held on 7 September 2022,
despite many challenges, the Federal Government of
Somalia has made significant progress in advancing
its key national priorities. Close cooperation with the
federal member states has been sustained, momentum
in the fight against Al-Shabaab has been regained
2/22

22/02/2023

In the December meeting of the NCC, Federal
Government and federal member state leaders, with
the exemption of Puntland, agreed a federated model
regarding the allocation of powers and on justice, both
of which are key elements for the completion of the
constitutional review. Puntland requested additional
time to consider its position on those matters and
has asked for further consultations with the Federal
Government of Somalia. I encourage the Federal
Government and the federal member states to continue
dialogue within the NCC framework towards consensus
on Somalia’s State-building agenda.
I welcome the continued commitment of the
Federal Government to implementing the women and
peace and security agenda, as demonstrated by the
launch of the national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000). The launch of the plan is timely, as it provides
a framework to address the challenges that persist for
women in Somalia. More has to be done to enable
equal representation in all facets of public life. To that
end, enhancing women’s political participation also
remains critical. That includes not only codifying the
commitment that Somalia’s political leaders made on the
30 per cent women’s quota in relevant legal and electoral
frameworks, but also ensuring that it be safeguarded by
all entities. In that regard, the United Nations continues
to support newly elected women representatives. For
example, through the joint programme on women and
peace and protection, the United Nations supported
the establishment of the Federal Parliament’s Upper
House women’s caucus. Moving forward, we must
remain focused on advancing women’s participation
and equality. I call on all stakeholders to redouble their
efforts towards achieving that objective.
As the Government seeks to advance its post-election
priorities, including conducting operations against
Al-Shabaab and managing the devastating impact of
the drought, recurrent political conflicts continue to
command the Government’s attention. In South-West
state, for instance, clashes took place on 23 December
related to the timing of the state presidential election. A
South-West state reconciliation conference, held under
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

the auspices of President Mohamud and the Speaker
of the House of the People, Sheikh Aden Mohamed
Nuur, was able to avert an escalation and address
political grievances. In Laascaanood town, Sool region,
the fighting that broke out on 6 February continues
and has led to increased humanitarian needs. An
inter-agency assessment reports that more than 185,000
people have been displaced, 89 per cent of whom are
women and children. At least 63 civilians were killed
and more than 363 people injured. Efforts to stop the
fighting are ongoing, but the situation, including the
targeting of civilian infrastructure, remains alarming.
I would like to reiterate the previous statements by the
United Nations and international partners condemning
the violence, calling for the resolution of political
tensions through dialogue and calling for unhindered
humanitarian access to urgently address the needs of
those displaced and impacted.
Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat to
peace and security in Somalia. The year 2022 was the
deadliest for civilians since 2017, with a 60 per cent
increase in civilian casualties as compared to 2021.
Over the past few months, the Federal Government has
made progress in countering that threat by targeting
Al-Shabaab’s military and financial operations and
ideological narrative. The Somali security forces,
reinforced by the use of local militias, have conducted
successful operations against Al-Shabaab in Hirshabelle
and Galmudug states. Operations are expected to
gradually move into other areas of Somalia.
Consolidating the gains in the newly recovered
areas will require strong linkages between military
operations and stabilization initiatives, comprised
of reconciliation and justice components and aimed
at bolstering good governance and service delivery.
In that regard and in line with Somalia’s national
stabilization strategy, efforts have focused on
supporting communities and newly established district
authorities in several recovered areas.
In parallel, the Government continues efforts
towards generating forces to gradually assume security
responsibilities in line with the Somalia Transition Plan.
The handover of the ATMIS Maslah camp to the Somali
National Army in mid-January was an important step
in that process, having paved the way for the handover
of similar much camps in future. However, funding
remains a critical challenge. I reiterate previous calls
by the Secretary-General to ensure predictable and
sustainable funding to ATMIS and adequate resourcing

S/PV.9267

for Somali security forces. That remains vital to the
security transition.
With five consecutive poor rainy seasons, the
current drought is unprecedented in its severity.
Humanitarian needs continue to steadily rise, with
about 8.3 million people — nearly half of Somalia’s
estimated population — requiring assistance and
protection in 2023. Needs are also more pronounced
among minorities and marginalized groups.
Thanks to generous donor support, Government
efforts and local community initiatives, humanitarian
organizations scaled up their response and reached
7.3 million people in 2022. While famine has been
prevented for now, it remains a threat if the April-toJune rains underperform as forecast and humanitarian
assistance is not sustained. The 2023 humanitarian
response plan, launched on 8 February, seeks $2.6 billion
to meet the priority needs of 7.6 million people. I urge
donors to stand with Somalia at this difficult time by
providing the required resources early.
Despite great adversity, the people of Somalia
continue to demonstrate strength, resilience and
resolve. The progress made by the Federal Government
of Somalia to advance peace, security and development
has generated positive momentum to enable further
advances in the State-building agenda. At the core of
that agenda lies the completion of an inclusive and
consensus-based constitutional review process. That
remains a priority in the period ahead.
As the United Nations, we stand ready to support
those efforts and, as always, to support Somalia
in implementing its vision of a secure, stable and
peaceful nation.
The President: I thank Ms. Gbeho for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Souef.
Mr. Souef: I thank Security Council members
for the opportunity to address them on the situation
in Somalia. I am pleased to be joined alongside
Ms. Kiki Gbeho, Officer in Charge and Deputy Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM). And to quote the United Nations SecretaryGeneral at last week’s African Union Summit, “the ties
between the African Union and the United Nations have
never been stronger.” That sentiment is also true of the
strong partnership that exists among the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), UNSOM

23-055363/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS).
Before turning to the ATMIS’s overview of the
situation in Somalia, I would like to underscore two
points of appreciation.
First, and on behalf of ATMIS, I would like to
express our gratitude to the Security Council for its
strong and continued support to the Mission and its
commitment to peace and security in Somalia.
Secondly, I would like to pay tribute to His
Excellency President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud for
his strong leadership. Under his leadership, Somalia
is now witnessing concerted efforts to advance peace
and security. In fact, the African Union believes we are
witnessing an emergence of a transformative change in
Somalia across various fronts.
On behalf of the African Union, I want to assure the
Security Council that ATMIS will continue to pursue
its strategic objectives as mandated by the United
Nations. The African Union’s dedication to supporting
Somalia is solid and enduring and will extend beyond
the life span of ATMIS, which ends on 31 December
2024. That is our aspiration to ensure Somalia forms
part of an integrated, prosperous and peaceful Africa
by the year 2063.
Since the most recent briefing by ATMIS in
September 2022 (see S/PV.9125), Somalia has
continued to register significant progress on its key
national priorities, particularly those outlined in the
Federal Government’s six-pillar work plan. As noted
earlier, leading those efforts has been President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, who I am pleased to report has
taken decisive steps, mainly to accelerate inclusive
politics and dialogue as a means of advancing the
country’s priorities.
To sustain and further reinforce the momentum
of inclusive politics, we have repeatedly witnessed
the President visit front-line positions across Somalia,
lending his personal support to ongoing reconciliation
processes. The result of those visits has been consensusbuilding among local communities in support of
Somalia’s ongoing offensive against Al-Shabaab.
Specifically, the President’s visit to the Middle
Shabelle region in November resulted in a cessation
of hostilities between two local communities that have
since played a central role in the Federal Government’s
removal of Al-Shabaab from the region. Similarly,
the President called for a cessation of hostilities and
4/22

22/02/2023

communicated the Federal Government’s readiness
to facilitate dialogue and a resolution of the conflict
between Somaliland forces and local communities
in Laascaanood. In response, Somaliland called for
a ceasefire and a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
International partners, including ATMIS, firmly
condemned the continuing violence and reports of the
mobilization of armed groups, and further urged all the
parties to adhere to the ceasefire, exercise restraint and
engage in constructive dialogue to establish a path to a
peaceful resolution.
Earlier this month, President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, together with the Speaker of the House of
the People, successfully led a two-phase reconciliation
process in South-West state, which concluded with an
agreement among its stakeholders. With the dispute
now resolved, I applaud the determination of all
stakeholders to support the Federal Government’s plans
to open a new front against Al-Shabaab soon.
I remain encouraged that Somali leaders continue
to pursue dialogue through the National Consultative
Council to sustain Somalia’s political stability.
Since May 2022 we have witnessed continued
and regular meetings of the National Consultative
Council. The National Consultative Council is now
helping to advance Somalia’s national priorities,
including security and key areas of peacebuilding and
State-building. The National Consultative Council met
recently in December, bringing together the Federal
Government and the federal member states, except
for Puntland, to agree on key outstanding issues of
federalism and democratization. Noting Puntland’s
stated position on its relationship with the Federal
Government, I am optimistic that Somali leaders can
reach a political agreement on key outstanding issues
within the framework of the National Consultative
Council. I am also encouraged that Puntland has
signalled a willingness to continue pursuing a dialogue
with the Federal Government and I look forward to its
participation in the upcoming meeting of the National
Consultative Council.
Somalia has been defined by its insecurity for
decades. However, I am pleased to report today that the
Federal Government is not only poised for lasting peace
by leading on silencing the guns in Somalia, but is also
taking steps to bring about prosperity for its citizens.
In that context, I welcome the efforts of Prime Minister
Hamse Abdi Barre, whose Cabinet approved more than
14 bills within a short period that have now been sent
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

to Parliament. Many of them will ultimately help to
create regional and international confidence and attract
foreign investment, enabling Somalia to realize its
great potential. Somalia’s bid to join the East African
Community and the recent visit of the East African
verification team to Somalia are good indicators of the
prosperity that awaits Somalia in the coming years.
I am particularly pleased that during the fortysecond ordinary session of the Executive Council of
the African Union, Somalia signalled its intention, as a
next step to its imminent admission to the East African
Community, to become a State party to the African
Continental Free Trade Area. That positive message
again illustrates the Federal Government’s commitment
to delivering on its laudable work plan — in this case,
a key priority milestone for its economic pillar. At the
African Union, as we celebrate 2023 as the Year of the
African Continental Free Trade Area, we are proud
that Somalia continues to place the importance of job
creation, poverty reduction, improved welfare and
sustainable development at the heart of its future.
Despite Somalia’s security challenges, I am
pleased to be able to say that Al-Shabaab is now under
immense operational pressure and losing vital terrain.
It is failing to maintain its hold on its centre of gravity,
which is local community support, something that we
continue to witness as local communities increasingly
join the offensive led and owned by the Somali security
forces. It is important to note that Al-Shabaab is now
being disrupted, degraded and defeated thanks to
the security forces’ courageous actions and gallant
sacrifices. Recent Al-Shabaab losses of several areas
in Hirshabelle and Galmudug — including Middle
Shabelle, Hiraan and towns in Mudug, such as the port
of Xarardheere — all represent strategic and operational
gains for the Federal Government.
Despite the current and positive security momentum
moving swiftly across Somalia, in the ATMIS area of
responsibility we are mindful that Al-Shabaab still has
the capability to carry out decisive operations, including
complex attacks using improvised explosive devices
both from suicide vehicles and carried by people,
ambushes, kidnapping, assassinations and indirect fire
attacks. While Al-Shabaab’s tactics, techniques and
procedures remained mainly unchanged during this
reporting period, our threat picture suggests that it is
trying to change some of its tactics. A key concern
remains its use of commercial drones, which are likely

S/PV.9267

to attain an armed capability in the future, a worrisome
trend that we have observed in other terrorist theatres.
Beyond Somalia, we are also concerned by
Al-Shabaab’s transnational threat to Somalia’s
immediate neighbours. However, I am equally
encouraged by recent regional security engagements
aimed at addressing that threat with a united approach.
In that regard, according to our assessment, the recent
summit convened by Somalia of the Frontline States,
including Djibouti, Ethiopia and Kenya, will enhance
the security framework that ATMIS serves in Somalia.
I would like to take this opportunity to update
the Council on the implementation of key aspects of
resolutions 2628 (2022) and 2670 (2022). Despite
uneven progress, I am pleased to report that key aspects
of the mandated tasks are receiving the urgent focus
and commitment they require.
At ATMIS we have submitted a detailed and
realistic reconfiguration plan that is still under review
by the Federal Government. Recently, working with the
Federal Government and with support from the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, we handed over the
Maslah forward operating base as part of meeting the
emerging demands of force generation. We have also
deployed to the Bariire forward operating base as part of
an operational agreement with the Federal Government
and recently collocated with the Somali security forces
at the Xawaadle bridge forward operating base.
Alongside our brave brothers and sisters in the
Somali security forces, we have contributed to the
ongoing offensive to degrade Al-Shabaab in line with
the agreed joint Federal Government of Somalia-ATMIS
concept of operations of 2022. To date and beyond in
our joint kinetic operations, ATMIS involvement in
the ongoing offensive has included, first, using ATMIS
helicopters to provide close air support; secondly, the
provision of casualty evacuation and medical evacuation
of Somali security forces troops from the battlefield;
thirdly, the provision of intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance; fourthly, the provision of indirect fire
support; and fifthly, the provision of combat service
support, such as ammunition, water, drugs and field
accommodation, and the provision of advisory support
on international humanitarian law and issues related to
the protection of civilians, to mention but a few.
I want to be clear: the African Union’s support to
Somalia, as I mentioned, will remain unwavering. For
that reason, I am grateful for the support of ATMIS

23-055365/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

troop-contributing countries (TCCs), particularly
through their recent commitment to the Somalia
Operations Coordination Committee to do more to
support to the ongoing offensive. ATMIS TCCs have
already committed to deploying critical force enablers,
such as attack and utility helicopters, and are now
seeking robust long-range intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance capabilities. When it is feasible
for Somali security forces to begin taking over agreed
forward operating bases, ATMIS TCCs will create
quick reaction or mobile forces at a faster pace. That
needs to be encouraged, and more support is needed
to sustain the current success of the Somali security
forces-led offensive. It will require the Council to
consider the encouraging results of Somalia’s pace of
force generation.
With Somalia on track to meet its target of 15,000
newly trained forces this year, I welcome the recent
return of 3,500 Eritrean-trained Somali National Army
(SNA) troops, some of whom have already been deployed
to the frontlines, as well as the ongoing training of
SNA troops in Egypt, Ethiopia, Turkey and Uganda.
On 6 February, Somalia’s Cabinet Minsters approved
the agreement between the Federal Government of
Somalia and the United Arab Emirates on military and
security cooperation and counter-terrorism. With such
a commitment, ATMIS is confident that Somalia is on
track to assume security responsibility from ATMIS by
December 2024.
Those brave young men and women must be
supported with the equipment necessary to fight
Al-Shabaab, the appropriate firepower and adequate
ammunition supplies. That will only be possible when
the Council once again takes into account the progress
already made by Somalia in meeting the sanctions
benchmarks effectively and in a timely manner as a
pathway to lifting the arms embargo. Similarly, with
Somalia expected to generate 15,000 forces, there
is now an immediate need to increase the level of
the current UNSOS support package to the Somali
security forces beyond the mandated 13,900 forces. In
the interim, ATMIS remains committed to continue
providing international humanitarian and human rights
law training of trainers to Somali security forces and
to supporting efforts to advance the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security.
Turning to the adjustment of the timeline of phase
one, we believe that this extension should provide the
6/22

22/02/2023

Federal Government of Somalia and ATMIS the space to
complete important mandated tasks. As we have stated,
there has been uneven progress, and there remains a
need for further consultations on two critical issues:
the first is the strategic sector-by-sector approach to
the drawdown and the second is the funding of the sixmonth delay.
Regarding the initial drawdown of 2,000 ATMIS
troops, ATMIS has been looking at various options
based on the direction provided by the African
Union Commission. For a successful sector-by-sector
approach, there is a need to undertake more detailed
planning with the Federal Government to understand
where they would want ATMIS to continue to hold
and where the Federal Government would be willing
to either take over or accept the risk of some ATMIS
troop drawdowns across the sectors. As the Council
will recall, resolution 2670 (2022) agreed to the Federal
Government’s request to delay the drawdown of 2,000
ATMIS troops to June of this year. In doing so, it was
also anticipated that ATMIS partners would financially
support a delay of the drawdown. Regrettably, resolution
2670 (2022) does not provide the funding modalities
required to support the six-month extension, and key
partners, including the European Union, have indicated
no new funding.
I remain deeply concerned by the shortfall in the
funding available for ATMIS and the Somali security
forces. With no resolution on who and what mechanism
will fund the current drawdown delay, there is an urgency
to address the funding issue of ATMIS. Moreover, we
believe that issue must be addressed within the broader
context of the funding for African Union peace support
operations. In that regard, I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent call to the Security Council at the
most recent African Union summit, stating that African
Union missions must be afforded access to assessed
contributions. The Security Council meeting to be held
next month under the presidency of the Government
of Mozambique to discuss the security transition in
Somalia could institute a breakthrough moment on
funding and provide the Council, the African Union and
the key partners an opportunity to address ATMIS’s
outstanding funding requirements.
Somalia continues to experience an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis. In response to that, and as
part of the wider support provided by international
partners, the African Union Permanent Representative
Sub-Committee on Refugees, Returnees and Internally
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

Displaced Persons visited Somalia in December
2022 to show solidarity with Somalia and assess the
humanitarian situation. That delegation met with
the Government and humanitarian partners, visited
internally displaced persons camps in Mogadishu and
Baidoa and extended a solidarity gesture to the Federal
Government of Somalia in support of the humanitarian
drought response. ATMIS also facilitated the delivery of
humanitarian supplies, including through the provision
of escort and security to the World Food Programme to
deliver 142 metric tons of assorted food commodities
in hard-to-reach areas in Hirshabelle and South-West
states in 2023.
As the Council is aware, I took over the leadership
of ATMIS in November 2022, with extensive experience
in peace support operations, both with the United
Nations and the African Union, and I am proud to be
able to work with a team of truly dedicated and talented
people who do not take for granted the opportunity to
help rebuild Somalia. Under my leadership, ATMIS
shall remain a reliable partner and a dependable ally.
I therefore renew my commitment to the timely and
effective implementation of the mandated tasks as
assigned by the Council. To that end, ATMIS will
continue to require a strong civilian component with a
clear sense of purpose. With the support of the African
Union Commission, I plan to begin the recruitment of
national staff to enhance the effectiveness of ATMIS.
In conclusion, I would once again like to express
my appreciation for the opportunity to brief the
Council and renew the African Union’s commitment to
achieving peace, stability and development for Somalia
and its people, in line with the aspirations of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063.
The President: I thank Mr. Souef for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: The last time I was in this Chamber
was five months ago (see S/PV.9158) to present the
annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/740) on
women and peace and security. The Council members
may recall that my main message that day was that we
are sliding backwards rather than making progress,
and that global trend is playing out in Somalia too.
As we have just heard, the projections in Somalia
are dire. In the past few weeks alone nearly 200,000
people have been displaced from Laascaanood, and
more than 60,000, mainly women and children, have
fled to neighbouring Ethiopia. The ongoing drought is

S/PV.9267

expected to render half the population food-insecure
by mid-2023 and put the country at increased risk of
famine. The previous famine declared in Somalia in
2011 killed a quarter of a million people. That situation
exacerbates gender-based violence.
In their deliberations and decisions on Somalia over
the past few years, Council members have raised the
importance of both the 30 per cent quota for women and
new legislation on sexual violence. The two issues have
been a top priority for the United Nations in Somalia and
at Headquarters, including the two visits by the Deputy
Secretary-General. Women’s political participation and
leadership are prerequisites for more inclusive societies
and for finding solutions to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable development. Yet the quota in Somalia has
not been met. Women’s representation has declined,
sexual violence has increased and the sexual offences
bill adopted unanimously by the Cabinet of Ministers
five years ago has still not been adopted by Parliament.
Instead, its opponents are pushing for alternative
legislation that would legalize child marriage, omit the
age of consent, reduce the types of admissible evidence
and take away the rights of survivors.
In the 2016 elections, women’s representation
jumped from 14 to 24 per cent, and a commitment was
made to reach 30 per cent in the following elections.
Instead, the total number of women in the two
Chambers has declined from 80 to 67. Every Somali
woman from civil society who has been invited to brief
the Council in the past few years has warned that that
would happen, has explained why and has provided
details of the mechanisms that should be put in place
for the 30 per cent quota to be met. Apart from a partial
reduction in candidates’ fees, those ideas have not
been implemented.
The decline in women’s representation is not limited
to the results of the last election. Only 13 per cent of the
current Cabinet members are women, despite advocacy
efforts in the talks during the Government’s formation.
In the 2021 elections in Somaliland, after the rejection
of a proposal for a 22 per cent quota, no women were
elected to the 82-seat House of Representatives. In the
South-West state Assembly, the representation of women
also declined, from 22 to 15 per cent. In Puntland and
Hirshabelle, women’s representation rates remain in the
single digits. Conversely, the rates of sexual violence
have seen an alarming increase since 2020. That year
they doubled compared to 2019, and they have continued
to rise as the worst drought in many decades is having

23-055367/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

a devastating impact on all Somalis, with women and
girls disproportionately affected. CARE International
recently documented a 200 per cent increase in genderbased violence cases among people displaced by the
drought compared to previous years. In our own recent
assessment on the impact of the drought, we found
that women take on increased economic burdens, skip
meals, find themselves separated from or abandoned
by their husbands and are more vulnerable to sexual
assault, as they travel longer distances to fetch water
and firewood.
Yet much of that goes unpunished. Our own data
indicates that 80 per cent of cases of sexual and genderbased violence do not reach the judiciary, and, when
they do, they often meet with male judges in a system
where fewer than 1 per cent of judges are women. And
still we hear that women and girls are not prioritized in
aid distribution and that local women’s organizations
rarely get any funding. As donors and the United Nations
worry about aid diversion and corruption, I would like
to ask where the women are in camp management.
Globally, we are sliding backwards on that score too.
From 2020 to 2021, there was a drop in the participation
of women in leadership and management structures in
camps for refugees and internally displaced persons.
But that cruel violence against women and girls in
Somalia is also very much linked to the conflict, both
with Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State, and to inter-clan
disputes. Al-Shabaab continues to abduct women and
girls, force families to give them their daughters in
marriage and occupy hospitals and maternity wards.
Somali women are strong and resilient, but they
are paying the ultimate price for defending their
rights. Al-Shabaab has conducted many attacks
to disrupt parliamentary elections. The deadliest
targeted a bright young woman — Amina Mohamed
Abdi — who had won a seat in Parliament at a very
young age, in defiance of her own clan’s elders, and
who was campaigning once again. Almost 50 people
died in that attack, only 11 months ago. A few months
earlier, Al-Shabaab killed Hibaq Abukar, an adviser on
women’s affairs in the Office of the Prime Minister. Its
members target women activists and women working
in local and national politics. In recent months, Sadia
Yasin Haji Samatar, the first woman to occupy the
position of First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, received
death threats for speaking up in support of legislation
that was favourable to women’s rights. In addition,
women’s civil-society organizations are facing threats
that attempt to control the agency and voices of women.
8/22

22/02/2023

Despite the prevalence of sexual violence committed
with high levels of impunity and targeted attacks on
women in public life in Somalia, since 2014 none of
the listings of the Somalia sanctions regime have
mentioned sexual violence or women’s rights, including
for the three Al-Shabaab individuals added in 2021.
They continue to be gender-blind.
The Security Council has repeatedly called for
women’s meaningful participation. But we need
members to demand it and to be more specific about
what they mean and what they expect. That includes
participation not only in elections, but also in the
stabilization agenda that is a key current priority for
the Federal Government and federal member states of
Somalia. It includes participation in the civil service,
the constitutional review, reform of the justice and
security sectors and all efforts related to peacebuilding,
State-building, preventing violent extremism, early
warning, transitional justice and humanitarian aid.
Only when women are included in all areas of public
life will we have a chance at peace and at ensuring that
we support the rebuilding of a society that is resilient
to future shocks. By doing that, the Council will be
amplifying the voices in Somalia fighting for those
goals. That includes the Government, as those are the
goals of the first national action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, adopted by the Government six months ago
and supported by UN-Women and the local action plans
that we are working on for five federal member states
and Banaadir district.
Most important, we must continue to protect the
space for the members of independent civil society, who
are on the front lines of the fight, risking everything
they have. Their patriotism should be celebrated,
and especially should be supported, both politically
and financially, in any way that the Council can. The
Council has the opportunity to take decisive action and
to stand with the women and girls of Somalia at this
critical juncture. I urge the Security Council to seize
this opportunity.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me begin by thanking the Deputy Special Representative,
the African Union Special Representative and the
Executive Director of UN-Women for their very
informative briefings. I would like to make three points.
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

First, the United Kingdom is deeply concerned about
the developments in Laascaanood. Alongside partners,
we have supported ceasefire negotiations among the
parties and issued statements calling for restraint
on all sides, dialogue, the protection of civilians and
unfettered humanitarian access. We encourage Council
members to do likewise.
The problems in Laascaanood remind us that we
need to support Somalia in making progress on the
fundamental questions of power and resource-sharing,
including finalizing the Constitution. Those are
vital building blocks for long-term State-building
and security.
President
Hassan
Sheikh
Mohamud
has
demonstrated commitment through the Somali National
Consultative Council, bringing federal member state
leaders to the table to answer such questions. We
should encourage and support Somalia’s leadership
in translating agreements into tangible outcomes
and locking in incremental progress. That requires
technical groundwork in advance of the meetings,
and consultative mechanisms afterwards, to produce
credible governance models. In order to be sustainable,
such efforts must also include the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women so as to embed
their inclusion in future political processes. We must
underline the importance of all federal member state
leaders engaging constructively.
Secondly, as we heard, the humanitarian crisis is
entrenched and is deteriorating. The fact that a famine
was averted in 2022 is not grounds for complacency.
With drought forecast to continue in 2023 and more
than 227,000 people estimated to have been displaced
in January alone, we must continue to work together to
fund life-saving assistance, lift access restrictions and
ensure that aid reaches those who most need it.
As we heard, women and girls comprise 80 per cent
of those displaced by drought, and displaced populations
are especially vulnerable to sexual violence. The United
Kingdom’s joint programme with the United Nations
Population Fund responds to incidents of gender-based
violence among newly displaced populations, reaching
up to 34,800 women.
Finally, we commend the progress made by the
Somali security forces in the fight against Al-Shabaab
since President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s election.
There is indeed cause for optimism in the months ahead.
We urge the United Nations to ensure an effective

S/PV.9267

benchmark assessment process for the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia, and we look forward
to returning to this subject in March ahead of our
deliberations in June.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Deputy Special Representative Gbeho, Special
Representative Souef and Executive Director Bahous
for their briefings. We welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Somalia in
today’s meeting.
The political transition and counter-terrorism
operations in Somalia have recently witnessed some
progress. However, the situation remains complex
and dire. Somalia’s security situation is failing to
fundamentally improve, and its humanitarian crisis
is worrisome. The international community should
continue to step up its attention to, and its efforts on,
the Somalia issue. In connection with the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2023/109), I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, the Somali political process faces significant
challenges. The Federal Government and its federal
member states held several meetings of the National
Consultative Council. The parties have significant
differences on key issues, such as the allocation of
powers and the federal system. China calls on all
parties to act effectively in the long-term interests of
the country and its people, resolve disputes through
dialogue and negotiation and create conditions for a
political transition. In Laascaanood, the security forces
of Somaliland continue to clash with local militias,
causing many civilian casualties. We urge all parties
to the conflict to immediately adopt a ceasefire and
ensure the security of the people.
Secondly, terrorist attacks are a serious threat to
people’s security and regional stability. We noted that
the Somali security forces have increased their counterterrorism efforts. Countries outside the region have also
been conducting military operations in Somalia. History
shows that external military forces alone cannot realize
lasting peace and security in the country. Ultimately, an
improvement of Somalia’s security capacity-building is
required so that the country can resolutely demonstrate
its primary responsibility in fighting terrorism and
maintaining stability. Until Somalia completes its
Transition Plan, the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS) still plays an irreplaceable role.
China trusts that the Somali Government will continue
to actively work with ATMIS and win the hearts and

23-055369/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

minds of the people in the areas in which it has regained
control. Major donors should provide sustainable and
predictable funding to enable ATMIS to discharge
its mandate.
Ethiopia, Djibouti and Kenya, together with
Somalia, recently held a regional security summit on
combating terrorist forces. China supports countries
of the region in their efforts to deepen cooperation on
counter-terrorism and maintain common security.
Thirdly, Somalia is experiencing an unprecedented
drought. More than 8 million people are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance, while more than
1.3 million people are displaced. China calls on the
international community to increase its humanitarian
support to Somalia, honour existing commitments and
ensure the timely provision of humanitarian funds.
At the same time, the Somali Government should do
more, including by reducing bureaucratic restrictions
on humanitarian work and improving humanitarian
access, so as to achieve a solid basis for meeting the
security and development needs of its people.
A recent report by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs points out that counter-terrorism
operations in Somalia may have negative impacts
on the humanitarian situation. Issues such as forced
recruitment, indiscriminate attacks and the destruction
of infrastructure particularly require our close attention.
China calls for the relevant military operations to take
the protection of the civilians seriously, in particular
the security of vulnerable people, such as women and
children, and work to eliminate their negative impacts.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Gabon, Mozambique and Ghana.
We express our appreciation to Ms. Anita Kiki
Gbeho, Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Acting Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed El-Amine Souef, African Union (AU)
Special Representative and Head of the African Union
Transitional Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), and Ms. Sima
Sami Bahous, Under-Secretary-General and Executive
Director of UN-Women, for their comprehensive
briefings. We also welcome the participation of our
brother the Permanent Representative of Somalia in
this meeting.
10/22

22/02/2023

(spoke in English)
The members of the A3 welcome the significant
progress being made by the Federal Government
of Somalia in pursuing its key national priorities,
particularly its six pillars for the period spanning
2022 to 2026. We particularly welcome the holding
of the meetings of the National Consultative Council,
presided over by President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud,
aimed at advancing cooperation between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, the efforts
to accelerate the pace of negotiations with Somaliland,
the strengthening of ties between federal and regional
institutions of Government and efforts to ensure
political stability.
We acknowledge the progress made on the chapter
of cooperation between the Federal Government of
Somalia and federal member states, as well as the
generation of forces and the handover of forward
operating bases within the context of the security
transition and the operationalization of the Somali
security forces and the Somali National Army (SNA).
We applaud President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s
leadership in fostering an atmosphere more amenable
to peaceful coexistence throughout the country by the
significant initiatives he has undertaken to advance
inclusive political dialogue. The Somali President’s
numerous visits to front-line locations in the country
to provide his personal support for continuing
reconciliation efforts are highly commendable.
We advocate the full and effective participation
of women in Somalia’s peacebuilding efforts. The
participation of Somali women at key decision-making
levels is vital for good governance and long-term peace
within the broader development spectrum. In this regard,
we applaud the launch on 5 September 2022, of the
Somali National Action Plan for the implementation of
the Somali Women’s Charter and resolution 1325 (2000),
requiring parties to a conflict to ensure that women’s
rights are respected, that their participation in peace
talks and post-conflict reconstruction is encouraged,
and that females are safeguarded from sexual violence
during and after armed conflict. We are confident that
these measures will empower Somali women to make
meaningful contributions to preventing and responding
to violent extremism, climate change, humanitarian
crises and other threats to national security.
On the security front, we note that Al-Shabaab, like
other terrorist groups active in the Sahel, West Africa
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

and Southern Africa, continues to be a transnational
threat. It is therefore imperative that additional efforts
and resources are deployed to counter its ability to
conduct operations in Somalia and other parts of the
region. In this regard, we commend the Government
of the Federal Republic of Somalia for demonstrating
a firm determination to eliminate the footprint of
Al-Shabaab and applaud the people of Somali for
rallying boldly behind their Government in the ongoing
offensive against Al-Shabaab.
As confirmed by the briefing we have just received,
the sustained operations by Somali Security Forces and
ATMIS have resulted in the liberation of several regions
of Somalia from Al-Shabaab, notably Hirshabelle and
Galmudug. Also, the liberation of the port town of
Harardhere, a key financial hub for Al-Shabaab, has
been critical to the efforts to degrade the financial
infrastructure of the terrorist organization and to the
success of the ongoing battle against the terrorist group.
The significant progress being made could not have
been accomplished without the support of key allies. In
this regard, we take note of the various forms of support
offered by partners that have enabled the Somali
Government to take the fight to Al-Shabaab.
While commending the Somali Government for
the progress made in the security sector, it is important
to point out that Somalia still faces significant
challenges. Much more work remains to be done.
Al-Shabaab continues to maintain the ability to outwit
the security forces, allowing it the potential to launch
lethal attacks against security personnel, civilians and
Government officials.
We also note the need to improve the relations
between the Federal Government and some federal
member states, as well as between some opposition
elements and several federal member states. Talks over
Somaliland’s status have also made little progress,
and critical State-building tasks and funding gaps
for implementation of the Somalia Transition Plan
(STP) and the ATMIS mandate continue to be a
significant obstacle.
Against the backdrop of the extended timelines
for Phase 1 of the ATMIS Concept of Operations
(CONOPS) established by resolution 2670 (2022), the
A3 supports the call by ATMIS on the Security Council
and international partners to assist in addressing the
additional deficit created by the delayed drawdown of
ATMIS, in addition to the Mission’s other financing

S/PV.9267

gap and the Somali Government’s quest to obtain
both lethal and non-lethal support to equip the newlygenerated SNA units and improve on their operational
capabilities, particularly as preparations are in process
for the complete withdrawal of ATMIS by December
2024. In this regard, we welcome the African Union/
United Nations joint roadshow to raise resources for
ATMIS and encourage the efforts deployed in this
regard by both organizations.
We also support the African Union initiative to
accelerate the implementation of the STP. However,
we wish to caution that the sector-by-sector approach
in terms of assessing the performance of the ATMIS
CONOPS, as indicated in resolution 2670 (2022), should
be conducted carefully and with the participation
of all relevant stakeholders in a manner that avoids
compromising the security gains achieved thus far.
Again, we take note of the return of the 3,500
Eritrean-trained SNA troops as well as those forces
currently undergoing training in anticipation of the
eventual departure of ATMIS. We are confident that
these actions strengthen the capabilities of the Somali
National Army and help to advance the campaign
against Al-Shabaab for the benefit of the overall
security of the country.
We continue to be alarmed by the humanitarian
situation in Somalia brought on by a protracted drought
following five consecutive years of failed rains, which
has been aggravated by the effects of decades of conflict,
mass displacement and a fragile economic situation that
is driving some Somalis to the edge of starvation. As
noted in the briefings today, almost 1.3 million people
have been internally displaced as a result of the longest
and most severe drought in Somalia’s recent history, and
an estimated 6.4 million Somalis will likely experience
severe food insecurity in the first quarter of this year.
Since mid-2021, more than 3.5 million animals have
already perished, decreasing children’s access to milk
and contributing to their nutritional inadequacies due
to the absence of the lost livestock.
In the light of the growing number of Somali
civilians in critical need of humanitarian assistance,
we renew our call for humanitarian donors to respond
urgently to the humanitarian call. We further emphasize
the necessity to assist the country in tackling the
fundamental cause of the recurrent and continuous
humanitarian disaster created by climate change.
Somalia has been one of the smallest contributors to the
climate crisis, yet it faces the most severe consequences

23-0553611/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

of climate change. Its conditions demonstrate the link
between climate change and security in Africa and
require the support of major economies in addressing
the country’s vulnerabilities to the vagaries of climate.
We acknowledge the importance of the Summit
of the Heads of State and Government of Somalia
and its neighbours — namely, Djibouti, Ethiopia, and
Kenya — held on 1 February 2023 in Mogadishu. To
completely free Somalia of the influence of Al-Shabaab
and to facilitate the drawdown of ATMIS troops
and the gradual transfer of security responsibilities
to the Somali security forces, we support the
recommendations outlined at that important Summit,
including the agreement reached to make a final push
for joint operations in areas still under the control of
Al-Shabaab.
As a security transition predicated on the departure
of ATMIS by the end of 2024 rapidly approaches, we
urge the Security Council to rethink the comprehensive
removal of the arms embargo on Somalia, which is
essential in the fight against Al- Shabaab and vital
to the country’s peace and stability. The A3 calls on
the international community to support Somalia in
building her capacity in terms of training, logistics,
mine clearance and human rights compliance. With
the scheduled departure of African Union troops,
it is imperative that the Somali defence and security
forces be able to fulfil their sovereign duty to secure
their territory.
In conclusion, we wish to recall the provision of
resolution 2670 (2022) relating to the decision to convene
a formal meeting on the transition in Somalia no later
than 31 March with the participation of Somalia, the
African Union, the European Union and ATMIS as well
as troop-contributing countries. We believe that such a
meeting could provide a unique platform for discussing
ways and means of aligning priorities between the
ATMIS CONOPS and the Somalia Transition Plan.
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique reaffirm their
support and commitment to Somalia’s sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity. We
further encourage the Council and all key partners to
take this into account as we seek to deliver long-term
peace and stability for Somalia. We urge the Federal
Government to lead the Somalia Transition Plan and
direct all essential partnerships.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
thank Deputy Special Representative Gbeho, Special
12/22

22/02/2023

Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
(AU) Commission for Somalia Souef and UN-Women
Executive Director Bahous for their comprehensive
briefings. We also welcome Somalia’s participation in
this meeting.
Over the past six decades, Somalia has endured
profound challenges, from conflict to climate
shocks, piracy, poverty and famine. And yet, against
overwhelming odds, the Somali people have cast aside
the narrative of a failed State and have, instead, charted
their own course towards peace and stability. While
challenges remain, in recent months, since President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s election, Somalia’s
leadership has demonstrated its commitment and
ability to keep the country on an upward trajectory and
should be commended.
As we meet today, Somalia is at a critical inflection
point, which represents a unique opportunity to end
the cycle of conflict in a country that has been on the
Security Council’s agenda for over 30 years. This year
could augur well for Somalia — if the Council and the
international community seize the moment.
Building peace is more than preventing war. It is
also about establishing an architecture that supports
the country as it rebuilds itself. The international
community needs to follow suit by helping to
consolidate the sustainable peace Somalia deserves and
is striving to achieve.
With that in mind, I would like to focus on
three elements.
First, there is a need to support the ambitious
frameworks put forward by Somalia since the elections
towards more inclusive political, security, justice and
economic reforms. We are encouraged by Somalia’s
efforts to foster national unity, in particular by
strengthening relations and coordination with federal
member states. Stable governance will require Somali
stakeholders to stay resolutely committed to resolving
differences through dialogue. In the context of the
recent incidents in Laascaanood, we welcome the
ceasefire and reiterate the importance of restraint.
Secondly, Somalia’s most significant security
challenge continues to be terrorism. For a decade
and a half, Somalia has fought against the spread of
Al-Shabaab’s extremist ideology and violence. With
the support of the United Nations, the African Union
and other partners, Somalia continues to strengthen
its capacity to counter terrorism. The United Arab
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.9267

Emirates remains committed to assisting in whatever
way it can in those efforts.

be viable only if paired with sustainable development
and improved economic prospects for Somalia.

However, the international community must
recognize that, as its methods grow more sophisticated
and more lethal, Al-Shabaab’s reach and influence pose
an existential threat to Somalia and to international
peace and security. Over the past four months,
Al-Shabaab killed more than 500 people, including
civilians and international peacekeepers, and it
continues to subject women and girls to sexual violence
as a tactic of domination. As we heard from Executive
Director Bahous, the brutalization of women in
territory controlled by Al-Shabaab continues unabated.
That is reprehensible, and it shows the importance of
addressing the impact of extremist ideologies on the
lives of women and girls. Our approach as a Council
must never be described as gender-blind.

The country is experiencing the longest and
most severe drought in recent history. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/109) highlights how Somalia
is on the brink of famine. The United Arab Emirates is
gravely concerned about the fate of more than 20 million
people currently experiencing food insecurity and
almost 2 million children facing acute malnutrition.
Scaling up humanitarian assistance will be the test of
the international community’s commitment to Somalia.
Assistance needs to be gender-responsive, sensitive to
Somalia’s complex challenges and should encompass
both immediate relief efforts and longer-term support
for development and resilience.

Much more needs to be done to assist the Somali
Government’s efforts to combat Al-Shabaab and other
terrorist groups.
At the national level, that entails strengthening
national counter-terrorism capabilities, such as
effectively securing the areas formerly controlled
by Al-Shabaab, as well as ensuring the inclusive
delivery of public services. That is critical to curtailing
Al-Shabaab’s influence and preventing a vacuum that
it could exploit.
At the regional level, leaders have demonstrated
that they are rising to the challenge, including most
recently at the Mogadishu summit, and the Council
should step up and support that cooperation. In addition,
the partnership with the AU and the work of the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia remain a key
multiplier in bolstering Somalia’s security and stability.
And finally, at the international level, the Council
needs to rethink its counter-terrorism approaches. The
current two-track system, which essentially applies
the Council’s counter-terrorism framework only when
addressing those who are listed by the Council as
Da’esh or Al-Qaida affiliates, has to be redesigned.
The Council’s tools to combat terrorism must be
brought to bear in a consistent and predictable manner.
Bridging that gap will help Somalia and other countries
around the world counter terrorism more effectively on
their soil.
However, counter-terrorism strategies will not be
enough on their own. The consolidation of stability will

The United Arab Emirates remains steadfast and
unwavering in its support for the people of Somalia
and takes note of the position put forward by Ghana,
on behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council, in that regard. My country aligns itself with
that position.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Deputy Special Representative
Gbeho, Special Representative Souef and Executive
Director Bahous for their briefings and their insightful
presentations today. I would also like to welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Somalia
at today’s meeting.
Last month I had the opportunity to visit Somalia to
review the humanitarian stability and security situation.
I want to thank Ms. Gbeho and Special Representative
Souef for their support during my mission, as I met
with both of them there.
Let me start with security and some good news.
Thanks to the bravery of Somalia security forces
and citizens, since last summer, over 70 towns in
Hirshabelle and Galmudug have been liberated from
Al-Shabaab’s brutal rule. Unfortunately, lives were lost
in the process. We mourn the Somali people killed in the
struggle to free their country from terrorism. One such
victim was Danab Deputy Commander Major Hassan
Mohamed Osman. His sacrifice and that of others like
him reinforces the commitment of the United States to
support Somali-led efforts to defeat Al-Shabaab and
provide security to the people of Somalia.
We therefore welcome the recent commitment
by Somalia and its neighbours to expand operations
against Al-Shabaab further into southern Somalia, and

23-0553613/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

we strongly support and call on other international
partners to help meet Somalia’s force-generation needs.
Stability, which is of course directly tied to security,
remains a challenge in Somalia. Delivering timely and
balanced stabilization interventions to newly liberated
territory is imperative to bring security and relief to
the Somali people in those areas. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) has a critical
role to support the Federal Government of Somalia’s
planning and coordination of stabilization efforts
in response to operations. We appreciate UNSOM’s
efforts to continue highlighting the need for long-term
approaches to security and good governance based
on security sector reform and the rule of law. Those
efforts will pave the way for lasting peace and security
in Somalia.
We still support the Federal Government’s stated
goal of ending the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS) by the end of 2024. We expect
that drawdown plans will be coordinated with Somali
officials in line with Somali-defined security priorities
on the ground. But ATMIS has played a key role in the
ongoing Somali-led operations against Al-Shabaab. In
the meantime, we therefore urge ATMIS to continue
to provide the necessary support, in close collaboration
with our Somali partners.
The United States also welcomes progress
towards federalism and political reconciliation. We
congratulated the Federal Government and those
federal member states that have come to agreement
on the national security architecture and a national
justice sector framework. We similarly welcomed the
agreement reached on parliamentary and presidential
elections in South-West state. However, we are still
gravely concerned about the violence in Laascaanood,
particularly the indiscriminate shelling of civilians.
We call for an immediate de-escalation of violence,
the protection of civilians, unimpeded humanitarian
access and for tensions to be resolved peacefully
through dialogue.
Finally, I want to talk about the drought and the
potential for famine again in Somalia. Famine is the
ultimate failure of the international community. In a
world abundant with food, entire communities should
never have to starve to death. The Council cannot sit
here and accept that failure.
Since 2022, the United States has provided more
than $2.5 billion of life-saving assistance to the Horn
of Africa. Some $1.3 billion of that went directly to
14/22

22/02/2023

Somalia. Our funding last year accounted for more than
80 per cent of the World Food Programme’s emergency
operations in the region. We delayed the onset of
famine, but it was only a delay.
On my recent trip to Mogadishu, I announced that
the United States would provide another $40 million
to Somalia. That funding will address extreme food
gaps and combat the outbreak of deadly diseases.
But starting this April, the risk of famine will return.
According to the United Nations own figures, without
contributions from other donors, critical food and
nutrition assistance, supporting 4.6 million people in
Somalia, will end in April. We all just heard the call of
Ms. Gbeho.
I was clear in Somalia, and I will be clear with
all members in the Chamber. The United States
cannot continue to do that alone. This is a collective
responsibility. I call on the international community,
especially countries in the region and countries with
the means to give more, to heed the call of humanity.
Amid this crisis, it has been devastating to watch
some traditional donors cut their humanitarian budgets.
We cannot slash or even merely sustain our aid budgets.
We must increase our funding in the year ahead. We
must turn this famine postponement into a cancellation.
And that will require more countries to contribute
and give more, both bilaterally and multilaterally. I
therefore appeal to all my colleagues around the table
on this issue today. Let us be ambitious. Let us fight
this famine and let us do it together. Let us save lives.
Before ending, let me note our continued focus on
the situation in Türkiye and Syria, where they have
experienced another earthquake less than 24 hours ago.
Let me also express my condolences on the devastation
and loss of more lives.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
briefers for their briefings and would like to make
three points.
First of all, we encourage the Somali Government
to continue its efforts to implement political reform
and fight against Al-Shabaab. Cooperation between the
Federal Government of Somalia and the member states
is encouraging and must continue. Institutions must
be strengthened, and the Constitution finalized, via an
inclusive process that gives women and young people
their rightful place.
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

France welcomes the Somali Government’s
determination to fight against Al-Shabaab, and we
reiterate our firm condemnation of the terrorist attacks
perpetrated by that group. Efforts towards stabilization,
disarmament and reconciliation must be increased
in areas that were recovered from Al-Shabaab.
Strengthening the national security architecture will
also help to build lasting peace.
As others are, France is concerned about the violence
in Laascaanood, in the Sool region. De-escalation must
be urgently initiated, civilians protected and safe and
unfettered humanitarian access guaranteed. Only
through dialogue will tensions be resolved.
Secondly, the international community must rally
to provide assistance to the most vulnerable Somali
people. The humanitarian situation is deteriorating, and
the risk of famine remains. Women and children are the
primary victims. We call upon international partners to
support the humanitarian response plan, which requires
$2.6 billion this year.
France is making a tangible contribution. In
December last year, a World Food Programme vessel
was able to deliver 25,000 tons of wheat, provided
by Ukraine to the Somali people. It was France that
financed that effort with €14 million.
Efforts to protect human rights, in particular
the rights of women and children, must continue. As
stated by the Executive Director of UN-Women, the
plight of women in Somalia remains very difficult. We
commend the launch of the national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However,
we remain concerned about the increase in sexual and
gender-based violence.
Lastly, and this is my third point, Somali troops must
continue to grow stronger. The Somali Government and
the contingents of the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS) must be resolutely committed to
the security transition in order to meet the goals of
resolution 2628 (2022). That is the prerequisite for the
Somali people to take charge of their own medium-term
security and enable the complete withdrawal of ATMIS
by 31 December 2024. Until then, we encourage the
efforts of Somalia, the African Union and ATMIS to
ensure the successful drawdown of 2,000 soldiers
from the Mission by 30 June 2023, in accordance with
resolution 2670 (2022).
This year, once again, the European Union
remains the largest ATMIS contributor. In parallel, it

S/PV.9267

contributes to the strengthening of Somali troops with
its European Union Training Mission Somalia and
financial instruments, including the European Peace
Facility. However, other partners must also commit to
standing with us in support of Somalia.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would also like to
thank the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM); Special Representative
Mohamed El-Amine Souef and Executive Director
Bahous for their comprehensive briefings. We also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia to
today’s meeting.
We are encouraged by the political and security
momentum in Somalia, but, with regard to the
humanitarian response, more needs to be done. We
welcome the progress made on the implementation
of Federal Government priorities, and the holding of
regular meetings of the National Consultative Council
has contributed to it. We welcome the agreement on the
distribution of powers between the Federal Government
and the federal member states. However, that process
should be pushed further to include all federal member
states. The limited cooperation announced by Puntland
is indeed concerning, as are the bloody tensions in
Laascaanood. De-escalation and dialogue are the only
way forward, and including all stakeholders, mainly
women and youth, is a must.
We are following the developments in the fight
against Al-Shabaab. While we commend Governmentled offensive operations against the terrorist group, we
are alarmed by the ability of Al-Shabaab to carry out
high-impact attacks against Government security forces
and civilian targets in urban centres across the country.
It is crucial for military operations to be combined
with socioeconomic measures. We cannot afford to
risk losing State control of the newly liberated areas
because the population’s essential needs are not met. In
that vein, support for the implementation of the updated
national stabilization strategy is key to securing the
areas recovered from Al-Shabaab. In addition to that,
the adoption of the new counter-terrorism strategy is
a positive step in eroding the ability of Al-Shabaab to
impose taxation, recruitment and territorial control.
Somalia needs the support of the international
community, along with its neighbours, who share the
same challenges. The summit convened on 1 February
in Mogadishu proved the regional dimension of the

23-0553615/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

22/02/2023

threat caused by Al-Shabaab and the need for common
efforts to counter terrorism.

will therefore serve as a common thread for the three
points I wish to share.

We are deeply disturbed by the devastating impact
of the drought on women and children, who make up
more than 80 per cent of Somalia’s displaced population
and are frequent victims of human rights violations and
conflict-related sexual violence. The increase in sexual
and gender-based violence is deeply concerning. We
urge the Federal Government to investigate without
delay all reported cases of sexual and gender-based
violence and to hold the perpetrators to account. As we
are all aware, planning, directing or committing acts
of sexual and gender-based violence are stand-alone
listing criteria under the Somalia sanctions regime.
We in the Security Council should make greater use
of that provision and use targeted sanctions as a way
to punish the perpetrators of such crimes. We welcome
the launch of the Somali action plan to implement the
Somali Women’s Charter and the national action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000), and urge for their genuine
implementation.

First, the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women is essential to advancing Somalia’s national
priorities. It is particularly important to safeguard the
participation of female candidates running for political
office, as well as elected female representatives, so
that they can contribute to political processes at every
level, free from threats or reprisals. In that regard, the
national action plan on women and peace and security
and the action plan for the implementation of the
Somali Women’s Charter are key instruments, and we
encourage their full implementation. Switzerland has
long been committed to active engagement with Somali
society as a whole and in all its diversity, as well as
to strengthening local governance. That means that
the voices of women, as well as those of young people
and minority groups, must be heard without hindrance
and integrated into decision-making processes
and public life. That approach is important for the
constitutional review, the power-sharing discussion
and for reconciliation between the Federal Government
and the federal member states. We welcome the regular
meetings of the National Consultative Council in that
regard and encourage continued constructive dialogue.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate our support for
UNSOM and thank the international partners of
Somalia who have contributed to peacebuilding and
have supported the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS) and the Somali authorities in
gradually taking over their security responsibilities,
a challenging process that will require constructive
efforts from all sides until the full security takeover is
completed. We also commend ATMIS for its sacrifices
and call for its continued support and collaboration
with Somali forces in order to meet the expectations for
the Somalia Transition Plan.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. Gbeho, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Souef, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, and Ms. Bahous, Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of UN-Women, for
their briefings. I also would like to welcome the
representative of Somalia.
We welcome your call on Council members to pay
special attention to the women and peace and security
agenda in our deliberations today, Madam President.
As a Somali proverb says, “the best bed to sleep on is
peace.” However, if peace is for the benefit of all, it is
also the responsibility of one and all. Just as they are
elsewhere, women are essential creators of sustainable
peace in Somalia, and their important contributions
16/22

Secondly, we remain concerned about human
rights violations and abuses, including sexual and
gender-based violence. It is vital to ensure women’s
rights and a safe and respectful environment that can
enable women to fully participate in peacebuilding in
Somalia. We encourage the authorities to continue their
efforts to combat and prevent those violations. We also
encourage Parliament to pass the 2018 sexual offences
bill without delay.
Respect for international law must be at the heart
of the responses to insecurity throughout the country.
We deplore the continued attacks by Al-Shabaab and
other armed groups and acknowledge the efforts of the
Government and the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia to address them. As they do that, we call on
all actors to respect international law, including human
rights and international humanitarian law, in order to
ensure the protection of civilians, particularly in areas
under military operations. We are also concerned about
the current outbreak of violence in Laascaanood, which
has resulted in massive displacement, with women
and children being the worst affected. Respect for
international humanitarian law is imperative to ensure
timely, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

Thirdly, Somalia is on the brink of famine. Climate
change is clearly a major factor. Women are often the
first to face it, and are disproportionately affected. The
humanitarian response in Somalia should therefore be
designed and implemented with the active participation
of women, while also remaining sensitive to climate
effects and risks. We are currently seeing that in the
shape of the region’s most severe drought in four
decades, which is further increasing food insecurity.
The risks include violence due to increased competition
for natural resources, heightened tensions within
communities and the forced displacement that may
result. We must continue to support the Government in
its response to the humanitarian situation.
Somalia’s national priorities indicate a strong
commitment and clear direction towards a prosperous
future in which the country can become “at peace
with itself”. Women will undoubtedly be at the heart
of that commitment. We commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), which
is playing a crucial role. Switzerland will continue
to support Somalia, its people and UNSOM in their
peacebuilding efforts. We count on a united Security
Council to do the same.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Ms. Gbeho,
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador Souef, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, and Ms. Bahous, Under-Secretary-General and
Executive Director of UN-Women, for their informative
briefings. I also welcome Ambassador Osman and the
Somalian delegation to this meeting. I would like to
express our appreciation for the work of the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) and
to thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
that enable ATMIS and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to do their work. Let
me also thank Ambassador Swan for his leadership of
UNSOM.
We are worried about the figures in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/109) indicating that Somalia
recorded a significant increase in civilian casualties
in 2022. The high lethality of some of the attacks
perpetrated by Al-Shabaab during the reporting period
is also extremely concerning. Nevertheless, I would
like to underscore that we are pleased with the progress
that has been made in the fight against Al-Shabaab,
especially through the dislodging of the group from
several areas in various Somali states. We commend the

S/PV.9267

Federal Government of Somalia, the federal member
states and all the relevant partners that are working
together to address that threat.
For those achievements to have a lasting effect,
it will be essential to design and implement sound
peacebuilding initiatives. Brazil has repeatedly
emphasized the Peacebuilding Commission’s unique
position in the United Nations system, as it could play
a bigger role in Somalia. The Peacebuilding Fund
also finances invaluable projects in the country. We
commend the implementation of the national security
architecture and encourage Somalia to redouble its
efforts on that front. And we note with appreciation
how reconciliation initiatives have been integral to the
recovered territories.
Brazil stands ready to keep its engagement in the
ATMIS reconfiguration and the security transition that
is taking place across Somali institutions. We hope that
the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal
member states keep to the recent pattern of regular
National Consultative Council meetings. Above all,
we encourage the sustained dialogue among Somalia’s
leaders to address the most pressing national priorities.
The serious humanitarian situation in Somalia
demands attention from the Council. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Somali Red Crescent Society and all
humanitarian agencies that provide vital assistance in
Somalia have issued clear warnings on that crisis in the
past months. With the projections of more than 8 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance in 2023,
we should work towards scaling up assistance in an
improved and sustained way in order to prevent famine.
Forced displacement has hit Somali women and
children the hardest. Therefore, we should also address
the protection gaps and inequalities that the current
humanitarian crisis aggravated. Chiefly among those
responses is the implementation of gender-inclusive
humanitarian efforts. Such assistance would enable
a safer environment for the women and children who
suffer disproportionately from the current tragic
situation. We therefore endorse the appeal made by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia on the
matter. Somali women deserve bolder assistance from
the international community and humanitarian partners
to lead the way not only in overcoming the current crisis,
but also in rebuilding their communities afterwards.

23-0553617/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Deputy Special
Representative Gbeho, Special Representative Souef
and Executive Director Bahous of UN-Women for their
briefings and contributions.
Peace and stability in Somalia is essential for a
stable and prosperous Horn of Africa and can contribute
to a vibrant maritime economy, expanding from the
Gulf of Aden to the Indian Ocean. Under the leadership
of the newly elected federal President, Somalia has seen
fresh momentum for its State-building efforts, despite
the lingering challenges it continues to face. In that
regard, Japan emphasizes the vital role played by the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS),
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia and
commends their tireless efforts.
In furtherance of the aspirations of the people of
Somalia and the successful fulfilment of the mandates
of the three missions deployed in Somalia, Japan
believes that the following points are essential.
First, Somalia needs stronger partnerships
and support from the international community,
particularly from its neighbours. The summit of
Somalia’s neighbouring States held in Mogadishu on
1 February demonstrated renewed regional solidarity
against common threats. Japan welcomes the leaders’
articulation of their strong will to foster coordination
by establishing mechanisms for operations and border
security. The sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia is paramount and
cannot be achieved with porous borders. Regional
cooperation to prevent the cross-border movement
of terrorists, illegal weapons and ammunition must
be expanded.
Secondly, institution-building is vital across
all sectors. We commend the recent operational
advancements of the Somali National Army, with the
help of community defence forces. Their operations
have led to the further liberation of certain Al-Shabaab
strongholds. In order to hold onto those newly liberated
areas and deliver sufficient security and basic services,
it is crucial to build institutions and capacities at the
local and community levels. That has to be done through
close cooperation between the Federal Government and
federal member states, with the support of international
community. Japan, for its part, has contributed to the
capacity development of central and local government
officials by providing training programmes. Local
institutions and security forces must be able to garner
18/22

22/02/2023

the trust and confidence of people on the ground. Such
efforts will create conditions in which the presence of
ATMIS is no longer required.
Thirdly, it is essential to protect the most
vulnerable and address multifaceted threats to human
security in a holistic manner. Unabated clashes and
violence continue to displace a large number of women
and children, who are exposed to the risk of falling
victim to child recruitment and sexual violence. Those
challenges add to the already acute humanitarian
situation caused and exacerbated by severe droughts
and other climate impacts. An approach from a
women and peace and security perspective is critically
important in overcoming the difficulties Somalia faces.
The humanitarian-development-peace nexus should be
the key to our approach. In order to build community
resilience, we should further integrate our assistance on
that nexus with regard to food security, medical care,
youth empowerment and more.
Let me conclude by assuring the Council that Japan
continues to play its part, including as Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Al-Shabaab, in promoting peace and
stability in Somalia and the broader region.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Deputy Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, Ms. Anita
Kiki Gbeho; the Head of the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia, Mr. Mohamed El-Amine Souef;
and the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima
Sami Bahous, for their briefings.
We are closely following the situation as it develops
in the Federal Republic of Somalia, where the internal
security situation remains difficult, the level of terrorist
threat remains high and the deep territorial and clan
fragmentation of society persists. The conclusion last
year of the protracted electoral cycle created good
preconditions for restoring State institutions, gradually
promoting national reconciliation and improving the
security situation in the country. We anticipate that all
participants in the Somali political process, including
the leadership of the states of Puntland and Somaliland,
will continue working together to establish a stable
model for a federal structure. At the same time, we
continue to believe in the need to preserve the territorial
integrity and unity of Somalia.
We consistently support the efforts of Mogadishu
to stabilize the internal political situation. We note
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

that the work of the National Consultative Council
has intensified, within the framework of which the
Federal Government and states have reached important
agreements on cooperation for the implementation of
key national priorities. We welcome the signing of an
agreement between the Federal Government and the
Somali state authorities on the division of power.
Meanwhile, we note the overall dire humanitarian
situation throughout Somali territory. A significant part
of the population remains on the brink of famine, which
is expected to reach its peak in April and June this year
if the necessary level of humanitarian assistance cannot
be provided.
The security situation in the country also remains
of great concern. The extremist group Al-Shabaab
continues to attack Government facilities, military
units, international organizations and civilians in urban
areas, especially in the capital and the Lower Shabelle
region. On 23 January, militants fired on a helicopter
belonging to the Russian joint-stock company UTairHelicopter Services, which is involved in providing
airlift services to the United Nations humanitarian
mission in Somalia.
We are aware that the Somali National Army,
supported by local militias, conducted a series of
successful offensive operations in the states of
Galmudug and Hirshabelle, which resulted in the
liberation of several towns from Al-Shabaab. The
federal authorities also facilitated a resolution of
the situation in South-West state. However, we are
seriously concerned by the confrontation that broke out
in the disputed region of Sool between Somaliland and
Puntland. We hope that that conflict situation will be
resolved as soon as possible.
In that context, we attach great importance to
the work of the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia, which plays a key role in combating terrorism
and ensuring domestic security. We consider its
presence a critical factor in deterring extremist and
other illegal activities in Somalia and a prerequisite for
making progress in strengthening its statehood.
We view positively the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia. We note the efforts made
by Somalia’s neighbours to provide assistance in
combating terrorism and welcomed the regional summit
in Mogadishu on 1 February, which brought together
the leaders of Somalia, Djibouti, Kenya and Ethiopia

S/PV.9267

and saw the signing of a number of agreements with a
view to bolstering joint action against the Al-Shabaab
extremist group.
At this point, as a priority, we need to focus on
increasing the effectiveness of Somalia’s federal
enforcement bodies so they can ensure effective
control of the situation themselves. By the time ATMIS
concludes its work, the Somali people should be able
to assume full responsibility for ensuring security
throughout Somalia’s territory.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Ms. Gbeho, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. Souef, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia, and Ms. Bahous, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for their briefings.
We recognize the commitment undertaken by the
Federal Government of Somalia, with the support of
the United Nations system in general and UNSOM
in particular, to continuing to ensure the country’s
reconstruction with a view to achieving a lasting peace.
It is therefore crucial to have a policy of openness
that enables the enhancement of those efforts while
ensuring transparency and trust. In that context, we call
for that work to continue and for strengthening it in the
following areas.
First, on the political front, we hope that the
National Consultative Council will continue to work on
the national plan and the electoral processes. Inclusive
democracy has been shown to be key in overcoming
conflicts, building institutions, and implementing
policies aimed at ensuring economic well-being,
social development and public safety. As a signatory
to the Shared Commitments initiative for the Security
Council’s agenda on women and peace and security,
Ecuador acknowledges the political will that the
Government of Somalia has demonstrated in acting to
promote the political and social participation of women,
including through the Somali Women’s Charter and the
country’s national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000).
We encourage Somalia to strengthen those strategies in
order to ensure greater and more equitable participation
by women in Parliament and governmental institutions.
Secondly, regarding security, we regret that
Al-Shabaab continues to perpetrate attacks causing

23-0553619/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

death and suffering. We condemn those heinous acts
and hope they will not go unpunished. Al-Shabaab must
be held accountable for its use of violence and for its
violations and abuses of human rights. The outcomes
of the summit of Heads of State and Government
of Somalia, Djibouti, Kenya and Ethiopia held on
1 February are encouraging. They affirm the need to
support regional efforts and the critical importance
of regional unity in confronting threats such as those
posed by Al-Shabaab. We therefore urge that those joint
efforts continue.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians is an issue of the
utmost concern for my delegation. Based on what we
have heard today, about half of Somalia’s population
is in need of humanitarian assistance. Famine and the
predicted droughts have led to rising levels of food
insecurity and chronic malnutrition for 1.8 million
children under the age of five. We are also seeing forced
displacement and its consequences, in addition to an
increase in all types of violence. We therefore have no
choice but to unite our voices in support of the most
vulnerable. It is vital to ensure the implementation
of the 2018 sexual offences law, which incorporates
policies for preventing sexual violence against women
and girls and protecting them from it, in addition to
underscoring the importance of accountability in the
transition to national reconciliation and peace.
We condemn the looting and destruction of
humanitarian goods, as well as attacks and threats
against humanitarian personnel. Somalia is in need of
essential goods and supplies to ensure the survival of
its civil society. The international community cannot
remain inactive in the face of that situation and must
assist the efforts of Somalis and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia. Ecuador commends
the substantial cooperation between UNSOM and the
Government of Somalia on issues such as reducing and
eradicating female genital mutilation, child marriage
and adolescent pregnancy, democratizing access to
sexual and reproductive health services, promoting a
culture of prevention with regard to sexual violence
against women and girls and producing genderdisaggregated data to provide specific information
on the number of women and girls who are victims of
sexual violence in order to develop public policy.
Lastly, we recognize the Government of Somalia’s
efforts within the framework of resolution 2628
(2022) and call for joint action to be taken by regional,
subregional and international organizations and within
20/22

22/02/2023

the United Nations system to alleviate the crisis. We also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Somalia in the Chamber today.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I thank Ms. Gbeho, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Acting Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
Special Representative Souef and Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director Bahous for their
briefings. We welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia in today’s meeting.
I also want to express our deep disappointment that
the current conditions were not conducive to the safe
participation of a civil-society representative to brief
the Security Council on women and peace and security
issues. We remain firm in our belief that the voice of
civil society needs to be heard, and we need to do more
to enable the safe participation of civil-society briefers
without fear of reprisals, harassment or abuse. For those
reasons, we are circulating as a document of the Security
Council the statement that would have been delivered
on behalf of the Somali Gender Equity Movement, a
non-partisan sociopolitical global movement made up
of 9,000 diverse Somali women inside the country and
in the diaspora who have united to advocate for gender
equity in Somalia.
Somalia is on a path towards a holistic
transformation, and the political reforms already
achieved should continue to incentivize further progress.
Progress in the constitutional review process to achieve
an effective model of federalism for Somalia remains
key. We are encouraged by the recent agreements on the
allocation of powers and the establishment of technical
committees to review and prepare recommendations
on issues of national security and universal suffrage
elections. On that note, Malta underlines the importance
of inclusive, free and fair elections and a civic space
that represents all stakeholders. The full, equal and
meaningful participation of women is the backbone of
every society. We welcome the launch of the Somali
Women’s Charter and Somalia’s national action plan
on women and peace and security and urge their full
implementation. Only when all Somali women become
an integral part of all policy- and decision-making will
it be possible to establish a foundation for effective
governance, sustainable peace and development.
23-05536

22/02/2023

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.9267

On the security front, 2022 was the deadliest
year we have seen, with a 153 per cent increase in
civilian casualties. Al-Shabaab continues to exploit
regional instability. Malta strongly condemns all
offensives carried out by Al-Shabaab, especially those
targeting civilians.

pursuit to restore lasting peace, security and stability
in Somalia should remain our compass.

Malta remains supportive of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), which assists
in the systematic harmonization of Somalia’s security
sector. Together with the European Union, a major
donor to ATMIS, we also continue to support a gradual
handover of security responsibilities to Somalia. We
commend the African Union’s continued commitment
and appeal for the eventual completion of ATMIS
by 2024.

Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate and wish every success to the Maltese
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also want to thank the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union (AU) Commission for
Somalia, Mr. Mohamed El-Amine Souef, and Ms. Anita
Kiki Gbeho, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), for
their briefings. And I thank Ms. Sima Sami Bahous,
Executive Director of UN-Women.

Somalia remains subject to the heaviest impacts
emanating from food insecurity, compounded by
extreme droughts. Almost half of the Somali population
suffers from severe food insecurity. We are deeply
concerned about trends of severe malnutrition and
the lack of hygiene, risking increases in diseases and
further displacement.
We are alarmed by the way that those overlapping
threats have left children out of school and, consequently,
subject to exploitative and dangerous conditions. With
up to 1,127 violations against children recorded, we call
for swift justice and accountability, and we continue to
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Malta is deeply committed to combating all
forms of violence, including conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence. We are pleased to hear
of a number of programmes developed for raising
awareness on conflict-related sexual violence, including
multi-stakeholder workshops to address any social or
legal impediments to ensuring accountability. We urge
the Somali authorities to investigate and prosecute all
reported cases of sexual and gender-based violence,
based on a survivor-centred approach. The perpetrators
of such crimes must be held accountable. We also echo
UNSOM’s call for a more gender-inclusive humanitarian
response, with a focus on displaced women and girls in
areas heavily affected by drought.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates its continued
support for Somalia. We commend the work carried out
by the Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNSOM in partnership with
regional actors and the international community. The

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud of the Federal
Republic of Somalia has further solidified his vision
of underscoring a whole-of-Government approach
that places equal effort on upholding State-building
through an inclusive political settlement and longterm reconciliation process. The past few months have
witnessed the achievement of many of the articulated
priorities of the Federal Government of Somalia. On the
political front, regular national consultative meetings
were held by the President to deepen federalism and
enhance cooperation on State-building priorities.
The successful conclusion of the reconciliation
conference in the capital of South-West state, Baidoa,
from 17 January to 5 February, is a true testament
to the Government’s inclusive engagement with all
stakeholders to resolve outstanding issues and build
on and implement the agreements and outcomes of the
sessions of the National Consultative Council.
Somalia hosted neighbouring countries’ Heads of
State from Djibouti, Ethiopia and Kenya at a historic
front-line State summit in Mogadishu last month at
which they agreed to fully strengthen bilateral security
cooperation and the final push in regional effort to defeat
international terrorists in Somalia. That is both timely
and sensible and is the only way to sustainably deliver
peace and security to our region and the continent, in
general, given the fact that we face a common threat.
Somalia is truly grateful to all its international partners
that are standing with us in solidarity in the fight
against international terrorism at home.
The Somali Government is making demonstrable
headway in its new comprehensive strategy of fighting

23-0553621/22

S/PV.9267

The situation in Somalia

Al-Shabaab militarily and ideologically. We have
decided that enough is enough and that the international
terrorist group Al-Khawarij must be comprehensively
defeated once and for all. The Somali Government
convened a conference bringing together more than 300
religious scholars and clerics in Mogadishu in January.
The clerics and scholars, who had come from across
the regions of Somalia and the diaspora, declared their
support for the Government’s war against Al-Shabaab
and other terrorist groups and ideologically challenged
their violent extremist ideologies. Our people have
answered our Government’s call to stand with us in the
fight to liberate territories controlled by the terrorist
groups. And they are now organically organizing and
fighting together with Somali National Army and
other security forces to make Somalia safer for their
own future.
Since the previous reporting period, our national
armed forces have intensified their offensive operations
against terrorist groups in the states of Hirshabelle
and Galmudug and has dislodged them from many
towns and villages. Despite constraints in logistical
and financial resources, the Somali security forces
began to conduct clearance and target operations in
South-West state and Jubbaland states. So far, all
recent operations have been successful in all Somali
national armed forces operation areas where critical
main supply routes and population centres have been
liberated. Although the implementation of the Somalia
Transition Plan for security is a resource-intensive
exercise, it is worth noting that the Federal Government
of Somalia has indeed successfully achieved at least
90 per cent of the priorities and objectives outlined in
the previous report that was submitted to the Council
in October 2022. Nonetheless, the activities of the
Somalia Transition Plan will not succeed unless the
long-standing arms embargo on Somalia is fully lifted
and articulated international support is made available
and restructured with proper alignment to the realities
on the ground, including investment in quick-impact
projects in the recently liberated areas.
Somalia averted the looming famine last year. We
thank donors and humanitarian agencies for heeding the
call of the Government in addressing the humanitarian
needs of the local population. In that regard, we stress
the importance of the nexus between humanitarian

22/22

22/02/2023

and development assistance, which is crucial to the
work involving the Federal Government of Somalia’s
long-term strategies to invest in and support systemic
transformation across long-term cycles. Furthermore,
we stress utilizing country systems, which is an
important component in building our State capacity to
maintain security, foster economic stability and growth
and deliver services. Bypassing country systems
creates additional transaction costs for our Government
and may distract attention from the systems that
govern the use of domestic resources, undermining
State accountability.
In northern Somalia, we remain appalled by
and condemn the aggression against the people of
Laascaanood, which has caused immeasurable human
suffering and loss of life and large-scale civilian
displacement. President Hassan Sheikh Mohamed has
called for an immediate end to hostilities and negotiating
a lasting ceasefire. The Federal Government of Somalia
stands ready to create the conditions for the start of an
inclusive Somali-owned national dialogue to resolve
the conflict and thereby create the foundation for
peace and stability throughout the country. The Federal
Government of Somalia underlines its duty to protect
the Somali population and the responsibility to continue
to provide substantial ongoing humanitarian support
to those affected by the conflict in Laascaanood,
in particular women and children. We call on our
international partners to provide immediate assistance
in the form of safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access and enabling the delivery of humanitarian aid
to the population of Laascaanood and the Sool region.
What is happening in Laascaanood today is a crime
against humanity, and it is against the values of the
Somali people. In that regard, there can be no impunity
for such crimes involving indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Furthermore,
the Federal Government of Somalia is committed to
investigate and hold the perpetrators accountable.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

23-05536
