United Nations

S/PV.4046 (Resumption 2)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

4046th Meeting
Friday, 17 September 1999, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. van Walsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Martínez Ríos
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fonseca
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chen Xu
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Essonghé
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957)

99-85811 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting resumed at 2.45 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate; in the same breath, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/1999/957) on this very important issue.
The question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is not new. From traditional society to our modern
world with its elaborate written laws, it has always been
understood that persons who are not involved in combat
during an armed conflict should not be subject to attack.
The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other international
instruments of humanitarian and human rights law prohibit
the targeting or endangering of civilians during times of
hostilities.
However, as we are all aware, civilians, particularly
children and women, have become habitual targets of war
at a time when we should be considering ourselves more
civilized than our ancestors. Children are habitually
abducted and turned into killers, couriers and the sexual
slaves of armed thugs. Women are raped in order to shame
the enemy or destroy its morale. Whole groups of civilians,
by virtue of their ethnicity or religion, are with wanton
regularity decimated, “cleansed” and threatened with
extinction. In short, today’s wars, particularly those that go
by the misnomer of civil wars, are nothing more than
glorified acts of terrorism in which the laws of war are
totally ignored.
All of these atrocities are being perpetrated while we
have in place institutions and instruments created to avert
them and punish the perpetrators. We therefore need to ask
ourselves how we can endeavour to become more effective
at utilizing these institutions and instruments. It was with
this in mind that we found the report of the SecretaryGeneral of paramount importance and relevance. While all
its contents and recommendations may not curry favour
with everybody in this Organization, we dare say that we
find most of them to be quite appealing. They reinforce
what we have always thought should be done in situations
of armed conflict and in endeavours to prevent the eruption
of conflict.
Our central vocation as the United Nations is to
discourage recourse to the use of force, to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We fully share the

2

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
Secretary-General’s view on nipping potential conflict
situations in the bud, so to speak. The United Nations
should utilize this capacity early, when signs of a
potentially explosive situation are there. The experiences
of Rwanda, and recently of East Timor, should teach us
a lesson. Timely use of the Secretary-General’s good
offices and cooperation with regional organizations in
preventive diplomacy should be exploited to the full.
There can be no doubt that, whenever the situation
so demands, no effort should be spared to attempt some
preventive deployment of peacekeepers, negotiators or
mediators. We fully subscribe to the Secretary-General’s
observation that this form of deployment had an
immeasurable impact in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. Where the situation has gone beyond
preventive action, the Security Council should at least
develop the habit of instantly informing the parties to a
conflict about their obligations towards civilians and the
consequences of violating international humanitarian and
human rights law. It should be made clear that children in
particular should not be used as soldiers or otherwise
targeted. The Security Council should not just threaten,
but should make good on its threat. There should be no
hesitation over imposing an arms embargo or other
targeted sanctions where evidence exists that a party or
parties to an armed conflict are deliberately targeting
civilians.
Humanitarian assistance to civilians is essential
during an armed conflict. Parties to a conflict should
therefore allow unimpeded access and provide security
guarantees to humanitarian agencies and their personnel
in the discharge of their duties. Anyone who fails to do
so, in our view, should be held to account under
international humanitarian law. It is becoming quite clear
that denial of access to humanitarian assistance by a party
or parties to an armed conflict has become a valuable
weapon of war.
It is indeed disturbing that even though the majority
of Member States of the United Nations are party to the
international instruments on humanitarian and human
rights law, such instruments continue to be violated with
impunity. My delegation finds merit in the
recommendation by the Secretary-General that where war
crimes and crimes against humanity have been committed,
the Security Council should act without fear or favour.
The Council should not only put in place a mechanism
for ensuring that the suspects are apprehended and
punished, but must also do all in its power to enforce the
warrants of arrest.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4046th meeting
17 September 1999

My delegation also supports the recommendation that
as Member States of the United Nations, we should strive
for the early ratification of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court. If this can be achieved sooner rather than
later, it will go a long way in enabling us to enforce respect
for humanitarian and human rights law.

it remains a challenge to ensure that the provisions
regarding civilians in armed conflict are upheld on the
ground and accorded the respect they deserve. That
respect can be widened and advanced if our discourse on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict reflects
historical truths and not politicized distortions.

We are also of the view that the minimum age for
recruitment and participation in hostilities should be raised
to 18. This is quite consistent with our own policy and
practice as a country. Furthermore, we are supportive of the
call for accelerating the process of negotiating an optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
children in armed conflict.

For the facts in the case of Israel and the West Bank
are that Israeli forces entered these territories during the
1967 Six Day War only after neighbouring States massed
their armies along its borders and Israeli cities came
under fire from artillery positions in Samaria and in the
environs of Jerusalem. History is important, for we are
finding the international community is being forced to
deal almost exclusively with the results of a war of selfdefence from 30 years ago, while ignoring many times
wars of clear-cut aggression. The best proof of this trend
was the decision to convene the High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention with respect to the West
Bank and Gaza and not with respect to any single conflict
since 1949. Regardless of these circumstances, Israel has
been ready to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the ArabIsrael conflict through Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which were passed in this
Chamber in 1967 and 1973, respectively.

In conclusion, we fully agree that peacekeeping and
peace-making missions should be structured in such a way
that the special protection of assistance requirements for
children and women and the elderly will always be
paramount.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Israel. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Gold (Israel): I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of your important post. Let me also
commend your predecessor on the outstanding manner in
which he conducted his duties previously.
The State of Israel has a deep and historical interest in
the growth, integrity and respect of international
humanitarian law in general and the Geneva Conventions,
in particular. As a nation that lost one third of its
population in the nazi occupation of Europe in the most
heinous case of genocide in human history, Israel’s own
birthright in engraved with a particular responsibility to
prevent this crime from occurring again against the Jewish
people, and a universalist commitment to combat genocide,
crimes against humanities and war crimes wherever they
may occur.

In signing the Oslo accords in September 1993,
Israel demonstrated that while it is determined to achieve
secure and recognized borders as a result of final status
talks, it is also determined not to rule over another
people. Today, in fact, more than 97 per cent of the
Palestinians in the West Bank are not under Israeli
occupation, but rather under the administration of the
Palestinian Authority. The Oslo accords are a testament
to the desire of the people of Israel to take into account
the needs of civilians in armed conflict even before that
conflict is fully resolved. Now it is the hope of Israel to
complete the permanent status negotiations with respect
to these territories. Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) are the only agreed basis for
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

In this context, Israel is concerned with what is
transpiring today regarding those international instruments
designed to protect civilians in armed conflict, including the
Geneva Conventions. The world community is facing at
least 20 ongoing armed conflicts across the globe that have
led to acute starvation, ethnic cleaning and the physical
eradication of entire communities. A basic paradox
confronts the international community in this regard, for
while the Geneva Conventions in particular have received
nearly universal support by the accession of 188 countries,

This process has not been without risks for, while
implementing its agreements with the PLO, Israeli
civilians have been directly targeted by terrorist
organizations that have operated out of Palestiniancontrolled areas. It is our hope and expectation that, with
the parties re-engaged in the peace process after the
signing of the Sharm El Sheikh Accord, the Palestinian
Authority will finally dismantle the operational
infrastructure of these terrorist organizations and prevent
attacks against Israeli civilians.

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
In war civilians are in some cases the mistaken
casualties because of their proximity to a theatre of
operations. In terrorist attacks civilians are the intended
target. In war military planners seek to degrade the military
capacity of their adversary by striking other military
formations, airfields or command and control systems. In
terrorist attacks marketplaces, city bus lines or apartment
buildings are deliberately targeted. The most direct means
for protecting civilians in armed conflict is by combatting
the entire phenomenon of terrorism and rejecting any
political excuses intended to provide it with support.
The concern of the international community with the
protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
supported. The protection of civilians goes to the heart of
the common values that underpin the United Nations as a
whole. Through determined action, and fair as well as
balanced implementation of international conventions and
instruments, the Member States of the United Nations can
assure that the protection of civilians in the twenty-first
century can be fundamentally different than the
unprecedented atrocities we faced in this century that is
about to come to a close.
The President: I thank the representative of Israel for
the kind words he addressed to me and my predecessor.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Haque (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I am confident that today’s debate will
create greater awareness among Member States of the
United Nations about the gravity and complexity of the
problem and the need to address it on a priority basis.
It is matter of grave concern for Pakistan and for the
international community as a whole that violence against
civilians in situations of armed conflict has reached
dangerous proportions. In most cases this violence is
directed against women, children and other vulnerable
groups, including internally displaced persons. The statistics
contained in the report of the Secretary-General are indeed
staggering. The fact that civilian casualties account for
almost 80 per cent of the total number of victims of armed
conflict and that more than one million people die each
year in various conflict areas around the world are
extremely disturbing. It is also a painful reality that there
are more than 30 million refugees in the world. Pakistan

4

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
itself has carried the burden of millions of Afghan
refugees on its soil for more than two decades and is only
too keenly aware of the plight of people who are forced
to leave their countries. We therefore condemn
unequivocally the targeting of civilians in armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, civilians are subjected to violence
despite the existence of a substantial body of international
law that has evolved over the years to protect civilians,
refugees and humanitarian personnel. It is therefore our
collective responsibility to ensure effective adherence to
these international legal instruments.
Violence against civilians is an unfortunate and
unacceptable by-product of wars and armed conflicts.
While recognizing the urgent need to address this issue,
my delegation is of the view that it is necessary for the
Security Council to address the causes of conflict,
including the denial of the right to self-determination of
people who are under foreign occupation and suffering
oppression and massive violations of their human rights.
The Council must work to redress these problems so that
conflicts and the grievous consequences that flow from
them may disappear.
The Secretary-General has proposed a set of specific
recommendations to pave the way for ensuring protection
for civilians in armed conflict. These include, to name
only a few, proposals for the deployment of preventive
peacekeeping operations; the need to establish working
groups of the Security Council to address specific volatile
situations; the establishment of a permanent technical
review mechanism of the United Nations; and the
imposition of verifiable arms embargoes to limit the
ability of warring parties to wage war against one another
and against civilians. These and the other
recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral will be studied carefully by my Government. I
would merely like to note here that at times one needs to
stretch one’s imagination considerably to find the tenuous
linkage between some of the recommendations and the
mandate of the Security Council.
The Secretary-General has encouraged the Council
to take decisive action to address this critical issue and to
promote a climate of compliance. In this context I would
like to recall that during the last debate on this subject in
the Security Council, in February 1999, a large number of
countries pointed out that the report of the SecretaryGeneral should not merely focus on the role of the
Security Council, but should be comprehensive in nature,
identifying the role of all concerned bodies and agencies.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We believe that Member States should have the
opportunity to thoroughly study and discuss this
comprehensive and far-reaching report and its
recommendations. We also feel that it is not possible for
non-members of the Security Council to engage in an
in-depth and interactive discussion of these
recommendations in the Council itself. Thus there is a need
for a forum, comprising the entire membership of the
United Nations, where all Member States can fully
participate in such discussions. The Security Council may,
therefore, consider requesting the General Assembly to
undertake the task of inviting the views of Member States
on the report itself and its recommendations, to conduct a
comprehensive exchange of views on the issue, and, if
necessary, to work towards the elucidation of a legal and
internationally binding instrument regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts. Pending that, the Council
may call for the scrupulous application of the considerable
body of existing international law to protect civilians in
armed conflict.
The President: The next speaker is Mrs. Sylvie
Junod, head of the delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39
of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red
Cross) (spoke in French): First of all I would like to thank
you, Sir, along with the other members of the Council, for
making it possible for the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) to speak here regarding the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflicts. The ICRC warmly
welcomes the Council’s initiative to undertake an open
debate, on the basis of concrete proposals, on a subject of
such fundamental importance. But we cannot fail to express
our disappointment over the fact that this essential debate
is taking place at the very time when we must deplore the
powerless of the international community to assure the
protection of civilians in various parts of the world. To
illustrate this point I will only cite two situations in which
our organization has been working for 25 odd years:
Angola and East Timor. We hope that in the latter case the
imminent deployment of an international force will help to
limit the terrible sufferings of a population that remains in
danger.
To avoid such situations, the ICRC would like
political and humanitarian actors in due course to join
forces and unite their efforts in accordance with their
respective responsibilities. It seems to us that in calling

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
upon the Security Council to give increased attention to
the prevention of conflicts by attacking the root causes of
crises and, to that end, establishing a more systematic and
specific framework for action, the recommendations of
the Secretary-General are on the right track.
In extreme cases, when all initiatives to ensure
respect for basic human rights and humanitarian law have
failed and when such principles have been rejected
outright, humanitarian action as such is disputed, and
States must find new remedies. Rapid action must be
decided upon and, if necessary, imposed. Such measures
should create new conditions enabling humanitarian
players to act. But they should not necessarily be included
in political decision-making on possible enforcement
action.
The ICRC is particularly pleased to note that, when
the Council decides to take action based on Chapter VII
of the Charter, it will no longer limit itself to political and
military considerations but will henceforth take account of
the humanitarian consequences of armed conflict for
civilians. This is an important step towards discharging
the collective responsibility that flows from common
article 1 of the Geneva Conventions, which requires
States parties not only to respect but to ensure respect for
the provisions of these Conventions. In this context, I
should like to point out that Article 89 of the first
Protocol Additional of 1977 requests States to act in cases
of serious violations of the Conventions and the Protocol,
both jointly and separately, in cooperation with the United
Nations and in accordance with the Charter.
The uncontrolled availability of arms is a threat to
civilians that the Council is now beginning to take into
account. In conformity with the mandate entrusted to it by
the most recent International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent, held in 1995, the ICRC undertook a
study of the availability of arms and the situation of
civilians in armed conflict, in which it provided an
account of its experience in the field and analysed the
consequences of the availability of weapons in terms of
human rights violations. It is therefore very pleased to
note that the Secretary-General agrees with the various
initiatives taken to deal with this difficult problem, and
has proposed several recommendations to States as part
of the measures to be taken to strengthen the physical
protection of civilians.
During the open debate in this Chamber on 12
February, the President of the ICRC, Mr. Cornelio
Sommaruga, expressed his deep concern about the fact

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
that in a number of armed conflicts both States and nonState actors do not respect even the minimum norms of
conduct of international humanitarian law.
That grim picture is brightened today by a note of
hope. Indeed, the results of the “People on War”
consultation, recently conducted throughout the world by
the ICRC for the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions, show that the norms enshrined in
humanitarian law are still relevant. The basic principles of
that law have just been reaffirmed in a solemn appeal,
adopted on 12 August, in the presence of the SecretaryGeneral. The ICRC would like to reiterate its deep gratitude
to him for his unconditional support.
The ICRC is endeavouring to protect civilians in
armed conflict by intervening directly with all parties,
including non-state actors, whatever cause they say that
they are defending. In this respect, paragraph 51 of the
report of the Secretary-General rightly states:
“humanitarian actors must be able to maintain a
dialogue with relevant non-state actors without thereby
lending them any political legitimacy”.
That is, indeed, the letter of the law. According to
common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, offering the
services of an impartial humanitarian organization such as
the ICRC does not at all modify the legal status of the
entity to which the services are offered. Humanitarian
organizations should not, therefore, be criticized, as is
sometimes still the case, for maintaining necessary working
relations with armed opposition groups during an armed
conflict. Rather, they should be encouraged to maintain
dialogue with all of those who have some influence on the
fate of the victims they are trying to reach.
We join with the Secretary-General in recommending
that the Council call upon non-state actors to adhere to
these humanitarian norms. The ICRC would like to point
out that, if we deny the very existence of armed groups or
simply reduce them to the status of criminals or terrorists
to whom we should not even speak, that could provide
them with a pretext for them to flout their responsibilities
towards civilians, prisoners and the wounded.
Respect for humanitarian law, which is a sine qua non
for the physical protection of civilians, is of great concern
to the members of peacekeeping forces. The ICRC
therefore warmly welcomes the rules and principles in the
Secretary-General’s bulletin of 6 August, which was drawn
up with the participation of his legal experts. It is

6

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
furthermore essential, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral indicates, that the personnel involved in regional
operations respect and observe humanitarian law.
Adequate training seems to be absolutely necessary if the
rules and principles are not to become a dead letter.
The ICRC has repeatedly expressed itself on
measures recommended for strengthening legal protection.
I will therefore keep my comments in this area brief. Yes,
our advisory services for international humanitarian
assistance are prepared to continue to help States to
adopt, on a national scale, specific measures for the
appropriate implementation of this law. The adoption of
national legislation for punishing war crimes is a priority,
especially since the future International Criminal Court
will be complementary to national criminal jurisdictions.
The propagation of humanitarian law remains a
priority on the agenda of our institution. Local networks
are increasingly being trained in this area, and play an
irreplaceable role in helping the ICRC to adapt its
message to its various audiences and take fully into
account different cultural contexts and traditional values.
I should like once again to state that in the framework of
its mandate to protect humanitarian law, the ICRC is in
the process of putting the final touches on a universal
study to determine the content of customary regulations.
That study, which will be issued next year, will define
more clearly the obligations of all parties to an armed
conflict, whether the conflict be international or internal.
In his opening statement, the President of the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session mentioned a
number of urgent challenges to be faced: war, displaced
persons, refugees, gender equality and the fate of
children, in particular children in armed conflict — this
last being a direct follow-up to the important resolution
recently adopted by the Security Council on that subject.
This opens the door to a new era of synergy that can
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The international Red Cross and Red Crescent
movement must, by its very essence, be an important
mechanism of this mobilizing strategy. The protection of
civilians in armed conflict goes to the heart of the debate
to be held at the twenty-seventh International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in Geneva at the
beginning of November, in which all States parties to the
Geneva Conventions, as well as the movement as a
whole, will participate. Its work should lead to the
adoption of a specific plan of action for the years 2000 to
2003.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should like first
of all to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate.
Civilians constitute the vast majority of human
casualties in armed conflict. They are the first victims of
the belligerent international environment we live in today.
The international community and its organizations should
give the utmost priority to this issue. On that basis, we
welcome the contribution made by the Secretary-General in
the report he has submitted to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which is contained
in document S/1999/957.
We would like to make some observations on the issue
under consideration. First, we expect the Security Council
to take into account the views put forward by States that
are not members of the Council in the open debate held
earlier this year on the question of the protection of
children and of civilians in armed conflict. Those views
should be integrated into the Council’s programme of work,
in accordance with the functions of the Council, as
contained in Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which it is to act as a representative of the
States Members of the United Nations in the fulfilment of
its duties, thereby complementing the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, United
Nations agencies and the international community in
general.
Secondly, when the Security Council and the United
Nations deal generally with this very important issue, a
global perspective must be taken that gives the utmost
priority to the prevention of conflicts through activating the
mechanism of preventive diplomacy and its machinery and
making the United Nations a focal point for that preventive
diplomacy. When considering the roots of intra- or interState conflicts, we find that one of the reasons for their
outbreak is the inequitable and unbalanced international
economic environment, which adversely affects the
economies of developing countries and creates “hot spots”
for conflicts.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, the deteriorating
economic situation is conducive to the eruption of violent
conflicts for a number of reasons, not the least of which is
that the political environment tends to be more favourable

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
to conflict in times of recession than in times of economic
growth.
The Secretary-General reiterated that the money
currently spent on military intervention and humanitarian
assistance could be reallocated to support equitable and
sustainable development, thus reducing the likelihood of
the outbreak of war. We call upon the countries of the
North to contribute to establishing a balanced and
equitable world economy that preserves the rights and
interests of the countries of the South.
Thirdly, the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, must adopt the principle of collective
responsibility in the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The
eruption of a given conflict means the failure of
preventive diplomacy — that is, our collective failure. We
should all bear our share of this responsibility, including
the Council, whose part in this failure is quite clear since
it bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We cannot make the
combatants solely responsible for the evils of war.
On the other hand, mistakes, bad judgement or the
abuse of the Security Council’s mandate can sometimes
result in catastrophes that are greater that those caused by
armed militias in poor countries. A crime of genocide
occurred in Rwanda in 1994, when the Security Council
could not muster the political will to stop the situation
from deteriorating, as its member countries did not wish
to expose their forces to danger in a struggle that did not
threaten their interests.
Another crime of genocide occurred, and continues
to this day, in Iraq, because the Council took, on 6
August 1990, an erroneous decision by imposing
comprehensive sanctions against Iraq. The victims of
those sanctions so far have been one and a half million
Iraqi civilians, and the fabric of Iraqi society has been
rent in a way that will affect future generations.
The Secretary-General, in paragraph 25 of his report
to the Security Council, pointed out that “recent
experience has shown that sanctions can have a highly
negative impact on civilian populations, in particular
children and women”. It is clear that the SecretaryGeneral was taking into account the suffering of the Iraqi
civilians as a result of the sanctions when he wrote this
paragraph, although he did not say that explicitly.
The report published by the United Nations
Children’s Fund on 12 August 1996 gives documented

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
figures showing that a half million Iraqi children under the
age of 5 have died because of the sanctions. Here I must
recall that the Charter has no mechanism for making the
Security Council accountable to the States Members of the
United Nations with respect to the legitimacy of its
resolutions and to what degree they conform to international
humanitarian law. It is crucial that we consider this very
important issue.
Fourthly, it is imperative that the Security Council
adopt a fair and equitable policy, eschewing selectivity and
double standards, that places the principles of the Charter
before the narrow interests of the powerful members of the
Council. The actions of the Security Council over this past
decade have given us convincing reasons to doubt its
integrity, its objectivity and its ability to be effective in the
prevention of armed conflicts and in the protection of
civilians.
Indeed, the Council has dealt selectively with
international crises. Palestinian civilians, for example,
experience the worst kind of coercion, humiliation and
forced migration as well as the destruction of their homes.
Iraqi civilians, suffering from comprehensive sanctions, are
exposed daily to attacks by American and British aircraft.
Hundreds of them have been martyred as a result of this
aggression, and roads, schools and laboratories have been
destroyed. All of this is occurring under the very eyes of
the Council, which has not taken any measures or called the
perpetrators to account. Furthermore, other situations —
less dangerous than the ones the Palestinians and the Iraqis
are facing — are exaggerated. We fear that the day will
come when CNN, the news network, will force a
programme of work on the Security Council — if it has not
done so already.
Fifthly, the role and task of the United Nations consist
of the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The exception to this
is the resort to coercive measures. The United Nations
demonstrates its effective assumption of its role whenever
it is restrained in such resort, as pointed out in the Charter.
We have noted, however, that in recent times, the United
Nations has had increasing recourse to coercive measures,
as if they were the sole and preferable solution. This is,
per se, proof of incapacity, not of power or strength.

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
The report provides us with a very comprehensive
overview of the issue on our agenda. In this connection,
we also wish to express our appreciation to the delegation
of Canada for having taken the initiative of discussing in
the Security Council the issue of the protection of
civilians. It goes without saying that the Netherlands will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
The norm is that civilians must never be the victims
of armed conflict. Reality, however, is steadily moving
away from that norm. Most armed conflicts today are
internal conflicts. In such conflicts, civilians are often the
primary victims — not by accident, but because they are
deliberately targeted or callously exploited as pawns in
the political game. Restrictions on humanitarian access
usually have a similar background. Innocent civilians are
deliberately deprived of food and medicine as another
move in the same political game. All this seems to be
taken more and more for granted. Such practices blur the
distinction between military and civilians and make
warfare degenerate ever further into barbarity.
The Security Council can contribute to a reversal of
this trend. For one, better use could be made of existing
instruments of international humanitarian law. As we
suggested earlier this year, the Council could call upon
parties to a conflict to involve the International
Fact-Finding Commission established by article 90 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
In relevant cases, this Commission could investigate
breaches of international humanitarian law or facilitate,
through its good offices, the re-emergence of an attitude
of respect for international humanitarian law.
It is also important that the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the United Nations maintain close
cooperation on the issue of civilians in armed conflict.
The Netherlands proposes that the Secretary-General’s
report be forwarded to the Red Cross Conference on this
subject which will take place in Geneva in the beginning
of November.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Netherlands.

Humanitarian assistance is not a substitute for
effective political action. The Netherlands calls for a
coherent and integrated approach to conflict prevention
and conflict resolution in which the diplomatic, political,
military, economic and humanitarian aspects, as well as
development assistance, are treated as integral parts.

The Netherlands warmly applauds the SecretaryGeneral’s report. It was indeed a tour de force to prepare
such an extensive and excellent report in just a few months.

In conclusion, I wish to confirm that the Netherlands
subscribes to the views expressed by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

8

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

I now resume my function as President of the Security
Council.
At the request of the Secretary-General, I call upon
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Vieira de Mello (Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator):
On behalf of the Secretary-General and, indeed, of all heads
of agencies, members of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee on humanitarian affairs, let me express the
gratitude of the Secretary-General and of the humanitarian
community as a whole for the Council’s generous reception
of the report. In particular, I thank you personally, Sir, as
well as Ambassador Fowler and your respective countries
for the particular role you played in bringing this debate
about.
We welcome the draft resolution before the Council,
which reaffirms the role of the Council in responding to
situations in which civilians are targeted, as has so often
been the case in countries that have been affected by
conflict in the last decade.
I thank the Security Council members for the rich and
varied debate, as well as the non-members for their
contributions yesterday and today. The seriousness of the
membership’s responses reflects the recognition by the
Council — and more largely by the membership of the
Organization — that the protection of civilians goes to the
very core of the mandate of this and other organs of the
United Nations.
I am particularly grateful that, both in
the presidential statement of February and in comments
today, this concern is not one that is limited to the legal
protection of civilian populations, but includes their
physical protection, which is often what is lacking.
We note with particular satisfaction that the Council
gave particular consideration and support to the following
issues. First, it has addressed the culture of impunity and
the issue of ensuring accountability for breaches of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
It was recognized that it is a duty of all States to hold
accountable, through their national legal systems and
through effective international tribunals, those responsible
for the most heinous crimes. In particular, member States
emphasized the importance of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its need to step in where national judicial
institutions fail to act. Several members called for
compliance with the existing ad hoc tribunals and the

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
possible creation of others, pending the establishment of
the ICC. The effectiveness of an international court will
depend first, obviously, on its coming into being and
thereafter on the support given by member States. There
was a recommendation that action be taken by the
Security Council to deal with States that do not cooperate
with the international tribunals, which we have noted.
Secondly, the Council addressed the issue of
inducing the compliance of non-state actors with
international law, including private-sector companies and
private security firms. In this context, we welcome calls
for States to ratify the Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Conventions, particularly since the obligations which they
create for non-state actors under international law are
those that are most frequently violated in conflicts of the
new generation.
Thirdly, regarding enforcement action, we were
pleased that several members referred to the need to
develop and apply objective criteria, ensuring consistency
in the Security Council’s action. Needless to say, the
Secretary-General, when requested, will be prepared to
assist.
Fourthly, in terms of comprehensive peacekeeping
mandates, it was encouraging to hear members emphasize
the changing perception of peacekeeping operations and
the recognition that modern peacekeeping entails more
comprehensive operations with extremely complex,
multifaceted programmes and, indeed, more robust
enforcement mandates, as has been discussed in this
Council in recent days.
We were particularly encouraged by the recognition
of the need for a rapid deployment capacity, including of
a preventive nature, both in terms of headquarters as well
as actual contingents. This is something we have been
striving for over the years, and it should, in our opinion,
include, in addition to military, also civilian components,
including humanitarian civilian police and others.
Fifthly, as for the need to control the flow of small
arms and, I might add, of heavy and more sophisticated
weaponry and equipment, often in violation of this
Council’s decisions, this is something we have flagged in
the past. We are extremely happy to see that most of the
members of the Council recognized it as an important
priority in terms of protecting civilian populations. We
welcome the suggestion by one of the members that arms
embargoes be imposed as soon as a party to a conflict
begins to target civilian populations.

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Sixth is the question of the Convention on the
Protection of United Nations and Associated Personnel. As
you can imagine, this theme is very close to our hearts,
almost on a daily basis. We are grateful for yet again
overwhelming support for action to strengthen the
protection of United Nations personnel. Only yesterday in
Somalia a senior programme officer, a UNICEF medical
doctor, was murdered in an ambush, adding his name to a
very long and sad list of fatal casualties among civilian
staff working for humanitarian organizations. I welcome the
support expressed by some for an additional protocol to
ensure better protection of all humanitarian personnel, not
just those from the United Nations.
On the question of sanctions, we were pleased to hear
several speakers give priority to the development of
targeted and smart sanctions so as to penalize those directly
responsible for wrong-doing, rather than aggravating the
suffering of civilian populations. This is an area in which
my office has attempted to actively support decision-making
by the Council.
Other issues that were also mentioned included raising
the age of recruitment for participating in hostilities; the
suffering of all civilians, but particularly of women and
children; the question of access; and more cooperation by
the Council with other United Nations bodies and regional
organizations. We are in full support of those.
In conclusion, the plight of civilians can no longer be
set aside because of other interests that might be at play.
The initiatives taken in this Council are heartening. Their
plight should indeed be of central concern. We should treat
all conflict situations around the world equally. The best
way to protect civilians is, however, as was stressed, to
prevent conflict, and in this context, development and
combating poverty is an indispensable tool to achieve
sustainable peace and stability in conflict- and post-conflict
areas.

4046th meeting
17 September 1999
that were mentioned in the report in which United
Nations personnel have lost their lives, although we are,
needless to say — and I know something about that, most
unfortunately — greatly concerned at the loss of life
among United Nations peacekeepers. Paragraph 22 of the
report lists only the countries in which United Nations
humanitarian staff and other humanitarian personnel have
died.
I also note that two delegations believe that the
Secretary-General’s proposals invite the Security Council
to go beyond its mandate as contained in the Charter. But
the Charter, we believe, was not intended to be a static
document. It is alive. Moreover, the Secretary-General
was responding to the Security Council’s February request
to submit concrete proposals on how to improve its ability
to provide civilians with legal and physical protection. We
attempted to respond to that call — your call — in an
imaginative yet balanced manner. Needless to say, not
everything we have suggested is the sole prerogative of
the Security Council. These recommendations are
addressed to the membership as a whole and to other
organs of the Organization, as well as, obviously, to other
actors on the international and regional scene. Do not
blame us, therefore, for having attempted to respond to
your own request, which provided us with immense
encouragement, as did the debate in this room.
Let us not forget that the Charter begins not with the
words “We the States” but “We the peoples”.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

One Security Council member said the SecretaryGeneral had done his job and it was now up to the Council
to implement his recommendations. Let me assure you,
however, that the Secretariat remains ready to provide every
support for the mechanism which the Council will establish
to follow up on the recommendations.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

We did not include, in responding to some of the more
critical observations, reference to all continuing conflicts.
Rather, we tried to focus on those which have been most
acute and have had the most acute impact on civilians in
recent years. Regarding the list of countries or situations

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1265 (1999).

10

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4046th meeting
17 September 1999

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

11
