S/PV.7037

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7037th meeting

Friday, 27 September 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Bishop/Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zuain
Mr. Mammadyarov
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Carrera
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. El Othmani
Mr. Fatemi
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Mr. Burt
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

13-48778 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1348778*

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: I warmly welcome the Secretary
General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence affirms the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Abubaker A. Al-Qirbi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Yemen.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedures, I invite Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Yemen, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedures, I invite Mr. Abdul Latif bin Rashid Al
Zayani, Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Jamal Benomar.
Mr. Benomar (spoke in Arabic): Following a month
in Yemen on my twenty-third mission, I have just
returned to New York in order to address this Council.
I left Sana’a in the middle of facilitating talks on the
southern question — a thorny issue on which agreement
has proved elusive thus far.
It is paramount to underscore to the Council
that the transition process in Yemen has reached a
critical juncture. While the historic National Dialogue
Conference is on its way to concluding its work with
far-reaching recommendations to guide Yemen’s
future course, the country is facing serious political,
economic, humanitarian and security challenges, and
key issues have yet to be resolved.
Nevertheless, there are achievements to be
celebrated in Yemen. The National Dialogue
Conference, the first ever exercise of its kind in Yemen,

2/22

27/09/2013

and indeed in the region, has given rise to a peaceful,
inclusive and meaningful dialogue amongst diverse
actors, bringing in new actors to the political process
such as youth, women, civil society representatives, the
Houthi movement and the Hiraak southern movement.
The Conference has not only provided the opportunity
for delegates from previously marginalized groups
to participate in serious and deliberative discussions
about the future of Yemen, but has also convened
former parties to conflict to negotiate solutions and
address historical grievances in order to move towards
a brighter and democratic future for all Yemenis.
The Dialogue has made extraordinary progress since
it was launched on 18 March. Over the past six months,
565 delegates, representing a wide cross-section of
Yemeni society, have engaged in constructive, open and
substantive deliberations on the key challenges facing
the country. The focus on principal and controversial
issues relevant to Yemen’s governance have laid
the foundation for a new social contract and a legal
framework based on dignity, equality, human rights
and the rule of law. In fact, the work of the National
Dialogue is nearly 90 per cent complete. Six of the nine
working groups have completed their work.
Taken together, the recommendations developed
during the dialogue provide a blueprint for building a
more peaceful, just and prosperous Yemen. They include
measures to ensure more open, accountable governance;
greater participation of women in decision-making;
and improved protection of human rights. Indeed, last
week my team supported a conference entitled “Women
Partners in Dialogue, Partners in Building and Decision
Making,” during which I had the opportunity to meet
with the women’s caucus; they informed me of their
satisfaction in achieving key objectives of the National
Dialogue. Foremost among these are acknowledgment
of and protection for women’s human rights; integration
of these rights in the new constitution to ensure
equality; and a guarantee of 30 per cent women’s
representation in three branches of Government. This is
quite extraordinary, particularly in a part of the world
that suffers from an evident deficit on women’s rights
and gender equality.
In particular, the efforts of the working groups on
Sa’da and the South have helped to identify the roots of
conflicts and the grievances of the people affected by
war in those parts of the country. This will allow the
State to mitigate the conditions that gave rise to past
conflicts and to redress the grievances that emerged

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

out of them. In fact, the Sa’ada working group has
reached agreement on some 70 conclusions and related
implementation guarantees.
All delegates deserve praise for their hard work,
dedication and tireless efforts to achieve the objectives
of the National Dialogue. I wish to pay special tribute
to the contributions of the delegates representing youth,
women and civil society, whose energy, creativity
and enthusiasm in many ways served as the engine
that propelled the dialogue forward. The inputs and
ideas put forth by countless citizens throughout the
country — through their participation in town hall
meetings, public discussions and through the media
– also contributed greatly to enriching the dialogue
process.
It is, however, important to recall that the
Conference is but one step in the transition. The
National Dialogue was never intended to resolve all of
Yemen’s challenges. It was designed as part of a wider
and longer-term political transformation process. As
the Council is well aware, there have been delays in
implementing the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Initiative and Implementation Mechanism, which have
impacted the already tight time frame. This is a result
of a combination of the fact that some tasks simply took
longer than foreseen, and the fact that there have been
acts of obstruction at times.
Consequently, the timetable has inevitably
shifted. Only several months remain to complete
work that has taken other countries years. The work
includes completing the National Dialogue, drafting
and adopting a new constitution, and organizing and
conducting general elections. All this implies complex
negotiations, technical preparations and public
consultations with a view to building consensus. What
is more vital is that progress continues to be made by
achieving the milestones of the transition laid out in the
Implementation Mechanism.
The difficulties facing the National Dialogue
Conference in its waning weeks have underscored the
imperative of addressing the Southern question in a fair
manner. In recent weeks, the Hiraak southern movement
suspended its participation in the Conference for nearly
a month, contending that its legitimate grievances
and aspirations were not being adequately addressed.
Indeed it is beyond contention in Yemen that the South
has suffered nearly two decades of discrimination and
marginalization. However, the Hiraak was persuaded
to return to the National Dialogue, following additional

S/PV.7037

commitments by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and the Government to speedily implement
confidence-building measures in the South. In this
context, the Hiraak and other constituencies agreed to
negotiations to resolve the controversial issues of state
structure and the status of the South.
Since 10 September, at the request of the parties I
have been facilitating talks aimed at finding a consensual
solution to the Southern question. Throughout these
discussions, I have stressed that the Yemenis are the
decision-makers. They are the ones who will live with
the long-term consequences of the choices they are
about to make. I am pleased to report that progress is
being made, based on the various proposals put forward
by the different constituencies towards agreeing on a
set of principles with a view to building a new federal
State structure, although discussions continue with
regard to the number and delineation of the federal
units. Consensus has been sought on a number of
delicate issues, including natural resources, powersharing, and allocation of authority to federal, regional
and local levels.
The commitment of southerners to supporting the
new vision of a federal Yemen is largely contingent on
timely and unambiguous action by the Government
to redress past injustices and on guarantees that
there will be no return to the past. Toward this end,
it is essential that the outstanding elements of the
confidence-building measures — known as the 20+11
points — be implemented without delay and, insofar
as implementation depends on longer-term processes,
that the timeline for their implementation be clearly
articulated.
In this connection, I welcome the action plan of the
Government of National Unity, led by Prime Minister
Mohamed Salem Mohamed Basendwah, to implement
the 20+11 points, its apology to the people of the
South and Sa’ada for past abuses committed in their
respective conflicts, and the continuing work of the two
commissions to address the unlawful or illegitimate
seizure of land and property and the unjust dismissals
from the military and civil service in the South. I am
particularly pleased that Qatar has pledged $350 million
to support restitution and compensation claims for the
South, which comes at a critical time. I sincerely hope
other countries will follow suit.
The recent difficulties encountered in the National
Dialogue must not be allowed to jeopardize the gains
achieved thus far. These gains must be preserved and

13-487783/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

forward momentum maintained with a timely move
to the next stages of the transition. The final phase
of a political process of this nature and magnitude is
rarely easy, as parties reach the stage where they must
make tough decisions on sensitive and complicated
issues, and the National Dialogue is not immune to this
phenomenon. Unfortunately, as the Council is aware,
there are efforts to turn back the clock that undermine
confidence in the political transition. In this connection,
continued compromise and good will are required from
all parties.
There are potentially disruptive currents
percolating in the country. At this stage, however, I
am hoping that all stakeholders will cooperate in good
faith to bring about a fruitful conclusion to the National
Dialogue, and that it will be unnecessary for me to brief
the Council to the contrary. As affirmed in resolutions
2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012), all parties must commit
to resolving their differences through dialogue and
consultation, to rejecting acts of violence to achieve
political goals, to refraining from provocations, and
to cooperating in the implementation of the Transition
Agreement. By signing the Transition Agreement, the
parties recognized that a peaceful transition should
represent a complete break with the past and a complete
transfer of power to new governance in Yemen.
Given the emerging consensus on federalism,
there is increasing debate among Yemenis about the
need for what they are now calling a constituting or
establishment period to provide the necessary time
with clear benchmarks, resources and capacity for
transitioning towards a federal State. Indeed, some
parties have developed proposals for such a constituting
period, focusing on the need for more inclusion and
power-sharing. These debates have also raised questions
about the timing and character of elections.
The National Dialogue was never designed to
address all of Yemen’s challenges at the same time.
The Conference was meant to conclude with a broad
consensus on a set of principles on nine core topics
that would provide guidelines for the process of
drafting a constitution, which is one more step in the
transition. Some issues will require work beyond the
National Dialogue through auxiliary channels for
genuinely inclusive negotiations that go hand-in-hand
with the process of drafting a constitution. Moreover,
subsequently, other issues will still need to be addressed
through subsequent legislation, Government policies,
plans and programmes.

4/22

27/09/2013

To sum up, the National Dialogue Conference is
not a panacea or an end in and of itself, but a vehicle
through which Yemenis can lay the foundations for
more inclusive politics, agree on broad principles and
initiate processes for resolving protracted conflicts.
It appears that some people do not want the National
Dialogue to reach an agreement until there is clarity
and consensus on all aspects of the constituting period
and the future federal State structure. In our opinion, it
is important to address those matters one step at a time,
with the aim of concluding the National Dialogue as a
matter of priority. The people of Yemen look forward
to that outcome in order to ensure that the transitional
political process advances.
Those political developments are transpiring against
a backdrop of serious humanitarian, economic and
security challenges. Yemenis have high expectations for
a peaceful transition, yet today some 13 million people,
more than half the entire population, require some form
of humanitarian aid. The main causes of vulnerability
in Yemen, such as poverty, chronic malnutrition, water
shortages and inadequate government services, all
arise from a lack of development. The Government of
National Unity, in its efforts to address the underlying
causes of a humanitarian crisis and to tackle serious
underdevelopment of the country, should be given all
the support it needs. I take this opportunity to welcome
a presidential decree to establish an anti-corruption
board and approving an action plan for the elimination
of clandestine workers and double-dippers.
In parts of Yemen, the security situation remains
volatile, while Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula still
posing a major threat. Just last week, that group carried
out major attacks in Shabwa governorate, resulting in
dozens of deaths. Assassinations of senior military
officers and kidnappings continue to take place. In the
north over the past few weeks, scores of people have
reportedly been killed after clashes between opposing
armed groups in Sa’ada and Amran governorates. We
are monitoring this trend closely, and are engaged with
the main actors.
The
relentless
campaign
against
public
infrastructure continues. There have been frequent and
increasing acts of sabotage and attacks on infrastructure,
electrical cables, and oil and gas pipelines, costing the
Government tens of millions of dollars. The Yemeni
people demand that those responsible for such criminal
acts be brought to justice swiftly.

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

Nevertheless, as I have said before, and it is worth
saying it again, to date Yemen remains the only peaceful
country in negotiated transition among those of the Arab
Spring. The National Dialogue Conference is the most
genuine, transparent and inclusive deliberative political
process anywhere in the Arab region. This model for
dialogue and deliberation for establishing democratic
governance based on the will of the people can inform
other transitional processes in the Arab world and
beyond. This is a remarkable achievement of which the
Yemeni people should be proud, since they have shown
the Arab world what can be done when people commit
to peaceful change.
In conclusion, it is imperative for the National
Dialogue to reach consensus in order to enter the next
transitional phase. Much credit must go to President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, who despite
all odds, has shown his persistent and unwavering
commitment to steering and ensuring the conclusion
of a transitional political process. He deserves all our
support. The world is watching Yemen to see whether
it will continue along the promising path on which it
has set out. Once the National Dialogue Conference has
been concluded, the implemention of the agreements
reached will pose other challenges. In that regard, I
heard one consistent message during my most recent
visit — Yemenis are still counting on the Security
Council to uphold its unanimous support as they move
towards the next stage.
The strong, sustained support of the international
community — in particular the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the European Union, the Friends of Yemen and
the Security Council — has always been critical. I would
like to commend the leadership role of Mr. Abdul Latif
Al Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council. I would also like to thank the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the co-chair of the Friends of Yemen, for
being the first and largest donor to honour its pledges.
We also wish to thank the diplomatic community in
Sana’a for its efforts and active support. Yemenis are
counting on the international community to continue
supporting the country. At the United Nations, we
will continue to provide all the necessary knowledge,
support and advice, in close cooperation with our
partners, to ensure a successful transitional political
process in Yemen.
The President: I thank Mr. Benomar for his
briefing.

S/PV.7037

I now give the floor to the Secretary General of the
Gulf Cooperation Council.
Mr. Al Zayani (spoke in Arabic): Let me at the outset
thank you, Madam President, for having organized this
important meeting on developments in the situation
within the Republic of Yemen. I am pleased to take part
in this meeting. We at the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) are pleased to do so because we are closely tied
to Yemen, its people, its future security, its evolution
and its development.
The Security Council’s ongoing interest in Yemen
with respect to the political and security situation in
the country, as well as the implementation of the GCC
initiative and in addressing challenges and obstacles,
gives us hope that Yemen will be able to get through
this critical period in its history. The Security Council
charged with maintaining international peace, stability
and security. It enjoys international respect, and its
mandate under Chapters VI and VII of the United
Nations Charter gives it a role in the maintenance of
international peace and security, settling disputes,
preventing aggression and maintaining its important
role on economic and security questions. The Security
Council, given its responsibilities, mandate and
credibility, is the international body whose role it is
to protect the political process under way in Yemen.
As a regional organization that is dealing with the
Yemeni crisis and wants to ensure the success of the
peaceful settlement to help the process move forward
successfully, the Gulf Cooperation Council would like
to rely on the Security Council and the international
legality it represents.
I would like to commend the resolutions,
declarations and statements on Yemen and the visit of
Council members last January, which was an important
symbol for the security, stability and unity of Yemen.
The Council’s support for the Government and its
leaders and the Council’s backing of the expectations of
the Yemeni people to be able to implement the political
and economic reforms are key. The Council’s mission
expressed its support and wish to continue to follow up
on the Gulf Cooperation Council’s initiatives regarding
the implementation mechanisms available to meet the
challenges, deal with impediments and support the
national dialogue during this critical period for the
future of Yemen.
In the Gulf Cooperation Council we understand the
importance of implementing our initiative. We expect

13-487785/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

very much from the Security Council, particularly as
there are external forces, including the Yemeni side
and terrorist groups, that despite admonitions from
the Council, are working to impede national dialogue
and the political and peaceful processes. Some of those
forces seek to undermine Yemen’s stability. The role of
the Council will be important in terms of supporting the
national dialogue throughout in order to reassure the
people of Yemen and give it confidence in a prosperous
and secure future.
The efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council will
not be successful without the initiative seeking to
prevent a civil war in Yemen, which was done thanks
to the wisdom of the Yemenis themselves. They sought
to bring about peace and find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. Confidence in the Gulf Cooperation Council
member States, which had good intentions and close
historical, political, social, economic and cultural ties
with Yemen, all helped to bring us forward.
Mediation by the Gulf Cooperation Council has
also played an important role in providing confidence
to the people of Yemen and the political forces there.
We maintain a certain equidistance in relation to all the
parties, and our goal is clear and well defined, namely,
to avert a civil war, preserve the security, stability and
unity of Yemen and meet the expectations of the people
and its aspirations.
Here, I would like to commend the President of
the Republic of Yemen, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, and his wise decisions and leadership during
the transition period, as well as with respect to the
National Dialogue Conference overall. Thanks to his
wise leadership and his determination, he has been
able to bring Yemen out of the crisis and meet the
expectations of the people, despite the impediments and
challenges of this period. I would also like to commend
the role of the Friends of Yemen and their support for
the initiative through their ambassadors in Sana’a.
Our cooperation in Yemen has been an outstanding
example of regional and international cooperation
for the settling of disputes that threaten international
peace and security. The sponsors of the initiative need
to speak with one voice and coordinate their efforts to
support the Yemeni parties in this difficult period. That
cooperation reaffirms for the Yemenis the commitment
of the international community and its support for their
cause. In that regard, let me here commend Mr. Jamal
Benomar, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General

6/22

27/09/2013

on Yemen, and his efforts and support for the initiative
of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its implementation
mechanism. His work and commitment with respect to
the mission of the Gulf Cooperation Council in Sana’a
has been key.
The States of the Gulf Cooperation Council want
peace. They are open to the world. They enjoy transparent
relations with other States and organizations. We share
the same peaceful principles, which govern our policies.
We reject violence. We call for dialogue and for respect
for the sovereignty and independence of States. The
States of the Gulf Cooperation Council are bedrocks
of stability and security in a region that is experiencing
one of the most difficult and complex periods of its
history. Our States would like to ensure cooperation
and meet regional and international expectations.
The principles of our foreign policies give us
great credibility and international prestige. That is
clear. Our regional role has become an active one and
contributes to settling the various issues. We support
the role of the United Nations in the maintenance of
peace and security, in particular under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, which reaffirms the role
of international organizations in settling disputes as a
complementary role to the United Nations.
We in the Gulf Cooperation Council are fully
available and prepared to assist Yemen. Our relationship
with that brother country will continue, and we will
pursue our efforts to provide support to development
in all spheres during this economically difficult period,
which includes humanitarian problems and challenges
resulting from piracy, illegal migration, terrorism and
worsening poverty. The efforts of the Gulf Cooperation
Council member States are coordinated with the
Friends of Yemen, presided over by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and the Republic of
Yemen.
Together with the donors conference, we are all
working to meet the pledges totalling $8 billion for
Yemen, with most of the funds coming from Gulf
Cooperation Council countries. Although Yemen still
needs further financial support, it is most important
to ensure that the pledges already made are realized
and to begin to implement programmes and projects
impacting the daily lives of the Yemeni people. That
would increase their confidence in the political period
that lies ahead, particularly as they will judge political
changes underway based on the effects on their living

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

conditions. In addition, supporting Yemen economically
and rapid reconstruction and development efforts are
essential to security and stability.
From the outset, the Security Council has been
playing an important role in supporting the mediation
and the implementation of the initiative. The Council’s
support continues to be necessary for a peaceful
solution in Yemen, to ensure a peaceful settlement to
the dispute and to help the Yemenis with the support of
their friends.
Finally, let me thank you, Madam President, for
letting me address the Council. Our hope is that we will
be able to help establish a new Yemen able to meet the
expectations of its own people and its hopes for a better
life.
The President: I thank Mr. Al-Zayani for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abubaker Al-Qirbi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Qirbi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia for the work done by the Australian
Mission during its presidency this month. Our thanks
go also to Mr. Héctor Marcos Timerman, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Argentina, for his wise leadership
of the Council last month. I would also like to convey
the greetings of President Mansour and his deep
appreciation of the role played by the Security Council
in supporting the Yemeni Republic, which enabled it
to peacefully overcome the political crisis; that was
deeply appreciated by the international community.
The visit of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council mission to Yemen truly touched the hearts
of the Yemeni people, because they reaffirmed the
concern of the Security Council and the international
community with regard to the crisis in Yemen and their
support for the country during the transitional period,
with a view to bringing the transition to a successful
conclusion.
The Security Council supported the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) initiative and its
implementation mechanism by adopting resolutions
2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012). I am sure that the Council
will agree that the leaders of the two parties to the
conflict showed wisdom in agreeing to a peaceful
settlement and the democratic transfer of power.

S/PV.7037

President Mansour was able to manage the crisis in
such a way as to absorb all of the parties and induce them
to work together to implement the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative in keeping with the deadlines set.
He was able to defuse the political conflict and involve
all parties in the National Dialogue Conference. That
acceptance is evidence of the degree of civilization of
the Yemeni people, who, at the end of the day, have
given priority to the interests of their country over
those of clans, parties or individuals.
The National Dialogue Conference has been a forum
for the free, transparent and courageous expression of
differing, sometimes provocative positions, but, most
importantly, it has made it possible for people to hear
and accept others’ views and make concessions; it
therefore stands as a good example.
On behalf of the Republic of Yemen, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General, who followed
the political process in Yemen; the five permanent
members of the Security Council; and the States
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, which,
through their ambassadors in Sana’a, made it possible
to reach a political solution by reaffirming that it had
to be Yemeni-led.
We thank the countries of the GCC, which
proposed the Gulf initiative and have continued to
sponsor it. We would also like to thank Mr. Al-Zayani,
Secretary-General of the GCC, as well as Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, for their tireless efforts to involve the Yemeni
people in the process of resolving the most complex
issues, particularly during the most trying stages of the
National Dialogue Conference.
Over the course of two years the Council has heard a
number of briefings by Mr. Jamal Benomar, which have
made clear that the Yemeni people are committed to the
GCC initiative and its implementation mechanism, as
well as to the National Dialogue Conference, so as to
allow Yemen to emerge from its political crisis and to
create a new Yemen.
During his briefing today, although he spoke of
the fragility of the economic and security situation
and of other threats, Mr. Benomar stressed the
commitment of the Yemeni people. However, in order
for success to be achieved, economic and political
support will be required in the areas of reconstruction
and compensation. Members will agree that that cost,

13-487787/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

whatever it might be, would be lower than that of Yemen
returning to the starting block.
President Mansour has worked tirelessly in the
area of the economy, which has been adversely affected
by terrorism. The President focused on managing the
National Dialogue Conference and was able to overcome
obstacles through his wisdom and his patience. Despite
his efforts, however, certain participants in the National
Dialogue made a deliberate attempt to reject the five
goals contained in the GCC initiative, particularly
the need to preserve the unity, security and stability
of Yemen. Those goals were reaffirmed in resolutions
2015 (2011) and 2014 (2011), given the importance of
the Yemeni-agreed hewing closely to the five goals
defined in the GCC initiative.
The Council is thus called on to respect those
resolutions and to reject any proposal that is not
consistent with those goals, because that could
give certain parties a pretext to go back to square
one — which was a situation of violence and conflict.
That is what we have been able to avoid up until now,
thanks to the Gulf initiative, the unified position of the
Council and its unity with the GCC countries.
The differences among and the legitimate claims of
Yemenis in the north, south, east and west of the country
were taken into consideration during the National
Dialogue Conference, in full transparency, with no
restrictions. Most of those involved in the Dialogue
agreed on a consensus laying out a number of solutions.
Those solutions are part of the new Constitution, which
sets out how power is to be exercised and provides for
justice for all, the equitable distribution of wealth and
the building of the State, while also addressing the
administrative and power imbalances that were the
source of previous crises. The solution must ensure
that the experiences of the past do not recur; indeed,
the best guarantee for the future is the Constitution,
the rule of law and the State institutions tasked with
implementing the outcome of the National Dialogue;
external guarantees will help the political forces to
remain involved in the process, in keeping with the
agreements reached.
Mr. Benomar’s briefing described the developments
in the political process since his previous briefing. I
should like to add that six of the nine working groups
have finished their work. The problem remains with the
State-building group and the group dealing with the
southern provinces. The success of the State-building
group depends on the work being completed by the
8/22

27/09/2013

group dealing with the southern issues. A small
committee of 16 — eight from the North and eight
from the South — members from the southern issues
group has been created to deal with that, including
representation from all political sides, with members
from north and south, to resolve those differences and
arrive at a consensus with regard to the nature of the
State. However, there are fears that there may be delays
for unknown reasons, which could create a further
separation in the future. Thanks to the good offices of
the President of the Republic and Mr. Benomar, those
meetings have continued, and Mr. Benomar has been
able to bring together the views of the participants. We
hope that consensus will be possible.
As in the past, through the GCC initiative, we have
sometimes had to wait for months for consensus to be
achieved, but our goal is to have a successful end to
the transitional period and National Dialogue in order
to accomplish the planned goals in a comprehensive
manner.
I would like to reaffirm to the Security Council that
what we need from it as Yemenis is that the Council
not dictate the solution but that it maintain unity within
the Council and its support for the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementing mechanism,
as well as the two relevant resolutions, and avoid any
attempt to prevent the implementation of the initiative
for the National Dialogue.
President Hadi Mansour is sure that the transitional
period and the National Dialogue will be successful.
We must not move away from that towards a situation of
violence. He always reaffirms that all constitutional and
legal solutions are acceptable with a view to bringing
about freedom and justice for all and to dealing with the
genuine injustices that existed in the past. That is all
part of Yemeni unity, which is not just a safety valve for
Yemen itself but for the region and the world.
Mr. Benomar spoke about the challenges of the
economic and security situation through which Yemen
is going. The friends of Yemen group has also dealt
with those issues in detail. Today’s transitional efforts
will not be successful unless the economic and security
challenges, as well as the political ones, are addressed,
particularly in light of the precarious humanitarian
situation that Yemen is experiencing.
The support of the international community for
Yemen remains inadequate, although we recognize that
the international community has understood that the

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

way to deal with the crisis in Yemen is to provide it with
the necessary support to enable it to achieve stability.
That will be less costly, of course, for the international
community than to see Yemen fall back into conflict
and violence. Yemen must continue to be a shining light
in the wake of the Arab Spring.
In that connection, I would like to point out the
humanitarian suffering of approximately 600,000
displaced persons in Yemen due to wars and terrorism
and the presence of more than 1 million refugees
from the Horn of Africa, as well as the issues of
unemployment, poverty, and malnutrition that threaten
40 per cent of the population. Despite such a precarious
humanitarian situation, the 2013 appeal was financed
only to the tune of 44 per cent. That, I believe, requires
that the Council examine how the deficit can be made
up, since that support is important for Yemen’s security.
To conclude, I would like to say that the people of
Yemen are hoping for a clear position from this Council
that will reaffirm the support it has always given to
the Gulf initiative and to resolutions 2014 (2011) and
2051 (2012). The results of the National Dialogue will
be the only way to define the outlines of a new future,
which the Yemenis themselves must do. The unity
of Yemen is a Yemeni and international demand to
preserve its stability, as well as international peace and
security. We are sure that the Council will stand by us
in that endeavour, as it always has. The Yemeni people
themselves want to ensure that their own model is
successful in overcoming the political crisis and that at
the end of the transitional period there will be success.
The President: I thank Mr. Al-Qirbi for his
statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Foreign Minister of Australia.
I thank Foreign Minister Al-Qirbi and Gulf
Cooperation Council Secretary General Al Zayani for
their briefings. Both are making important contributions
to Yemen’s political future. I also acknowledge the
contribution of United Nations Special Advisor
Benomar and thank him for his briefing today.
This meeting takes place at a crucial moment in
Yemen’s history. Yemen has embarked on a peaceful
political transition process and must be commended
for doing so. Under Interim President Hadi Mansour’s
leadership, Yemen has made progress with political
dialogue and has undertaken important reforms in the
security sector. It is important that the current spirit of

S/PV.7037

inclusiveness and participation continue as a foundation
for Yemen’s democratic future.
We do not underestimate the challenge of
identifying a new basis for national governance in the
face of serious security, economic and humanitarian
challenges. Continued participation in the National
Dialogue by southerners who are able to speak with
authority and are prepared to contribute constructively
to the transition process is essential to the shaping
of the nation. Outreach to and engagement with all
Yemenis will be vital to ensure broad support for that
future Yemen.
While significant progress has been made in the
National Dialogue, we note the delay to its conclusion.
Any slippage in the political transition timetable
must be minimized and managed effectively to avoid
disengagement by any party from the transition process.
There remain spoilers, both inside and outside Yemen,
who wish to undermine the political process and derail
Yemen’s political transition. Their actions risk Yemen’s
stability and security and that of the region. It is vital
that no further actions be taken to undermine the
Government of National Unity or the transition.
Yemen’s security risks must not be underestimated.
Sectarian and tribal clashes and the activities of
terrorists, including kidnapping for ransom, continue
to destabilize and undermine the security of Yemen
and the Arabian Peninsula. We deplore the cowardly
attacks this past week that took the lives of more than
40 members of Yemen’s armed forces. Such attacks
underline the importance of firm resolve by Yemenis to
see through a successful transition.
As chair of the Council’s Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, Australia will continue to work with
others, including Yemen, to address the terrorist threat.
A unified and integrated armed force is also important
to Yemen’s future security.
Yemen’s political insecurity challenges are
compounded by a dire humanitarian situation. Over
13 million people are without access to safe water
and sanitation, more than 6 million are without
access to health care, and more than 300,000 are
internally displaced. An estimated 3 million children
are malnourished. Yemen’s regional partners have
an important role in helping Yemen to address the
considerable political, economic and humanitarian
challenges it faces. Regional support is also essential
for Yemen’s successful political transition. The

13-487789/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

Gulf Cooperation Council has played an important
leadership role in brokering Yemen’s political transition
agreement. Long-term constructive engagement by
Gulf Cooperation Council member States will remain
crucial. The Friends of Yemen group plays a valuable
role in fostering international coordination and
information-sharing to support the Yemeni-led process
of political transition and national development.
It is crucial that the Security Council continues
to engage actively and constructively to support
the Yemeni-led political transition. We stand by the
Council’s readiness to consider further measures,
possibly including sanctions, against those who seek
to interfere in the transition process. The Council’s
engagement in Yemen has already demonstrated
the value it can bring through preventive diplomacy
measures. It is essential that success be translated
into continued support for a democratic, stable and
prosperous Yemen.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I will now give the floor to members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this meeting at such a timely juncture, as the
National Dialogue Conference in Yemen is drawing to
a close. I would like to thank the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar;
the Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
Mr. Al Zayani; and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Yemen, Mr. Al-Qirbi, for their statements.
Two years ago, Yemen was on the brink of civil war.
Since then the Yemeni parties have shown exemplary
commitment to ensuring a peaceful future for their
country. They have chosen dialogue over violence and
consensus over division. Remarkable progress has
already been made on the path to this peaceful political
transition, which responds to the legitimate democratic
aspirations of the Yemeni people.
Today it is necessary to redouble efforts to so as to
move forward, and to make that process irreversible.
We understand that the deliberations within the
working groups of the National Dialogue Conference
have not always been easy. There is nothing surprising
about that. The examination of long-standing disputes
and the establishment of a new social contract cannot
be done overnight. Nevertheless, we sincerely hope that
10/22

27/09/2013

the Conference will be able to conclude over the next
few weeks and that the Yemeni parties will continue
to work together in a constructive manner to find fair
solutions to outstanding issues. It is important, in that
context, that the international community and the
Security Council stand beside the Yemenis, supporting
national reconciliation and recalling the provisions of
resolution 2051 (2012) to anyone behind the scenes who
may attempt to obstruct the process underway.
Yemen must also continue on the path of economic
reform. The Friends of Yemen stressed that the day
before yesterday. Progress is essential in the areas of
employment and combating unemployment, as well as
on the issue of subsidies to the ,energy sector. It is also
important that substantial reforms be undertaken to
modernize the civil service.
The Yemeni transition, moreover, remains seriously
constrained by security threats facing the country. The
recurrence of terrorist attacks against civil society,
Yemeni security forces, diplomats and humanitarian
workers is a real source of concern. In that area also,
we must come to the aid of the Yemeni authorities.
The humanitarian situation also remains very
worrying, as the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, spoke
of following her recent visit to Yemen. With one
of the highest levels of child malnutrition in the
world, more than 1 million children denied access
to education, 13 million people — more than half
of the population — without access to drinking
water or basic sanitation, and more than 10 million
people suffering from food insecurity, it is clear that
solving the humanitarian crisis is indispensable for
the stabilization of the country and for its economic
recovery. The humanitarian needs, therefore, must not
be neglected, and the economic challenges must be
addressed. Otherwise, the prospects for a successful
political transition could be seriously compromised.
In conclusion, allow me to say a few words on the
rights of the child and the problem of child soldiers. We
welcome the adoption by the Government of Yemen, at
the beginning of the month, of the action plan to put an
end to the recruitment and the employment of children
by Yemeni armed forces. Once that has been formally
signed, it should be implemented as soon as possible.
We also call upon the Yemeni Government to respect
the commitments it has made under international law,
including United Nations Convention on the Rights

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

of the Child, to which Yemen is a signatory, and to
pass a law establishing a minimum age for marriage
in line with international norms. Those steps are
indispensable, I believe, to ensure consistency with the
efforts deployed within the framework of the National
Dialogue Conference with a view to modernizing and
protecting human rights.
Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me thank the Australian delegation for
taking the initiative to convene this meeting on the
situation in Yemen. Our hope is that it will serve as an
additional measure by the Council to support Yemen
and the international and regional efforts to manage
and overcome this sensitive and decisive period in the
history of that brotherly country.
We would also like to thank Mr. Jamal Benomar,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen,
for his comprehensive briefing on the latest results and
developments, particularly those related to issues linked
to the National Dialogue in Yemen. We welcome Mr. Al
Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC), and thank him for his briefing on
the ongoing implementation of the initiative signed
on 3 April 2011. We would also like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen, Mr. Al-Qirbi.
In January 2011, Yemen entered a new phase, with
the fear of a civil war and an uncertain future. That
fear gave way to optimistic hopes, although within a
setting of division, a difficult humanitarian situation
and a regional climate that had seen successive
turmoil. Even so, the people of Yemen demonstrated
self-confidence. Despite all the challenges, the Gulf
initiative and the National Dialogue have brought about
positive results within the framework of a peaceful
political transition, amid the challenges and obstacles
that arose at various times. We welcomed the initiative
of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the good offices
undertaken by our brothers from the Gulf. King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud was the pillar of the
transition leading to the framework for addressing the
disputes in Yemen via constructive and frank dialogue.
We welcomed resolutions Council 2014 (2011) and 2051
(2012).
There have been gains; no one can deny that. The
United Nations clearly has played a role. Mr. Benomar,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, has
undertaken efforts to deal with the challenges and
open the door to a solution, one we have reached today,
which is a democratic leadership that has taken clear

S/PV.7037

decisions. Civil society, particularly women and young
people, are aware of that sensitive phase. The Council
and the international community have supported those
efforts and are determined to deal with those who
would wish to see a complete failure in Yemen.
Measures have been taken, and while remaining
obstacles continue to impede consensus in Yemen
despite the gains, the country is also facing a number
of ongoing challenges, including in terms of security,
proliferation of arms and armed groups, terrorism, acts
of vandalism targeting economic sites, and the survival
of its citizens.
All of that has caused considerable damage. Yemen’s
economy is in shambles and the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons has increased. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees counted 46,000 in the first month of the year.
The United Nations has issued repeated warnings about
the humanitarian situation in Yemen, which is teetering
on the precipice. Only 44 per cent of the pledges of
assistance to meet the basic needs of its citizens has
been honoured. However many donors have met their
pledges, including the Gulf Cooperation Council and its
States members. Once again, we appeal to everyone to
honour their pledges and to provide further assistance.
As Mr. Benomar and Mr. Al Zayani stressed,
Yemen is facing a difficult period and its challenges
must not be underestimated, but my country firmly
believes in the capacities and abilities of its people,
who have left their mark on world history. They have
the ability to meet their historic responsibilities for
protecting Yemen’s stability and the interests of its
citizens. We will continue to support Yemen, and all
efforts to ensure its sovereignty, territorial integrity
and the prosperity of its population.
Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the initiative of the Australian presidency to
hold this important informational meeting at a critical
time in Yemen’s political transition. We thank Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in Yemen and his assessment of its prospects in the
coming few months.
We also appreciate the presence of Mr. Abubaker
A. Al-Qirbi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen
and Mr. Abdul Latif bin Rashid Al Zayani, Secretary
General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, and thank
them for their statements, which show the commitment

13-4877811/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

on the part of both the Gulf Cooperation Council and
the Republic of Yemen to the transition process that
began in November 2011.
Since the beginning of our membership of the
Council, we witnesses the difficult road travelled by
the Yemeni people. That is why we applaud the progress
made to date in the National Dialogue Conference. We
are confident that, notwithstanding the delays in the
Conference, it will be possible to finalize all of the
reports of the working groups, which will provide the
basis and principles of the text of the constitution that
will forge a new stage of the democratic process in
Yemen.
The National Dialogue Conference has also provided
the people of Yemen with a historic opportunity that has
opened doors to groups that have been politically and
socially marginalized for decades to become involved
in the future of their country. In that respect, the
agreement fostered by the Gulf Cooperation Council
has established the grounds for an inclusive negotiating
process that have served as the basis of the new Yemen.
However, we must point out that any final agreement
achieved must take into account the issue of the South
and the operations of armed groups.
Guatemala believes that the transition in Yemen is
a process. That is why it must continue beyond the time
established in the transition agreement. The National
Dialogue Conference has set a stage that has made it
possible to reform the State and its institutions, which
must be replicated within the other power structures in
Yemen. The commitment made to marginalized groups,
including women and young people, must also be longterm. Those groups must continue to be part of the
change. We salute the spirit of inclusion promoted by
Yemen during this period and hope that it will continue
to serve as an example to other countries around the
world.
We continue to consider it important, in addition
to all of the efforts undertaken to date, that general
elections are to be organized and held in February
2014. Nevertheless, we are aware that the elections do
not represent an end in themselves. The Yemeni people
and authorities must be prepared for future challenges
generated by that process.
We must not lose sight of the serious security
problems persisting in Yemen, including the ongoing
presence of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. In
that respect, we vigorously condemn the attacks of

12/22

27/09/2013

20 September that killed more than 56 Yemeni soldiers
and police officers. Those terrorist acts must not go
unpunished. We hope that those acts will not interfere
with the security sector reforms made to date, and that
the reforms will bear fruit in the short term.
It is also important that the Yemeni authorities
understand that serious socioeconomic problems can be
resolved only once the security situation has improved.
Likewise, it is important for the Government to
develop national reconciliation policies based on social
development.
We welcome the ministerial meeting of the group
of Friends of Yemen, held on 25 September here in New
York under the co-chairmanship of Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom and Yemen. The meeting focused on
the political transition, the humanitarian situation and
reform of the security sector and of the economy. We
reiterate the urgency of financing the humanitarian
assistance programme for Yemen. It is disturbing that,
of the $703 million necessary to provide for the basic
needs of the Yemeni community, only 44 per cent
has been collected. Yemen is a country that is facing
multiple and concurrent humanitarian crises. That is
why it so urgently requires that assistance. The number
of displaced persons, the stalled economy and the
destruction of infrastructure represent only some of the
challenges facing the Yemeni people daily.
In conclusion, Guatemala is confident that the
Yemeni authorities will continue to progress on the path
of democracy and to implement policies to alleviate
the major social and humanitarian problems facing its
people.
Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): First of all,
I would like to express our thanks to the Australian
presidency for convening the meeting. We are also
grateful to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen,
my good friend Mr. Abubaker A. Al-Qirbi; the
Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
my good friend Mr. Abdul Latif bin Rashid Al Zayani;
and the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar, for their participation in
this meeting and insightful briefings.
Over the past few years, Yemen has undergone
remarkable political and societal changes. Its
achievements in forging national reconciliation and
dialogue are exemplary in the context of the recent
transformational developments in the broader Middle
East region. The country and its people deserve the

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

highest credit for the determination and perseverance
they have so far demonstrated towards fulfilling the
tasks of the transition process. The commencement
and conduct of the National Dialogue Conference, in
accordance with the defined timetable by the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, have been indispensable
for the Yemeni transition process. Despite the
reoccurring controversies and the contentious issues,
keeping up with the established schedule of the National
Dialogue and its objectives is imperative for achieving
the expected results.
Irrespective of the pitfalls, it is essential that all
political forces and groups continue their participation
in the Dialogue and contribute to its important work.
No attempts to interfere with the transition should be
tolerated, and the relevant actors must be aware of
their responsibilities. Among the other tasks of the
transition process, drafting a new constitution and
conducting general elections in 2014, as stipulated by
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, are the most
important ones that are contingent upon the outcome of
the National Dialogue.
Domestic security is a high priority. Unfortunately,
the threat of terrorism in the country remains acute. We
are concerned over the new reports on terrorist acts that
have taken the lives of dozens of people. Such instances
should not be allowed to recur, and the perpetrators must
be brought to account. The humanitarian and economic
situation is also a serious challenge that requires
continued support by the international community and
donors to the Government’s efforts.
Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
maintenance of peace and political stability in Yemen,
which might be possible through concerted and stalwart
efforts aimed at fulfilling the aforementioned transition
objectives and achieving national reconciliation.
We once again reiterate our full support for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Yemen. The country is now at a critical
juncture in solidifying its achievements and furthering
the greater political objective of building a democratic
and all-inclusive State. Continued international support
is, therefore, absolutely necessary to help Yemen
through this responsible phase in its history.
Ms. Power (United States of America): As is
reflected in our gathering today, the United Nations, the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and the international
community as a whole have all played important

S/PV.7037

leadership roles in support of Yemen’s critical transition
period. I would also like to recognize Foreign Minister
Al-Qirbi, Foreign Minister Bishop, who has now left
the Chamber, Secretary General Al Zayani and other
leaders who are here.
My delegation has appreciated the chance to
engage, during the current week, with the various actors
mentioned and to listen to their views in the Chamber
today. The United States shares many of the aspirations
that they have expressed. We firmly support Yemen’s
transitional process, including the National Dialogue
and the confidence-building measures undertaken by
President Mansour. We join with Yemen’s regional and
global partners in standing behind Yemen’s efforts to
strengthen the country’s political stability, security,
unity and development. And, of course, we are aware
of the many challenges to Yemen’s internal peace and
economic progress, but we share the determination
expressed by many here today to continue our efforts
in coordination with Yemen’s friends to build on the
important forward steps that have been taken.
As Special Adviser Benomar pointed out in April,
“The National Dialogue Conference has opened
a new chapter in the transition for which Yemenis
are now writing their own pages. Groups which
only a year ago were engaged in armed clashes are
now gathering in the same hall to discuss a common
future for their country.”
Given the nature of past grievances and the scope
of current challenges, it is proving very difficult to do a
variety of things, namely, to decide on the structure of
the State with a view to resolving deep-seated regional
grievances, to consider the question of accountability
for past violations and, at the most basic level, to meet
humanitarian and social needs.
My Government was pleased to note the substantive
discussions within the Dialogue’s working groups, as
well as vigorous efforts aimed at outreach that have
been undertaken and the inclusion of women, which has
been referred to in the Chamber several times today, as
well as of men, from all parts of the country, into the
process.
In recognition of the historic nature of this moment,
our shared objective now should be to ensure that the
outcomes of the National Dialogue are translated into a
new constitution and legislative agenda and explained
to the Yemeni people. We need to work together to
ensure that the electoral commission updates the voter

13-4877813/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

registry, organizes the constitutional referendum and
prepares for important national elections early next
year. We urge the Yemeni Government to produce a
detailed plan and budget for the elections process to
help donors identify resource gaps.
My Government also continues to support
President Mansour’s efforts to restructure Yemen’s
military and security services, including the decrees
he has issued to outline a new brigade structure and to
otherwise professionalize and enhance the capabilities
of the armed forces. We encourage the Government
to maintain and expand its efforts to implement that
essential aspect of the Transition Agreement. We all
know how important security is, as the foundation for
all else.
In addition, we strongly commend the President
and his Government for the leadership they have shown
in countering the threats posed by violent extremist
groups. We join with others in condemning recent
attacks, including the vicious assault on Shabwa on
20 September that killed and wounded dozens of
soldiers who were simply there to do their jobs. Yemen
is determined to build a better and more stable future
for its people; terrorists will not be able to stand in the
way of that landmark initiative. In Yemen, as elsewhere,
open and constructive policy debate should be welcome,
but efforts to divide and destroy through violence must
be resolutely opposed.
Looking ahead, we are encouraged by the
commitment shown by the United Nations, the
GCC and other partners to support Yemen during
this pivotal period. It is essential that the transition
remain on track and that progress also be made in
implementing economic reforms, fighting corruption
and strengthening governance, which is, of course,
also foundational, as is security. I emphasize as well
the persistence of food insecurity and other urgent
and dire humanitarian needs within the country. The
United Nations response plan for Yemen remains
severely underfunded; it is critical that countries who
have pledged deliver on their pledges and do everything
necessary to see that basic requirements are met. The
United States has provided over $320 million over the
past three years in support of the United Nations appeal.
Ultimately, the success or failure of the transition
depends on the choices made by Yemen, by Yemen’s
Government and by Yemen’s people. That is
appropriate, and it is a challenge for all of us to work
as diligently as we can to attain the goal we all seek: a
14/22

27/09/2013

Yemen that is stable, confident, at peace with itself and
its neighbours, and moving in the right political and
economic direction.
In closing, I’d like again to commend the
leadership being demonstrated by President Mansour
and his Government, by Special Adviser Benomar
and by the members of the GCC. In this joint effort
of extraordinary importance, the United States remains
ready and willing to do its part.
Mr. Fatemi (Pakistan): We welcome the initiative
of the Australian presidency to organize this high-level
meeting of the Security Council on Yemen. We highly
appreciate the detailed and insightful briefing provided
by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar. The presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Abubaker Al-Qirbi,
in the Chamber today is a sign of the Government of
National Unity’s continued resolve to complete the
transition process. We also thank the Secretary General
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), Mr. Abdullatif
bin Rashid Al Zayani, for his statement.
Yemen has walked back from the precipice. A
couple of years ago, the Government and people of
Yemen were at a crossroads. They decided to shun
violence and walk the difficult, rocky and sometimes
arduous path of dialogue and engagement. Regional
efforts, steered by the Gulf Cooperation Council, and
the good offices of the Secretary-General, ably led
by Mr. Benomar, notwithstanding, it is primarily the
Yemenis themselves who deserve full credit.
Pakistan enjoys deep historical cultural and
religious ties with the people of Yemen. The peace,
stability and prosperity of Yemen is dear to us. We
hope that full implementation of the GCC initiative will
lead to the normalization of conditions in that country.
The continued support of the international community
for that endeavour is therefore crucial. That, however,
does not mean that the international community should
micromanage Yemeni affairs. Respect for Yemen’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
should remain paramount in the Council’s deliberations.
Yemen is in the final phases of an inclusive
National Dialogue, unprecedented in its history and
groundbreaking for the entire region. We understand
that the process has been delayed by a few weeks.
We urge all Yemenis to continue working in a spirit
of compromise and cooperation, and to conclude the
process expeditiously. While we appreciate the efforts

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

of President Mansour’s Government, including the
recently announced formal apology to the South for
transgressions during the conflict of 1994, a number of
hurdles must still be overcome. The issue of the South
and the economic and humanitarian situation must be
handled skilfully and effectively. Those issues have the
potential to derail the entire process. We also appreciate
the special attention President Mansour has given to the
question of the South. We condemn the violence that
led to the killing of scores of Yemeni security personnel
last week, and offer our sympathy and condolences to
the families of the victims, as well as to the Government
and people of Yemen. We welcome President Mansour’s
resolve to fight the scourge of terrorism.
The Security Council’s active engagement in
Yemen, and its unity on the issue, has had a positive
impact on the ground. Resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051
(2012) and other Council pronouncements have helped
to deter the activities of spoilers. We hope that the
Council’s positive contribution will continue.
Yemen’s economic and humanitarian needs require
urgent attention, as my colleagues have pointed out. We
welcome the meeting of the Friends of Yemen held in
New York earlier this week and hope that pledges made
at the Riyadh donors’ conference and at the various
meetings of the Friends of Yemen will be fulfilled in a
timely manner.
Pakistan believes that the Dialogue process should
lead to the framing of a new constitution, a referendum
and elections. Meeting some deadlines, of which the
most important is that for the elections in 2014, is
therefore imperative.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Pakistan’s
full support for the Government and people of Yemen
in their efforts aimed at national reconciliation and
political transition.
Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Australia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
for convening this important meeting as the National
Dialogue in Yemen draws to a close. The United
Kingdom also thanks its friends — Special Adviser
Benomar, Secretary General Al Zayani and Foreign
Minister Al-Qirbi — for their assessments, and assures
them that in response to all their remarkable efforts
the United Kingdom and the international community
remain deeply committed to the success of the country’s
transition.

S/PV.7037

I was able to see the progress that is being made
in person, when I visited Sana’a once again earlier
this month. My discussions with President Mansour
reaffirmed the importance of the work of the United
Nations and the supporters of the initiative of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) in support of
Yemeni reconciliation through an inclusive, peaceful,
transparent, constructive and conciliatory dialogue. I
was impressed by President Mansour’s determination to
improve the security and economic situation in Yemen,
and His Excellency deserves all our support. I was
similarly impressed by the energy and determination
demonstrated by other parties to the National Dialogue,
with whom I and the United Kingdom have also been
in contact.
So we are pleased to hear that a conclusion to the
National Dialogue is close, with nearly all the nine
working groups ready to submit their reports. We would
urge all the participants to work together constructively
to find solutions to the remaining questions. If I may
pick up on one particular point made by the Special
Adviser, it is that the National Dialogue was never
intended to provide every conceivable answer to
every available question. An agreement on a set of
principles for any outstanding issues would represent
reasonable progress if a fully negotiated settlement is
not achievable at this stage. A framework for the future
would indeed represent success.
The National Dialogue, of course, is just one piece
in a much bigger picture of political, economic and
security reform. On the economy, the Friends of Yemen
ministerial meeting on Wednesday underlined the
important steps that the Government of Yemen has taken
on establishing the mutual accountability framework
policy commitments and pushing through energy
sector reform. But delivery on those commitments, and
further disbursement of donor pledges, is crucial if the
political solutions are to be sustainable and the lives of
the people of Yemen improved. I look forward to seeing
progress on the development of a supreme national
authority for combating corruption, fuel subsidy
reform, implementation of proposals to remove ghost
workers and efforts to tackle youth unemployment.
Accelerating progress on aid disbursements must be a
priority for all international partners.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
critical. Baroness Amos’s recent visit highlighted
again the acute nature of the situation, with more than
10 million people, almost half the country’s population,

13-4877815/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

suffering from food insecurity. Child malnutrition
rates are among the highest in the world. Substantial
humanitarian need will persist in Yemen for some years
to come. The United Kingdom remains a committed
donor of humanitarian aid, and we have increased our
contribution to £70 million over the next two years.
It is essential that the United Nations deliver as one
in-country. Humanitarian needs must not be neglected,
and the economic challenges must be addressed, or the
prospects for a successful political transition process
could be severely undermined.
Looking ahead to 2014, the international
community must continue to work together to support
the Government of Yemen in the transitional period and
beyond. The Security Council’s focus and continued
monitoring will be important. Spoilers cannot be
allowed to derail the transition. Embedding National
Dialogue decisions and supporting implementation will
be crucial. The continued attention of the SecretaryGeneral, the senior team, the GCC and the diplomatic
community in Sana’a will be vital to success, as indeed
will the support of all of us here.
Finally, in the midst of a difficult region, the
Security Council, as has been evident from a number
of comments made this afternoon, does not minimize
the achievements that the leaders and people of Yemen
have made to date in reaching their current position.
Difficulties have already been overcome, though a
tough further period remains. In remaining committed,
we honour what has been achieved, demonstrate our
support for fresh opportunities for the men, women,
young people and children of Yemen, and manifest our
hope that Yemen will produce its own pathway for the
future, along which we will be sure to walk with them.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): I appreciate
Australia’s hosting of today’s meeting and thank
Special Adviser Benomar for his briefing. We also
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Al-Qirbi
and Secretary General Al Zayani. We have listened
carefully to their statements and thank them for their
valuable contribution to this meeting of the Council.
Despite the high expectations of the international
community, the National Dialogue Conference was not
completed as scheduled, after all. Nevertheless, that
does not change the fact that the National Dialogue has
achieved meaningful progress on a number of important
issues and is nearing a successful conclusion with
a long-awaited final outcome, leaving behind many

16/22

27/09/2013

difficulties. Nor does it change the fact that Yemen
is a rare example for the region as it transparently
implements a political transition plan conceived through
peaceful negotiations. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea recognizes and commends the progress made so
far by all the working groups of the National Dialogue
Conference, including the Sa’ada working group. We
strongly support the leadership of President Mansour,
and warn all potential spoilers that they should show
restraint. We also commend the good offices of the
Secretary-General and Mr. Benomar’s tireless efforts
to use them to advance the process.
The Security Council has paid steadfast and major
attention to Yemen’s situation during the past several
months and has invested sincere effort in its future. The
ultimate success of the National Dialogue process, to be
followed by the next phases, of drafting a constitution
and holding a referendum and elections, is therefore
important to the Security Council, and the ongoing
process in Yemen has significant implications for the
relevance of its efforts.
The Republic of Korea believes that, in the process of
nation-building, creating a national consensus through
inclusive political discourse is much more important
than meeting deadlines. However, the transition time
frame cannot remain open-ended indefinitely. We
therefore call on all parties in Yemen to work patiently
and persistently towards a final agreement and its full
implementation without losing precious momentum.
The people of Yemen should devise their own formula
to translate the federalism agreement into a political
reality and swiftly move on to the next stage of creating
a new constitution.
The most critical prerequisite for a peaceful
transition into democracy is ensuring security. In that
regard, we are deeply concerned at the current security
situation, which is highlighted by tribal sectarian
pressures in Amran province and Ibb province this
month and the simultaneous attacks by suspected
Al-Qaida militants on soldiers and policemen a week
ago. The Republic of Korea condemns terrorism in all
its forms and is also concerned with kidnappings for
ransom and attacks on embassies and diplomats. We
strongly request the Government of Yemen to ensure
the safety of diplomats.We also have serious concerns
about the Government of Yemen report from earlier
this year on the alleged transport of arms from Iran.
Illicit arms transports can destabilize Yemen’s political
transition and undermine regional stability.

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

At the Friends of Yemen conference two days ago,
the participants reviewed the political, economic and
security sectors and discussed ways to assist Yemen.
The conference noted that Yemen is still experiencing
difficulties, especially on the humanitarian and
economic fronts. As for the Republic of Korea, we
pledged $2 million in an effort to assist Yemen.
We hope that the people of Yemen will continue
to stay on the course of peaceful transition and
reconciliation so that at the end of the day they can be
a proud model of success for other countries in turmoil.
Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, let me begin by thanking you and your
delegation for organizing today’s meeting. I would
also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Jamal Benomar
and Mr. Abdul Latif Bin Rashid Al Zayani for their
statements and recognize the important contribution of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen, Mr. Abubaker
A. Al-Qirbi.
On 6 August, during our presidency of the Council,
Argentina organized an open debate to highlight
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security (S/PV.7015). We
have no doubts that the critical role played by the
Gulf Cooperation Council in achieving an agreement
establishing the basis for a negotiated political
transition in Yemen offers one of the best examples of
the responsible and timely involvement of a subregional
organization in the prevention of a regional conflict. It
was model for the peaceful transfer of power, unique
in the Arab Spring developments. At a time when there
was a real possibility of a return to violence, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, with the decisive support of the Security
Council, defined a comprehensive road map with
specific deadlines to move towards democratic
transition by holding a National Dialogue Conference,
the preparation of a new constitutional framework
and the holding of elections at the beginning of the
following year.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is taking
place at a critical juncture on that path. Over the
next few days, the National Dialogue should adopt
the recommendations of the working groups and the
outcome document that will both reflect the discussions
of the past six months and feed into the drafting of the
new constitution. All parties must demonstrate the
greatest flexibility to achieve that result. The goals

S/PV.7037

were ambitious for Yemen and would be for any country
in the world. Over the course of just a few months, the
political and social leaders in Yemen had to reopen
discussion on the very foundation of the new State with
great inclusiveness. We are therefore not surprised that
throughout the process there have been difficulties and
challenges commensurate with what is at stake. Success
is not assured but there is certainly an effort to find a
consensus that we hope will be maintained in the final
phase of the National Dialogue.
The Government of President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour has taken important steps forward for
the purposes of creating a favourable environment
for advancing the transition. Although a lot remains
to be done in terms of the transitional democracy, the
specific measures designed to respond to the historic
demands of the south have been as courageous as they
are necessary to bring about trust and maintain the
commitments of the various players in the process.
Just as relevant have been the measures relating to
the reorganization and restructuring of the army with
a view to creating a security force that is professional
under a unified civilian command. Those reforms,
which have not yet been concluded, are not only
important for a successful transition from a political
point of view, they are also central to effectively
dealing with the precarious security situation that the
country is experiencing, including with the persistent
daily threat of Al-Qaida on the Arabian Peninsula.
The political progress has been important, and
we must recognize it. But we must not forget that the
men, women and young children who went out onto the
streets in Sana’a at the beginning of 2011 were not only
calling for greater participation in the decision-making
process, but they were also asking for full participation
in the economic and social life of their country. We
therefore believe that the viability of the transition will
depend on the capacity and the swiftness with which
the political consensus can be translated into a tangible
improvement in the lives of Yemenis. We feel that the
degree of political support for the political system in
the next few months will depend to a large extent on
how much the aspirations for social inclusiveness have
been met.
Like many economies in the Arab world, Yemen is
clearly suffering from the uncertainty and instability
that has been experienced by the country over the last
13 years. When it comes to Yemen, the new difficulties
are coming about in the light of a prior serious

13-4877817/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian situation that is affecting over half of the
Yemeni population, with the potential to undermine
the transition process. Therefore, Yemen’s sustainable
economic development is not only a humanitarian
imperative, it is also a moral obligation. Above all, it is
a matter of political urgency.
We therefore salute the support of the international
community for the Government of Yemen in its efforts
to deal with its economy in the long term. The meeting
of the Friends of Yemen that was held two days ago
shows that it continues to be a relevant forum for the
coordination of international aid for achieving the
economic potential of the country. Once again, we hope
that the promises of contributions that had been made
at the Group of Friends’ successive meetings will soon
be fulfilled and translated into projects that make a
tangible difference to the lives of Yemenis.
Under the leadership of the Government of
President Hadi Mansour, the people of Yemen have
made significant progress towards realizing the
vision of a new State that can fulfil its aspirations for
inclusion, participation and dignity. The next months
will be critical for producing a stable, prosperous
Yemen, and the international community, including the
Security Council and United Nations agencies working
in the country, should be prepared to support the efforts
aimed at meeting those goals in the framework of the
priorities defined by the Yemenis themselves and with
due respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
briefing, as well as Mr. Abdul Latif Bin Rashid Al
Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, and Mr. Abubaker A. Al-Qirbi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Yemen, for their statements.
The process of political settlement in Yemen is in
a crucial phase. The National Dialogue Conference is
close to completion and is meant to lay the basis for
addressing the country’s political, social and economic
challenges. It is a lengthy and difficult process, but it
is important that it is being carried out by the Yemenis
themselves through substantive negotiations and
consensus-building. On balance, it is adhering to the
timetable set forth in the implementation mechanism of
the Riyadh agreements.

18/22

27/09/2013

We support President Mansour’s efforts to bring
about broad reform of Yemeni society. We call on
all Yemenis to assist in these efforts and to do their
utmost to prevent any recurrence of civil confrontation.
Together with political assistance, measures need to
be taken to provide the country with effective social
and economic assistance. The priorities should be
determined by the Yemeni Government itself based
on the priority requirements of the reform agenda.
Interference in internal affairs is unacceptable
and the primary responsibility for improving the
socioeconomic situation in the country lies with the
Yemenis themselves.
One cannot say that the political process and
comprehensive reforms have been successful while
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the affiliated
Ansar al-Sharia are operating in the country and efforts
to sabotage infrastructure sites and attacks against
Government representatives continue. We are disturbed
by the spate of attacks perpetrated by terrorists against
military and police in the province of Shabwa on
21 September. All such manifestations and threats must
be fought relentlessly.
In conclusion, we commend the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Adviser, Mr. Benomar,
in seeking compromises between representatives from
across the Yemeni political spectrum. We also thank
the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations system
for their assistance in addressing the complex social
and economic challenges of the country.
It is important that the collective efforts of the
Yemenis and the world community bear fruit. Despite
the challenges, the country has been able to avoid sliding
into full-scale confrontation. Overall, civil peace has
been upheld in areas of ethnic and religious diversity.
Yemen has provided an example of how domestic crises
can be overcome through the National Dialogue and
diplomacy with reasonable outside assistance. For its
part, Russia will continue to provide the Yemeni people
the assistance they need in the political transformation
process and in addressing the critical economic, social
and humanitarian challenges.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank your country, Sir, for having
organized today’s meeting and to welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen and of
the Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
Their presence here today demonstrates the importance

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

they attach to the future of Yemen. I also wish to thank
them for their statements. I would also link to thank the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Yemen for
his strident and informative briefing on the situation in
the country.
This public debate is taking place at a time when the
situation in Yemen gives us grounds for hope — hope
based on the continuation of the work of the National
Dialogue Conference — but also remains a cause for
concern, with regard to the security, humanitarian and
other situations.
With regard to the National Dialogue, we commend
the Yemeni authorities, civil society organizations and
other political actors for their perseverance in staying the
course of constructive dialogue aimed at reconciliation
and rebuilding a new, united Yemen, resolutely focused
on development. We have been encouraged by President
Mansour’s frequent assurances that great leaps forward
have been made towards a new Yemen, in which justice,
order and freedom will reign.
We welcome the genuine progress that has been
made thanks to the sustained efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Adviser on Yemen, which have
brought a great number of Yemenis into the dialogue
process. That allowed for inclusive and constructive
discussions to be held during the second session of the
National Dialogue Conference in June.
We note that the Dialogue has dealt with 90 per cent
of its agenda and already has a number of agreements
under its belt, which was no easy task given the
upheaval that the country has recently experienced.
We hope that the numerous issues that have emerged
and the proposed solutions will be taken into account
in the new Constitution, the adoption of which should
lead to the holding of elections, planned, in principle,
for February 2014.
We welcome in particular the fact that one of the
crucial issues of the Dialogue — what form the State
should take — has been resolved with the choice of a
unified, federal and democratic Yemen. It is crucial for
the Yemenis to deal with the unresolved issues in the
same spirit of reconciliation in order to complete the
process they have begun.
On the security front, Yemen continues to face
the threats of terrorism. Armed groups are creating a
permanent climate of insecurity, with a genuine resolve
to sabotage the reconciliation process and plunge

S/PV.7037

the country back into chaos. The numerous terrorist
attacks against the military forces and security forces
in the South over recent months are part of this deadly
destabilization strategy.
Togo firmly condemns those terrorist attacks and
other acts of aggression against the population and
oil, electricity and gas infrastructure. We are sure that
the determination of Yemenis who so long for peace
will allow them to overcome these forces of evil. In
that regard, we call on all parts of Yemeni society, in
particular the civilian, military, religious and secular
sectors, to set aside their differences so as to bring
the national reconciliation process to a harmonious
conclusion.
We would like to commend President Mansour in
particular for the various efforts he has undertaken
in implementation of the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, in
keeping with resolution 2014 (2011). The restructuring
of the military hierarchy and the reintegration of retired
military officers and personnel have made a positive
contribution to keeping the social and political peace.
On the humanitarian front, calls have been made
regarding the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and a number of United
Nations agencies. It is therefore not unfounded
to fear that any deterioration of the humanitarian
situation would destabilize the country and seriously
compromise the progress that has been made in the area
of political stability. It is therefore a matter of urgency
for the international community to do more to help
humanitarian agencies to meet the needs of refugees
and the Yemeni population.
We would like to commend various countries
and organizations, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World
Food Programme and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for their support to Yemen.
We hope that the friends of Yemen will take further
initiatives as they did in March 2013 in London to help
the Yemeni population in difficulty.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Adviser Benomar for his briefing
today. The Chinese delegation listened with great
interest to the statements made by Foreign Minister
Al-Qirbi and Secretary General Al Zayani of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC).

13-4877819/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

Since the launch of the National Dialogue last
March, thanks to the hard work of the Government
and people of Yemen and the broad support from the
international community, the political process in Yemen
has made steady progress. The National Dialogue
is making headway. The Supreme Commission for
Election and Referendum is making preparations for a
new constitution and general elections. The restricting
of the armed forces is forging ahead in an orderly
fashion. Active measures have been taken to implement
the priority plan for economic and social reconstruction.
China welcomes these developments.
At the same time, the economic situation of Yemen
remains bleak and the security situation volatile.
The political transition process is still facing some
challenges. National reconciliation remains a daunting
task. Given the current situation, we hope that all
stakeholders in Yemen and the nation as a whole will
move towards the long-term interests of the country,
preserve unity, effectively apply the GCC initiative
and its implementation mechanisms, resolve political
differences through dialogue and consultations, and
continuously promote the national political process and
national reconciliation.
China appreciates the good offices of the Gulf
Cooperation Council in Yemen and supports the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser,
Mr. Benomar, in assisting Yemen to press ahead with
the political process. At the ministerial meeting of
the Friends of Yemen group, held recently in New
York, a consensus was reached to continue to support
the Yemeni Government in its political, economic
and security sector reforms. China welcomes this
consensus and hopes that the international community
will take this opportunity to make full use of the United
Nations and the Friends of Yemen mechanism and
enhance coordination and synergy in order to promote
the political process in Yemen. During this transition
process, the international community must fully
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yemen and the right of the people of Yemen
to choose their own path of national development.
Over the years, China has rendered continuous
support to the Yemeni Government in its efforts to
promote political and social reforms in the country
in order to help Yemen achieve economic and social
development and improve the country’s humanitarian
situation. China has provided assistance within the
scope of its means, including a total of ¥325 million

20/22

27/09/2013

in economic assistance and over ¥30 million in
humanitarian assistance. We will further scale up our
assistance to Yemen. We also call on the international
community to make good on its commitments and help
Yemen speed up the pace of economic recovery.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Let me start by
commending the Australian presidency for having
organized this important high-level meeting on
Yemen on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. I would
like to thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his informative
briefing and for his personal dedication to a successful
transition in that country for almost 30 months now.
I also thank Mr. Abubaker A. Al-Qirbi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Yemen, and Mr. Abdul Latif bin
Rashid Al Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council, for their insightful presentations.
As we expect the conclusion of the National
Dialogue Conference in the first week of next month,
we wish to express our sincere appreciation for the
progress that has been made since March. We are
happy to hear that six of the nine working groups have
completed their work, and we take note of the efforts
undertaken to ensure the inclusiveness of the process
and the decision to mainstream the concerns of women,
youth and marginalized communities throughout the
work of the Conference.
Rwanda further welcomes the establishment of a
commission to consider and address land issues and
a commission on the forcibly dismissed employees of
southern Yemen as a demonstration of the Government’s
commitment to addressing long-standing grievances
and to create confidence.
It is in the same vein that we command President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour for his decree
reinstating 795 army and security officers who were
forced into retirement after the 1994 civil war in a major
step towards resolving the grievances of the southerners.
We also welcome the Government’s formal apology to
the people in the south and the east and the Houthis for
the wars against them under the former Government.
This positive gesture by the current Government is
commendable, since it is aimed at encouraging people
from these regions to resolve their grievances through
a political settlement.
Rwanda is deeply concerned by increasing terrorist
activities of Al-Qaida and its henchmen in the Middle

13-48778

27/09/2013

The situation in the Middle East

East and in Africa. As we mourn the terrorist attacks of
last Saturday committed by Al-Qaida-linked Al-Shabaab
in a shopping mall in Nairobi, we remember that only
one day before that attack, Al-Qaida in the Arabian
peninsula had committed a terrorist attack against brave
Yemeni army officers and policemen. We also condemn
the persistent sabotage activities, which mainly target
electricity, pipelines, or gas infrastructure, and the
kidnappings. These criminals acts have contributed to
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
country, and my delegation calls upon all the spoilers
who intend to undermine the efforts of the Government
towards a democratic and reconciled Yemen to cease
all forms of violence and join the political process. We
stress that the perpetrators of these crimes will be held
accountable.
My delegation expresses concern over the dire
humanitarian situation in Yemen. As indicated on
Friday by Under-Secretary-General and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, who visited Yemen
on 12 September, 13 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, 10 million are food insecure,
7 million are in critical water situations, 6 million
are without health services, and more than 250,000
are affected by severe, acute malnutrition. These
figures show us how the humanitarian situation in
Yemen is critical, particularly as we know that the
humanitarian consolidated appeal of 2013 remains
underfunded, at just 43 per cent. We therefore urge the
donor community to honour the commitments pledged
during various meetings of the Friends of Yemen, and
we call for further humanitarian assistance for Yemen,
including by providing financial support to the Yemen
humanitarian response plan for 2013.
To conclude, I would recall that, despite real
challenges, the political transition in Yemen is
undoubtedly a model for the region, following the wave
of popular uprisings in the Middle East during the Arab
Spring. Yemen did not become Libya or Syria, and for
that we need to commend the people and leadership of
Yemen for their political maturity. We cannot forget
to recognize the important role played by the Gulf
Cooperation Council, the Security Council, which
visited Yemen in February, and the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General in that regard.
Rwanda stands ready to continue supporting her
sister country of Yemen to achieve success through the
current political transition.

S/PV.7037

Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen, the Secretary
General of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for their
statements. Their joint presence in the Council shows
that the method we have followed in Yemen was the
right one. The United Nations has worked with the
relevant regional organization — the Gulf Cooperation
Council — to set in motion a process to respond the
legitimate demands of the Yemeni population. This
process shows that, in situations of open crisis, the
establishment of an orderly, peaceful and democratic
transition is possible.
Indeed, the Yemeni transition, implemented under
the auspices of President Hadi Mansour, to whom
we reiterate our full support, provides a model to the
world in these troubled times. It is emblematic above
all because of the commitment of Yemenis themselves,
who have achieved significant progress in implementing
resolution 2014 (2011).
We welcome the progress of the National Dialogue
Conference, which was launched on 18 March and
provides an opportunity for all stakeholders in Yemen,
in particular the youth and civil society, to achieve
national reconciliation. We welcome the pledges of
good will from the parties involved, such as the formal
apology made by President Hadi Mansour for the
clashes of the past, in which all Yemenis suffered.
France urges all the parties to maintain their
commitment in a spirit of constructive vision in order
to continue the political transition by the earliest
deadlines set out. Recent difficulties have caused a
delay, as we all know, in the conclusion of the National
Dialogue Conference, which had been scheduled for
18 September. It is the responsibility of all Yemenis to
resolve the last issues under discussion in the working
groups concerned, including on the administrative and
territorial organization of the country. This should,
in any event, include respect for the principles of the
territorial integrity and unity of Yemen and establish
a distribution of powers that does not impede the
prospects for economic development.
In order to strengthen the second phase of the
Yemeni transition, it is also urgent to make progress
in other areas, in particular on the restructuring of
the security forces, on economic reforms and on
the humanitarian situation. The restructuring of the
security and defence forces is indeed a priority area in

13-4877821/22

S/PV.7037

The situation in the Middle East

view of the magnitude of the security challenges facing
Yemen.
France reiterates its strongest condemnation of
all acts of terrorism, regardless of the justification.
It is necessary in this connection for the Yemeni
Government to deploy adequate means to protect not
only the people, as its top priority, but also industrial
facilities, the repeated sabotage of which deprives the
country of its own resources and discourages investors.
This is a major challenge to the country’s economic and
social development.
Whatever institutions the Yemenis choose to
establish in the months to come, it is up to the Yemeni
authorities to undertake the economic, social and
political reforms necessary to a balanced development of
the country and good institutional governance. Indeed,
without a legal environment conducive to the growth of
the economy and guarantees for the establishment of
the rule of law, there can be no development in Yemen
in the long-term.
France welcomes the cooperation of the Yemeni
authorities with the Human Rights Council, and their
resolve to make progress with respect to the rights
and freedoms of individuals. However, the question of
women’s rights, forced marriages in particular, and the
application of the death penalty, including to minors,
continue to concern us.
The Yemeni authorities should pay special attention
to the continued deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. As Ms. Amos stressed again in New York
at the meeting of the Friends of Yemen, the country
must address the critical humanitarian situation, which
could affect its stability if it were to continue. Half
the population lives below the poverty line, 13 million
people require humanitarian assistance, and migrants
and refugees entered the system by the tens of thousands

22/22

27/09/2013

in 2013. The United Nations emergency humanitarian
programme does not have sufficient funds to deal with
this alarming situation. The international community
cannot remain indifferent.
In that context France, a guarantor of the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, fully supports this
iconic and peaceful political transition. We sought it
assiduously and we contribute to it by taking part in
the stabilization of the country in all fields. We stress
its centrality and insist on respect for the stages of
transition leading to the convening of elections as close
as possible to the deadlines that have been set.
France has therefore dispatched a constitutional
expert to the National Dialogue Conference to support
the drafting of the new constitution. Such a framework
will open the possibility of consolidating development
activities in the country. We are ready, as we confirmed
to the Friends of Yemen conference held on Wednesday,
to participate through the investment of our businesses,
by providing our expertise when it responds to needs
defined by the Yemenis themselves, and through our
cooperation and development projects, including for
the electrification of Yemen.
My country and the Council therefore remain
firmly alongside the Yemeni authorities at this historic
moment, when we have the opportunity to meet together
the legitimate democratic aspirations of the Yemeni
people.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. Again, I especially thank
Foreign Minister Al-Qirbi, Secretary General Al
Zayani, Special Adviser Benomar and all other highlevel participants for their participation this afternoon.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

13-48778
