i

i

YEAR

THIRTY-SECOND

MEETING:

NEW

13 JANUARY

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

Agenda (S/Agenda/l984)

Adoption

of the agenda

. , . , . . . . . . . . . . ..

. . . . . . . . , .. .

, . , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

1

. . . . . .. .

1

Complaint of the Government
of Botswana against the illegal rkgime in Southern
Rhodesia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December
1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of
Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12262)
. . , . . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SfPV. 1984

/

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1984th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l984)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Botswana to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2262).
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint of the Government of Botswana against :ithe
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations
of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the letter
dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12262)

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): III
accordance with the decisions taken by the Security
Council at its previous meeting, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representatives of Botswana,
Morocco, Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Lesotho to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s consideration of the item on the agenda.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. M. Mogwe
(Botswana) took a place at the Council table; Mr. M. S.
Zaimi (Morocco), Mr. S. G. Mwale (Zambia), Mr. I. A.
Sepetu (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. L. E.
Mathaba (Lesotho) took the placesreservedfor them at the
sideof the Councilchamber.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As
Presidentof the Security Council, I have received letters

13 January 1977, at 3 p.m.
from the representativesof Mozambique, Sierra Leone,
Yugoslavia and Kenya, in which they request to be invited
to participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion
of the item on the agendaof this meetingof the Council. In
accordance with Article 31 of the Charter of the United
Nations and rule 37 of the provisional rulesof procedureof
the Council and also in accordance with established
practice, I propose,if there are no objections, to invite the
representativesof those countries to participate, without
the right to vote, in the Council’s considerationof the item.
I therefore invite them to take the placesreservedfor them
at the side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a place at the
Council table whenthey wish to addressthe Council.
At the invitation oj’ the President, Mr. J, C. Lobo
(Mozambique), Mrs. S. Y. Gbujar?za(Sierra Leone), Mr. J.
Petri6 (Yugoslavia) and Mr. F. M. Kasina(Kenya) took the
p&es reservedfor themat the sideof the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
first speakeron the list is the representativeof Zambia, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of that country. I invite him to
take a placeat the Council table and to makehis statement.

4. Mr. MWALE (Zambia): Thank you, Mr. President,for
the opportunity given my delegationto participate in this
important meeting. 1 understand that you have just taken
up.an important assignmentasPermanentRepresentativeof
the Soviet Union to the United Nations. May I, therefore,
ta.ke this opportunity to wish you every success.1alsowish
ito congratulate you on your assumptionof the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. Your
great country, the Soviet Union, is committed to the
struggle for the liberation of southern Africa and hasmade
an invaluable contribution thereto. It is fitting, therefore,
that this meeting of the Council be presidedover by your
eminent self, as there can be no doubt asto the solidarity
of the Soviet Union with the Government and people of
Botswana, who are victims of illegal, racist, barbaric and
wanton acts of aggressioncommitted by the minority
rdgime of Ian Smith in the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia.
5. We, in Zambia, have always maintained that the
existence and the oppressive activities of white racist
minority regimesin southern Africa constitute a threat to
international peaceand security. We have repeatedly urged
the international community and the Security Council, in
particular, not only to recognize this fact but also, and
what is even more important, to act decisively to put an
end to colonialism,oppression,racismand minority rule in
southern Africa.

edness and tenacity of purpose. Zambia stands in complete
solidarity with Botswana.

6, This is not the first time that acts of aggressiqn
committed by the illegal regime of Southern Rhodes1a
against
neighbouring States have been brought to the
attention of the Security Council. In January1973,the
Council considered the aggression committed by the illegal
Ian Smith rigime against mY own country. In this regard,
the Council, inter a&z, addressed itself to the need for
putting
an immediate end to the illegal Ian Smith regime as
an effective way of terminating its hostile acts against its
neighbours.
But that British colony has continued with
impunity
to commit acts of aggressionagainst neighbouring
independent countries.

11, Batswam are freedom- and peace-loving p~ple. They
desire freedom and independence for themselves OS,indeed,
for their oppressed brothers and sisters in Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa. They desire peace in freedom
and not in bondage for themselvrs, BS, indeed, for their
oppressed brothers and sisters. Botswana is therefore
making tremendous sacrifices today for the liberation of a
people, an objective whose realiza tion is the collective duty
and responsibility of the international community.
12. By virtue of its geopolitical situation, Botswana
receives refugees from all the white-minority-ruled
COUntries of southern Africa. The numbers of those refugees are
growing with each passing day, as the instruments of
oppression and repression in those territories become much
more sharpened, Botswana has a moral obligation, and
indeed an international responsibility, to onre for the
refugees. But, owing to the circumstances of that country,
the Government of Botswana has repeatedly made it clear
that there are no freedom fighters maintaining military
bases in or operating from its territory.

7. The complaint of Botswana today is Yet another
111ustrationof the ever-growing threat to international Peace
and securjty which the white racist minority regimes of
southern Africa represent. Those regimes have become
more vicious in recent years. They are committing atrocities
against
the black majority within the territories concerned
and, as if this were not outrageous enough, they are
increasingly resorting to well orchestrated acts of aggression
against neighbouring independent African countries. As will
be recalled, the Security Council has deliberated before on
acts of aggression committed by those regimes against
Angola, Mozambique and, indeed, my own country,
Zambia.

13. Clearly, the aim of the Smith regime in committing
acts of aggression against Botswana, is to force that country
into abandoning its stand of principle against racism,
oppression and white minority rule in Southern Rhodesia.
It is hoping to pressure Botswana into desisting from
granting political asylum to those who flee from the grip of
oppression and repression in Southern Rhodesia, Perhaps it
is not surprising that the Smith regime, as a force of evil,
should pursue the victims of oppression into Botswarrii, on
the pretext of counteracting the activities of the freedom
fighters of Zimbabwe. But what Smith knows full well and
refuses to reckon with is the fact that the freedom fighters
of Zimbabwe are operating within Zimbabwe itself and not
from Botswana or any other neighbouring State,

8. Aggression against neighbouring States is only one
method by which the white racist minority regimes seek to
perpetuate themselves. There is also internal aggression
against the black majority, which takes the form of brutal
and savage murders of innocent civilians, including women
and children, rape, intimidation, arbitrary arrests, detentions, imprisonments and torture, and economic plunder,
exploitation and strangulation. Moreover, those regimes are
busy cultivating stooges among tribal chiefs and other
misguided elements whom they are parading as representatives of the oppressed majority in the well-known
tradition of “divide and rule”. One only needs to look at
the so-called constitutional conference at Windhoek in
Namibia, the bogus independenceof the Transkei bantustan
in South Africa and the lamentable situation in Southern
Rhodesia concerning tribal chiefs who were members of Iah
Smith’s so-called Cabinet and have now, upon his instmction, formed a so-called political party, the Zimbabwe
United People’s Organization (ZUPO), the purpose
of
which is, no doubt, to counter genuine nationalism in
Zimbabwe and to blunt support for the liberation
movement.

14. Smith has no one to blame but himself for the
devastating blows now being dealt to his r8gime by the
freedom fighters of Zimbabwe. He is a rebel who has defied
the international community for too long. He is a die-hard
racist and a heartless butcher who thrives on the savage
oppression and repression of the people of Zimbabwe. It is
because of Smith and all that he represents that the people
of Zimbabwe have taken up arms to liberate themselves. He
has abused their patience and frustrated their hopes for
peaceful change. Smith therefore should not look for
scapegoats as a reaction to the freedom fighters’ onslaught
which he has invited by his own intransigence.

9. MY brother and colleague,Archie Mogwe, the Minister
for External Affairs of Botswana, has presented the case of
his country in a most eloquent and moving manner [1983rd
meeting]. He has given the Security Council a catalogue
of
repeated acts of aggression committed against Botswana by
the illegal minority and racist regime of Ian Smith from the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia. He has also reiterated
the commitment of the Government and people
of Bat.
swana to the liberation of Southern Rhodesia and, indeed,
of southern Africa as a whole.

15. Because of the successes of the armed struggle, Smith
was recently compelled to attend the Geneva Conference
on Zimbabwe, convened by the United Kingdom as the
colonial authority for Southern Rhodesia. The first phase
of that Conference, which is currently in recess, did not
accomplish much, as a result of the political gimmickry and
well-known intransigence of Ian Smith and his henchmen in
the Rhodesian Front.

IO* We, in Zambia, appreciate fully the immense sacrifices
Botswana ls making for the liberation of southern Africa.
We greatly admire Botswana’s courage, principles,
for&&t.

16. One hears of arguments put forward by certain
hypocrites that the present important meeting on Botswana
2

could jeopardize the chances of success of the Geneva
Conference. That is strange and dangerous logic.
The
Geneva Conference was intended to be and remains an
fXtension of the StrUggk of the people of Zimbabwe. The
need for international pressure and action against the Smith
regime remains as great as ever before, Any action taken
anYwhere and at any time against the Smith regime is a
contribution to the liberation struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe. Smith has never been respectable, He is not
respectable now and any attempt to make him respectable
should be resisted. He remains a rebel and he must continue
to be treated as such.
17. The Geneva Conference is not being held for the
purpose of striking compromises with Smith, It is a forum
offered to permit him to capitulate gracefully, There can be
no compromise regarding liberation, for freedom is indeed
indivisible. It is in this light that, at their recent Summit in
Lusaka, the Heads of State of front-line African countries
made it abundantly clear that only the removal of the evils
of colonialism, oppression and racism in Zimbabwe would
put an end to the armed struggle.
18. The United Kingdom, as the colonial authority for
Southern Rhodesia, should ensure that the illegal regime of
Ian Smith does not carry out acts of aggression against
Botswana and other neighbouring independent African
countries. Such acts of aggression only show that Smith and
his clique are still bent on resisting the inevitable change.
19. As my delegation sees it, the illegal Ian Smith regime
in Southern Rhodesia is determined to destroy before it
fully capitulates. Further, with the connivance of apartheid
South Africa and, unfortunately, in direct or indirect
collaboration with those countries that sell arms to that
rebel British colony or have vested economic interests in
southern Africa, Smith is determined to maintain the status
quo, even to the extent of engulfing that entire area in a
nuclear war. The recent unprovoked acts of aggression
against Botswana and Mozambique must be seen in this
context. Those acts of aggression are meant not only to
intimidate the front-line countries but also to draw the
whole of independent Africa into an armed conflict. This is
a very dangerous war game which the Security Council
must strongly condemn, for it is an international conspiracy
which has already turned the southern African racial
conflict into a threat to international peace and security.
20. The United Nations and, indeed, the international
community as a whole should not lose sight of the fact that
the underlying cause of the southern African conflict is the
existence of the illegal racist minority regimes. The surest
guarantee against the repetition of acts of aggression against
Botswana and other independent African CoUntrieS
is
majority rule and independence for the whole of southern
Africa.
21. The Government of Botswana cannot, in the meantime, stand with arms folded and allow the Smith regime to
violate its territorial integrity and sovereignty with impunity, kidnap, maim and kill its citizens and wantonly destroy
their property. It has a duty to defend its people against
such external aggression, Therefore, as stated by my dear
colleague, Foreign Minister Mogwe, it is only natural that

Botswana should, as a matter of extreme urgency, strengthen its security forces for defence against this type of
aggression. This is a situation which has been forced upon
Botswana. The fact that it has hitherto maintained only a
police mobile unit and no army at all, is yet another proof
that Botswana cherishes peace and has no aggressive designs
against any country.
22. It goes without saying that the urgent measures for
national defence which Botswana must now take, will entail
a lot of unplanned expenditure. Funds budgeted for
development projects will now have to be diverted to this
urgent necessity. Botswana, which is a victim of aggression
because it upholds United Nations principles and champions the cause of free,dom and independence in Zimbabwe
and southern Africa as a whole, must surely not stand
alone. It has a perfect right to expect and receive assistance
from the international community, for it is bearing the
brunt on behalf of all countries that uphold the Charter of
the United Nations and love peace. I therefore trust that
the Security Council will act to ensure that Botswana
receives generous assistance from the United Nations and
the international community at large, in order that its
development programmes not be disrupted as a resuIt of the
channelling of some of its funds towards the vital area of
national security, necessitated by the acts of aggression
from the rebels in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia.
In addition, the Council should strongly condemn the
illegal minority regime of Southern Rhodesia for its acts of
aggression against Botswana, which are an affront to the
principles and objectives of the Charter. The illegal minority regime should also be called upon by the Council to
desist forthwith from committing further aggression against
Botswana.
23, To support Botswana in this situation is to advance
further the cause of liberation in Southern Rhodesia and,
indeed, in southern Africa as a whole. It is important for
the struggle of the oppressed people of southern Africa that
Botswana and other independent African countries in the
region be able to maintain their assistance to those people.
The international community therefore has a duty to assist
those countries in the interests of the liberation of southern
Africa.
24. Only the liberation of southern Africa will herald
genuine and lasting peace in the region. Only the liberation
of the whole of southern Africa will be a guarantee against
repeated acts of aggression by the minority regimes against
Botswana and other neighbouring independent African
countries. The security of Botswana, like that of Zambia
and other countries in the region, is interlinked with the
liberation of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa. For its
part, Zambia will co-operate with Botswana in every
possible manner, Together with Botswana and other countries similarly committed to the eradication of minority
rule, racism and oppression, we shall spare no effort to
assist those fighting for their national liberation, freedom
and independence.
25. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): 1
wish to thank the Foreign Minister of Zambia for his kind
words addressed to me as Council President and as
representative of the Soviet Union.

26, h,jr. ILLUECA (Panama) firzterpretfztiofl from SPQIp
ish): Mr. President, we must regard it as a happy event for
the United Nations and for international detente that the
Soviet Government has wisely designated as its representative a statesman of your stature. YOU have already given
us proof
of your brilliant ability to reconcile the national
interests of your country and your ideological convictions
with harmonious and constructive sohdons.
We fierefore
feel that your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the present month of January is a good augury,
suggesting that the year 1977 will be a propitious period for
the just and lasting settlement, in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter, of the major
conflicts which affect peaceand security in Various Parts of
the world. The delegation of Panama, while expressing its
wishes for the success of the presidency of Ambassador
Troyanovsky, takes the liberty of warning him that it wi]]
be very difficult for him to maintain or surpass the lofty
standards established during the month of December I976
by his eminent predecessor, Ambassador Ion Datcu of
Romania.
27. Mr. President, you accurately interpreted the sentiments of this Council when you expressed yesterday the
deep respect we have for the outgoing members of the
Council and our sincere gratitude for their important
contribution to the ideals of the United Nations. I am sure
that those feelings are shared also by all States and nations
of the international community. Panama cordially joins in
the well-deserved tribute paid in the Council to the brilliant
work done by the representatives of Guyana, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Sweden, Italy and Japan and by their
immediate assistants during the period 1 January 1975 to
31 December 1976. Rarely has there been such a fortunate
and positive combination of ethical, cultural, political and
human qualities as that represented during that period by
Ambassadors Rashleigh Jackson, Salim Ahmed Salim, Olof
Rydbeck, Piero Vinci and, Isao Abe, representing Latin
America, Africa, the Nordic countries, Europe and Asia. My
delegation, which benefited so much from the counsel,
guidance and exemplary devotion of those eminent personalities, will always remember them with admiration and
gratitude and will continue to benefit from the lessons &
be derived from their wisdom, experience and straight:
forwardness.
28. 1 CamtOt on this occasion, Mr. President, fail to
mention the outstanding work accomplished by your
eminent predecessor, Ambassador Yakov Malik, whose
actions as a politician and diplomat still awake echoes in
the halls of the United Nations. We wish him every success
in his new post as Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
his country.
29. With the process of strengthening and enhancing
the
Prestige of the United Nations system, we shall always
associate that illustrious Chinese statesman, Huang Hua,
who, as rePresf%tatiVe
of his country, contributed to the
effective advancement of the ideals of the United Nations
and of the third world. His promotion to the highest post in
the Government of the People’s Republic of China by his
recent designation as Minister for Foreign Affairs, is also a
haPPY augury that the world, with the contribution of that

great country, wi]] be able to enter a new era of Peace and
progress.
30, I should like to make particular reference to our
eminent co]]eague, Ambassador William SCranton, former
Governor of the State of Pennsylvania, who, in a few days,
wi]] be concluding his term of office as head of the United
States delegation.
Governor Scranton has represented a very
positive combination of the gentleman, the Politician and
the diplomat ad has, I should add, With his ChaIXling Wife
Mary, given us an excellent example of family life. But
Ambassador Scranton has been SOInetlIiIlg
IllOre:
1~ 1xIs
been the living illustration of a many-sided PersonalitY,
sewing
both as Ambassador of Itis Government and
ambassador of his people, and that is something rare. 1%
character is the expression of a culture and a stY]e reflecting
the lofty values of an imaginative, dynamic SoCietY
which
must respond to the changes of the times.
31, Despite the profound differences that have arisen
between his country and mine, and whiCh now SW~ likely
to be solved, thanks to the fruitful efforts of WpCriW
111011
such as he, I can affirm that his activity in the fhCWitY
Council, in the United Nations and on the international
scene deserves cordial recognition, and nothing could be
more significant than that such recognition should come
from a small country like mine, with more reason to recall
aggravations than to pay tributes, were it not for the fact
that, in this case, we have before us an exceptional person
of outstanding professional and human merit.
32. These are not words of farewell to Governor Scranton,
but rather an appeal that the values and style he represents,
with all that is constructive about them, should continue to
prevail in the foreign policy of his country.
33. It is a matter of especial satisfaction to the Panma
delegation to be able to extend a most cordial welcome to
the new non-permanent members of the Security Council:
the Federal Republic of Germany, represented by Baron
Rcdiger van Wechmar; Canada, by Ambassador W. H. Barton; India, by Ambassador Rikhi Jaipnl; Mauritius, by
Ambassador Radha Ramphul; and Venezuela, by Ambassador Sim6n Albert0 Consalvi. The great inte]lectual,
professional and personal prestige of our new col]cagues, to
whom we at once offer our most candid and friendly
co-operation, gives us reason to hope that, in the course of
this year, the work of the Council will be most productive
for the benefit of international peace and security and for
the progress and well-being of the peoples of the world.
34. It is flattering to Latin America that among the new
members there should be two States from this continentCanada and Venezuela-with which my country maintains
the closest and most friendly relations. That Venezuela
should have been chosen to occupy,
with Panama, the
Places reserved for Latin America in this United Nations
body is, in our view, singularly meaningful, Venezuela, the
cradle of the Liberator and at present the Ileadquarters
of
the Latin American Economic System, is committed, like
mY country and the other States of the region to
promoting not on*Y unity and integration in Latin A&rica
but also the Purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. As was stated by President Carlos Andr&

PCrez before the General Assembly on 16 November 1976,
our countries believe
“that only by means of [United Nations] concerted
action in the political, social and economic fields can we
fiid the genuine roads to peace, which should not be
mistaken for mere efforts to avoid wars, to limit them or
to end them, but which must be understood as being
based on social justice and the well-being of all human
beings all over the world.“1

39. My delegation also considersthat it is urgent for the
Council to adopt measuresso that the Secretary-General,
in
co-operation with the competent bodies of the United
Nations system,may organize a programmeof financialand
economic assistancefor the people of Botswanawhich, in
our opinion, hasearned the material and moral support of
all StatesMembersof the Organization.
40. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representativeof Panamafor the kind words he
hasaddressedto me and to my predecessor.

Panama and Venezuela will therefore make concerted and
constructive efforts, in the Council, to reflect a genuinely
Latin American policy and to respond to the best interests
of the world Organization.

41. The next speakeris the representativeof Lesotho. I
invite him to take a place at the Counciltable andto make
his statement.

35. We are also very pleased to welcome in the Council the
presence of the Republics of India and Mauritius, countries
with which Panama shares responsibilities and ideals in the
non-aligned movement. We also have great expectations of
the contribution to be made by the Federal Republic of
Germany, a country with which we have excellent relations
and with which we are carrying out joint programmes of
reciprocal co-operation.

42. Mr. MATHABA (Lesotho): Mr. President,on behalf of
my delegationI should like to welcomeyou to New York
as you assumeyour new responsibilititiesand to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidencyof the
Security Council for the month of January.Throughyou, I
wish to greet the new membersof the Security Counciland
to offer best wishesto those whoseterm of office expired
at the end of 1976.

36. The presence in this hall of Mr. Archibald Mogwe, the
Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, shows how
seriously that country and, indeed, all African States and
States Members of the Organization view the complaint
Botswana has made against the illegal regime of Southern
Rhodesia, in connexion with the violation of its territorial
sovereignty. That complaint was seconded yesterday by the
representative of the Organization of African Unity
(1983rd meeting/ and today by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia.
37. In his statement yesterday [ibid./, the Minister for
External Affairs of Botswana made it clear that, since the
independence of his country in 1966, there had been 36
violations of the territorial integrity of Botswana by the
security forces of the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia.
By giving actual, specific details, he proved that thOSe
incidents, which constituted clear cases of aggression, had
included murder, arson, abduction of persons and destruction of property.
38. After objective consideration of the facts set forth by
the Government of Botswana, my delegation is in favour of
having the Security Council take action to put an end to
the situation which must be condemned and rejected.
Accordingly, the delegation of Panama hopes that the
Security Council will reach a consensus decision, not only
condemningthe acts of aggression
of the illegalregimeof
Southern Rhodesia,but alsoexpressingthe Council’sdesire
that the Geneva Conference on Zimbabwe reach an
agreement that would ensure the prompt accessionto
independenceof Zimbabwe,under a governmentwith an
indigenous majority, in accordance with the relevant
resolutionsadopted by the GeneralAssemblyand by the
Security Council.
1 See Official
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of the General
67th meeting.

Assembly,

7hirtY-first

43. Permit me, through you, Mr. President,to thank the
membersof the Council for affording me the opportunity
to participate in the discussionof an issuevery seriousfor
Africa and, indeed, for Lesotho. My ForeignMinister would
very much have liked to have been there asthis item was
debated but, owing to circumstancesbeyond his control,
his duties have made it impossiblefor him to take part in
the debate. He hastherefore authorized me to makethese
remarkson his behalf.
44. The membersof the Council haveheardthe statement
of the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana[1983rd
meeting] eloquently and lucidly outliningthe repeatedacts
of provocation and aggressionperpetrated by the Smith
r&me againstthat sisterAfrican State. I shouldlike to take
this opportunity to welcomehim in our midst andto thank
hiin for the information he hasimpartedto membersof the
C’duncil and to us. He informed the Councilof the type of
assistancerequired by his country, andit isfor the Council
to adopt a positive resolution that will enablethe United
Nations and its specializedagenciesto render support to
Botswanaagainstthe aggressionby Rhodesia.
45. For 11 years, since the accessionto independenceof
the Republic of Botswana,the racist neighbouringcountries
have continued and intensified their clandestineacts of
surveillance, kidnapping, bombing,arsonandharassment
of
its citizens. The reasonis well known: Botswanaand other
independent African countries in southernAfrica, including
my own, have been placed by destiny in a delicate and
strategic positon for offering relief and refuge to those
oppressedby racist white minority and colonial rkgimes
and, by their very existence,they haveprovedthe fallacy of
white supremacyand superiority. But they are alsoviewed
asa threat to the very existence of that myth.
46. As was stated by Minister Mogwe and proved in the
speechof the Vice-Presidentof Botswanain the Parliament
on 17 December 1976 [see S/12262/, the rebel forcesof

Ian Smith have made 31 incursions into Botswana, which
are flagrant violations of its territorial
integrity and
Sovereignty. Given the long frontier between Botswana and
Rhodesia and the fact that the area is sparsely populated, it
is difficult if not impossible for Botswana, with its limited
material and human resources, effectively to defend and
protect human lives and property against criminal aggression by the well-equipped racist Smith Sgime.

and minority rule in southern Africa. A flicker from one of
the beacons might lead to despair among those engulfed
within the sea of colonialism and racial bigotry.
52. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Lesotho for his kind words
about me.
53. Mr. LAI Ya-Li (China) (translation from Chinese): We
have entered the new year of 1977 in the work of the
Security Council. Allow me, in the name of the Chinese
delegation, to welcome the delegations of the five new
States members of the Council. We are ready to maintain
close co-operation with them in the work of the Council in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

47, Because of these repeated barbaric acts of aggression
from Rhodesia, the people of Botswana find themselves
more than ever before face to face with increasing
problems, which demand more than they can afford.
Botswana is being made a victim because of its heroic stand
against colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination.
48. In the words of Minister Mogwe, no amount of
intimidation will make Botswana change its present policy
of giving refuge and assistance to the victims of oppression
in southern Africa-a heroic stand which commends itself
t0 US all. We, of Lesotho, have a saying in our language to
the effect that “when it dies, it kicks”,
which literally
means that Smith, in desperation, may attack Botswana.
But he knows that his days are numbered. There will be
majority rule in Zimbabwe.

54. We are much honoured by the presence of Their
Excellencies the Foreign Ministers of Botswana and Zambia
at these meetings of the Council. We have listened carefully
to their statements and those of the representatives of other
African countries, in which they have revealed with
irrefutable facts the truth on the matter now under
consideration
and sternly condemned the Southern
Rhodesian racist rCgime for its naked aggression against
Botswana.

49. Minority and racist rBgimes have in the past followed
those who fled from those regimes’ inhuman and abhorrent
policies into neighbouring countries, to monitor their
movements or kidnap or murder them. Botswana has not
been spared this harassment, and it should surprise no one
familiar with the region that fabrications about the existence of guerrilla bases and incursions of freedom fighters
from Botswana are being made by Smith. This is but a
nefarious attempt to distort the truth, mislead the world
and use these fabrications as an excuse to carry out acts of
intimidation, provocation and sabotage, with the hope of
forcing Botswana to change its policy of assisting in the
liberation of those Territories under racial and foreign
domination. Botswana has now become the scapegoat of
the internal struggle in Zimbabwe and the victim of an
irresponsible attempt to perpetuate the illegal racist rkgihe.

55. Over a long period of time, the Southern Rhodesian
racist r@me has ceaselessly sent armed forces to commit
unbridled aggression against Botswana, under the pretext
that the Government of that country has been supporting
and harbouring freedom fighters. After their invasion of
Botswana, the Rhodesian armed forces perpetrated murder,
arson and kidnapping wherever they went, stopping at
nothing in doing evil and causing tremendous losses to the
lives and property of the people of Botswana. According to
incomplete statistics, the Southern Rhodesian racist regime
intruded into Botswana on a dozen or more occasions in
the past year alone, committing ever more serious crimes in
each case. There is no doubt that the above-mentioned
aggressive atrocities committed by the Smith racist rdgime
constitute a gross trampling upon the Charter, a serious
encroachment upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Botswana and a grave provocation against the African
and other justice-upholding countries and peoples, as well
as a serious threat to international peace and security.

50. The Government and people of Lesotho resolute&
support Botswana in this hour of challenge and hail its firm
stand about upholding and defending the principles of the
Charter and the decisions and resolutions of the United
Nations. We urge the Council, and through it the whole
international
community,
fully to support and assist
Botswana in protecting and defending not only its noble
principles but also the lives and property of its citizens,
which is its paramount duty. Support to Botswana is
indispensable for the very survival of its people and the
maintenance of its political and territorial integrity, and it
goes a long way towards providing support and sustenance
for the struggle of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa,
whose very aims and objectives are within reach.

56. The present situation in Africa is excellent. The
national liberation movement of the broad sections of
people in southern Africa and their armed struggle are
developing swiftly and vehemently. The handful of racists
in southern Africa, including Ian Smith and his ilk, are
heavily besieged by the African people and are approaching
their doom. However, they are still carrying on their
death-bed struggle in order to save themselves from
destruction. As the Chinese saying goes, “cornered beasts
will still fight”. Recently, the Southern Rhodesian racist
regime has intensified its counterrevolutionary dual tactics.
On the one hand, it is engaged in political fraud by
hypocritically
professing its readiness to bring about
“reconciliation”. On the other hand, it greatly increases its
defence, budget, prolongs the term of military service, steps
up its repression of the armed struggle of the Zimbabwe
people and even wantonly sends troops for incessant

51. It is my fervent hope and earnest appeal that this
Council will live up to its honourable reputation and meet
the expectations of the people of Botswana and of those
still subjected to foreign occupation, racism and minority
rule. If the Council responds to that challenge in union, one
more step will have been taken towards eradicating racism
6

aggression against the sovereign States of Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana in an attempt to force these countries
into abandoning their support of the just struggle of the
Zimbabwe people. This once again testifies to the irrefutable truth that the nature of imperialism and all reactionaries will never change. The people of Zimbabwe and the
rest of Africa have realized more and more clearly from
their actual life that it is only by relying on their own
unremitting struggle that the independence and liberation
of Zimbabwe and the whole of southern Africa can be
achieved. They have realized that it is necessary for the
revolutionary people to use revolutionary dual tactics to
deal with counter-revolutionary dual tactics, that armed
struggle is essential, that negotiations must be based on
fighting and that, before the enemy really lay down their
arms, armed struggle must be strengthened and not weakened. In the face of the vicious enemy armed to their teeth,
the revolutionary people can defeat them only by adopting
the policy of waging a tit-for-tat struggle against them.

to you as Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to the United Nations. I am pleased to
mention here the brotherly relations of close and ever
growing friendship and co-operation in all spheres between
our countries, our parties and our peoples. And, if I may
strike a personal note, I should like to tell you how greatly
I appreciate our long-standing friendship.
60. The assumption, at the beginning of this year, of the
presidency of the Security Council by a distinguished
Soviet diplomat, Ambassador Oleg Troyanovsky, gives us
real pleasure and reinforces our hope that this new year will
be fruitful in constructive negotiations, thus strengthening
the role and the contribution of the United Nations in the
solution of major international problems. I wish you every
success in your important responsibilities and I can assure
you of the whole-hearted co-operation of the Romanian
delegation.
61. On behalf of the Romanian delegation, I should also
like to bid the warmest welcome to the new members of
the Council: Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany,
India, Mauritius and Venezuela. We know and duly appreciate the good work and experience of our new colleagues
and friends in the Organization. For my delegation, and for
me personally, it will be a particular pleasure to be able to
co-operate closely with the delegations of those countries in
the Council.

57. At present, the two super-Powers are stepping up their
fierce rivalry. over southern Africa. One super-Power is
doing its utmost to support the racist regimes in order to
maintain its vested interests in southern Africa. The other
super-Power, which styles itself a “natural ally” of the
African people, is even wilder in its ambitious design and,
under the banner of “opposing racism” and “supporting the
national liberation movement”, is racking its brains for
ways to divide the national liberation organizations and
undermine the militant unity among the African countries,
in an attempt to fish in troubled waters for further
infiltration and expansion in southern Africa. However,
neither racism nor hegemony is terrifying; they are essentially feeble because they are against the people. Today, the
African people have begun to integrate their struggles
against colonialism and racism with those against big-Power
hegemony. We are firmly convinced that the people of
southern Africa, who have been tempered through prolonged struggles, will certainly heighten their vigilance,
strengthen their unity, persevere in struggle, ceaselessly
frustrate all the conspiratorial schemes of racism, colonialism, neo-colonialism and hegemony and win the complete victory of national liberation.

62. Before turning to the consideration of the problem
which is under discussion here, I should like to express my
most sincere gratitude for the generous and kind words
which you, Mr. President, and other representatives have
spoken about my presidency of the Council last month, I
should like to stress the fact that my task was made much
easier by the spirit of co-operation and understanding
which prevailed throughout the proceedings of the Councii’
and I take this opportunity, once again, to thank all my
colleagues for that.
63. Lastly, I should like to say to Governor Scranton that
he has won our respect and sincere admiration.
64. The Romanian delegation listened with a great deal of
interest and attention to the important statement made by
the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Archibald Mogwe (1983rd meeting]. We should
like to express to him our appreciation for the cogency
with which he presented the case of his country to the
Council. The facts he mentioned with regard to the
repeated acts of aggression committed by the illegal regime
of Southern Rhodesia are, in our view, instructive for the
Council in its evaluation of the existing situation and will
also help it to decide what measures to take to prevent
similar acts of aggression from being committed in the
future by this regime against Botswana.

58. The Chinese Government and people strongly condemn the Southern Rhodesian racist regime for its criminal
aggression against Botswana, firmly support the people of
Botswana and the rest of southern Africa in their just
struggles against colonialism and racism and express high
admiration for the just stand of the Government and people
of Botswana in supporting the Zimbabwe people’s struggle
in defiance of brute force. The Chinese delegation holds
that the Security Council should adopt a resolution sternly
condemning the criminal acts of aggression committed by
the Southern Rhodesian racist regime against Botswana,
enjoining the racist regime to cease immediately the
aforesaid acts, commending the just stand of Botswana and
calling upon all Governments and peoples to give firm
support and powerful assistance to the just struggle of
Botswana.

65. The facts presented to the Council give an over-all
picture of the situation in southern Africa. This is not the
first time that the Council has met to consider complaints
from States Members of this Organization about brutal acts
of aggression against their sovereignty and territorial integrity committed by the minority racist regimes at Pretoria
and Salisbury, The actions of those regimes against neigh-

59. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure for me, on this
occasion, to be able to address a cordial word of welcome
7

-

71. Faithful to its policy of solidarity with national
liberation movements, Romaniaactively supportsthe strug
gle of the people of Rhodesiaand all the other peoplesof
southern Africa for the elimination of colonialism and
racism, so that they may achieve full freedom and
independence.In this regard, my country is strongly in
favour of recognizing the right of the peopleof Zimbabwe
to their autonomy. We considerthat the Security Council,,
the United Nations and the whole internationalcommunity
should take even more vigorous action to support the
lawful struggle and the just cause of the people of
Zimbabwe, so that it can realizeits aspirationto decideits
own fate free in an independentcountry.

bouring independent States and also the escalation of
violence, repression and terror against the national liberation struggle of the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe are
familiar to members of the Council and, indeed, to the
entire international community.
66. Such flagrant violations of international law and
morality highlight even more vividly the fact that the
persistence of the vestiges of colonialism and of racist
policy constitute a permanent source of tension, aggression
and conflict and gravely jeopardize peace and security on
the African continent and throughout the world. At the
same time, it demonstratesthe despairof the racistsin the
face of the gallant national liberation struggle at a time
when the will of the peoplesof southernAfrica to achieve
liberty is growing stronger every day. Those acts of
barbarity are an integral part of the hopelessattempts to
halt the liberation strugglein thoseterritories andto reduce
the legitimate support and assistance
which African States,
including Botswana, are giving to the national liberation
struggleof the people OFZimbabwe.

72. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fvom Russian): I
thank the representativeof Romaniafor what he saidabout
meand our long-standingfriendship.
73. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President,let me first of
all congratulate you on your assumptionof the important
duties associatedwith the presidencyof this body. In the
very short time sinceyour nominationasthe’representative
of your great country, you have already demonstrated
leadership qualities and diplomatic skills which, I am
confident, will ensure that our deliberationswill proceed
smoothly and progressivelyunderyour guidance.

67. That is why we feel that it is the duty of the Security
Council to take all necessarymeasuresto eliminate the
effects and, at the sametime, the causesof those acts of
aggression.The support the Council hasbeen askedto give
Botswana, so that that country can devote its efforts to its
peaceful and independent development, is important in
principle for the United Nations and the international
community. That is why this support should be conceived
and included within the broader context of the Council’s
concern for the grave situation persisting in southern
Africa.

74. As I am addressingthe Council for the first time,
permit me to say that it is the firm resolveof the Canadian
delegationto contribute, to the best of its abilities and in
the most constructive spirit, to the work of this important
organ of the United Nations. Canada,which hasserved on
the Council on three previous occasions,is proud to have
beenchosento serveagain, but is alsofully consciousof the
heavy responsibilitiessuch tenure involves. I wishto assure
our colleaguesthat we shall spareno effort in discharging
thoseresponsibilities.
4:/

68. The Council must resolutely condemn the acts of
aggressionagainstBotswanaand take energeticmeasures
to
put an end to those acts and to help Botswanato weather
the consequencesof that aggressionand devote all its
efforts to its peaceful and independentdevelopment.In this
regard, international assistancemeasuresfor Botswana
should be in keepingwith the spirit of the provisionsof the
Charter and previous resolutionsof the United Nations in
similar cases.The suggestions
made in the Council by the
Minister for External Affairs of Botswana warrant our
careful attention and could, together with other proposals
made here, be of use in establishingappropriate machinery, with the aid of international economic organizations and the specialized agencies,to provide, without
deIay, the assistance
neededin that country.

75. I should alsolike, Mr. President,to thank you and the
other membersof the Council for the warm welcomethat
has been extended to me and to the membersof my
delegation.
76. I should further like, with the sagacityof experience
that comes of having attended two meetings,to join the
others in expressingour appreciationto Mr. Scranton and
our regret at his departure. We have enjoyed his friendship
and appreciatedhis wise counselandwe wishevery success
to him and Mrs. Scranton in the future.

69. As we have already stressed,the positive experience
accumulated by the Secretary-Generalin similar situations
and also the possibility of usingthe United Nations system
are factors which should be taken into account so that the
most effective ways and meansof helpingBotswanamay be
found.

77. In preparingfor this debate,I rereadthe commentsof
my predecessor,Mr. Ignatieff, who representedCanadaon
the Council 10 years ago, when it was debating about
Rhodesia.He said,at that time, that it wasinadmissiblefor
a society to be founded on a systemof racialdiscrimination
under which a minority of whites exercisedpolitical and
economic control over a vast African majority. A decade
later, despite our best efforts, the illegalregimestill stands.
We sharethe frustration expressedby other membersof the
Council over the fact that majority rule hasnot yet been
achieved and that neighbouring countries, including
Botswana, are suffering from military incursionsby the
illegalrbgime.

70. My country, Romania,hasalwaysgiven assistance
and
will continue, asfar asit is able,to help the peoplesthat are
struggling to defend and consolidatetheir independence.It
is in this spirit that the Romanian people will give its
whole-hearted support to the efforts and just requestsof
Botswana.
8

78. Canada’s policy towards the Rhodesian question has
two main aspects. First, we have joined in the international
effort to isolate Rhodesia by the scrupulous enforcement of
sanctions since they were first implemented. Secondly, we
have made a commitment to help the free African countries
of southern Africa with their task of building societies on
the basis of economic and social justice for all their citizens.
In doing so, we have taken into account, particularly, the
extraordinary economic difficulties which the implementation of the sanctions presents for those countries bordering on Rhodesia. Thus, we have been an important
contributor to the United Nations and other multilateral
funds serving this purpose, and have also undertaken very
major bilateral programmes of development assistance to
those countries. At the present time, our bilateral assistance
in that area amounts to $54 million a year.

country. To our mutual satisfaction, many Batswana have
chosen to study in Canada on scholarships,
82. The warmth of the relations between our two countries was evidenced by the visit to Canada last year of
President Seretse Khama, whose views, not only on African
questions but on world problems, we have always found
most valuable.
83. I have referred to development assistanceprojects in
which we have been involved because I think that they
demonstrate, in a tangible way, our concern for Botswana
in its task of dealing with its continuing difficulties. We can
only hope that the need to divert resourcesfor military and
security needs will prove to be temporary,
84. Having set out what we see as the Council’s objectives
in this debate, we have only to reiterate that we should do
our best to contribute to a conclusion that conveysthe best
judgernent of all of us as to the achievement of our high
purposes.

79. Now I should like to comment on the specific
question before us today. I suggest that we have two
primary, overriding responsibilities: first, to do everything
within the power of this Council to stop the violations of
the territorial sovereignty of Botswana; and, secondly, until
such time as this result is obtained, to give all possible help
in countering the special economic hardship confronting
Botswana because of the defence obligations imposed on it,

85. The PRESDENT (interpretation fram Russ&): I

thank the representative of Canada for his kind words.
86. I should like to inform members of the Security
Council that, as President, I have received a letter from the
representative of Nigeria in which he requeststo be invited
to participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion
on the item on the agenda. In accordance with Article 31 of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure and also in accordance with the established
practice of the Council, I propose, if there are no
objections, to invite the representative of Nigeria to
participate, without the right to vote, in the consideration
of this item. I therefore request him to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber on the
understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he wishesto address the Council.

80. There can be no dispute that the one sure way to end
aggressiveacts by the illegal regime in Rhodesia is to move
rapidly towards majority rule. It seems to us that the best
prospect of achieving that goal is by way of the successof
the negotiations now being conducted by our colleague,
Ambassador Richard. Certainly, we have a responsibility to
express firmly and clearly our demand that the violation of
Botswana territory must stop. But, in our view, we should
seek to do so in terms which reinforce Ambassador
Richard’s efforts and demonstrate the unanimous view of
the Council on these matters. I thought that the SecretaryGeneral made much the samepoint with great effectiveness
in his comments yesterday to the Committee of 242 when
he underlined the importance of the Geneva Conference in
bringing about a peaceful transition to majority rule and
thereby putting an end to suffering and bloodshed. That is
the goal of my delegation in the discussionsnow under way
on a draft resolution or statement to be adopted by the
Council that will reflect its conclusions.

At the invitation of the &&dent, Mr. L. 0. Harrimun
(Nderia) took a place at the side of the Councilchamber.

87: The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):The
next speaker on my Pist is the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of that country. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

81. Now I should like to revert to the appeal of Botswana
for help in meeting the burden imposed by its defence
requirements. The Canadian Government has been particularly concerned regarding the hardships suffered by
Botswana as a direct result of its particular geographic
position in southern Africa. It is a country with which we
have enjoyed a close relationship, particularly since 1966
when it became a fellow member of the Commonwealth
and Member of the United Nations. We have co-operated
with the Government of Botswana on such major development projects in that country as the construction of the
thermal power plant at Shashe, the construction of a
section of the Botzam road and a geological survey of the

88. Mr, SEPETU (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to express our gratitude to
you and, through you, to the other members of the
Council, for giving us this opportunity to participate in the
present debate of the Council. May I also fulfil a pleasant
duty by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Your country’s
unequivocal commitment to the cause of African liberation
means that we feel particular satisfaction at seeing you
preside over the Council when it deliberates on a problem
that is, in the final analysis, an integral part of Africa’s
struggle against colonialism and racism.

2 Seethe recordof the 1058th meeting of the SpecialCommittee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of tire
Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto Colonial Countries
and Peoples(A/AC.109/PV.1058).

89. As this is the first time that the Tanzanian delegation
has taken part in the Council proceedings since our country
9

-__--_-

mobile unit along the border with Botswana are character.
istic of a reckless and desperate rigime. There can be no
justification whatever for those wild acts of subversion,
murder, kidnapping and harassment of innocent civilians or
for the malicious destruction of their property.

ceased to be a member of this important body, I should like
to express our thanks and appreciation to the present
members of the Council and those who, like us, left the
Council last month for the warm and generous tributes they
paid us with regard to the role of our country and our
delegation during our membership of the Council. We
certainly cherish the excellent co-operation and ties of
friendship we had with each and every member of the
Council.

94. In view of the articulate presentation made by Foreign
Minister Mogwe, we shall refrain from enumerating further
the various acts of aggression perpetrated by the illegal
r&me against Botswana. But we wish to emphasize the fact
that those cowardly acts have been as systematic as they
have been persistent. They are part and parcel of a
generalized scheme planned by the racist minority regimes
in the area against the freedom of the oppressed peoples in
southern Africa, as well as against the security and stability
of the independent African States.

90. In view of the impending departure of Governor
Scranton and since this is most probably the only opportunity we shall have in a United Nations body to do SO
before his departure, I should like, on behalf of the
Tanzanian delegation, to pay a tribute to him for his role in
our Organization. We do so not just as an act of diplomatic
courtesy. Ambassador Scranton has distinguished himself as
a personality of high integrity with a significant perception
and understanding of the problems of the United Nations.
The Tanzanian delegation, which had maintained with him
warm and cordial relations, wishes him all the best in his
future endeavours.

95. The aggression against Botswana, therefore, must be
understood for what it is. It is a continuation of an
aggression against freedom itself. And it is certainly a
menace to all free Africa. It should, therefore, surprise no
one that Botswana’s
complaint is Africa’s complaint.
Indeed, as the representative of Venezuela, Ambassador
Consalvi, rightly and succinctly put it in his statement of
yesterday (ibid.], the problem confronting Botswana is one
of concern to the entire international community.

91. Ever since the racists of Rhodesia proclaimed their
unilateral declaration of independence, there has been no
peace in that area and there cannot be any peace under the
status quo. In addition to its ruthless oppression and
persecution of the Zimbabweans, the illegal racist minority
regime in Rhodesia displays its arrogance and intransigence
by aIlowing its security forces to attack and commit acts of
provocation against the neighbouring independent States.

96. We therefore regard our participation in the work of
the Council on this important question not merely as a
demonstration of our outrage at the reckless and murderous
acts of the racist minority rBgime in the British colony of
Southern Rhodesia, not just as an act of unequivocal and
militant solidarity with the brotherly people of Botswana,
but, no less, as our obligation to remind the international
community that
the case of Botswana is in fact our
collective case-the case of the international community.

92. It is a matter of record that Botswana has been a
victim of such attacks ever since it became independent.
This is, however, the first time that a complaint about such
acts of aggression has been brought to the attention of the
Security Council. It is both proper and timely that
Botswana should now have brought this complaint before
the Council. It is proper because it is the responsibility of
this body to ensure justice, peace and security at all times
in all regions of the world, and timely because of the
intensification and frequent launching of such act91 of
aggression by the Rhodesian forces against neighbouring
African States. Such actions have grave repercussions -for
the security of Africa and clearly constitute a threat’to
international peace and security. It is particularly appropriate that Botswana should have brought this complaint,
because, as members of this body should know, that
freedom and peace-loving State is today a victim of such
dastardly acts of aggression simply because of its faithful
and unfailing commitment to the Charter of the United
Nations and to the decisions of its various organs, more!”
especially to the decisions of this very Council.

97. It is the United Nations which has prbclaimed its
unequivocal opposition to the illegal racist minority rkgime.
It is the United Nations which has repeatedly declared its
firm support for the legitimate struggle of the Zimbabwean
people. It is our Organization which has consistently called
upon all States to render every possible assistance to the
people of Zimbabwe in their struggle for freedom and
human dignity. Botswana, despite its tremendbus problems
and notwithstanding
its complex and delicate geographic
position, has done no more than be faithful to those calls
by giving refuge to the persecuted Zimbabweans and by
refusing to be insensitive to their plight. And it is these
outstanding qualities that have led that country to be a
constant victim of the desperate actions of the racist
minority regime in Salisbury. Clearly, therefore, it is not
just Botswana that is under attack, but the very principles
and ideals for which this Organization stands. The Council
must bear that in mind as it deliberates on the course of
action to adopt in order to meet the requirements of the
situation.

93. In his statement before the Council yesterday [1983rd
meetihg], my brother and colleague, the Minister for
External Affairs of Botswana, clearly explained the numerous acts of harassment and intimidation and the outright
aggressive actions committed against his country. Last year
alone there were 12 violations against the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Botswana by
the racist Rhodesian forces, culminating in serious acts of
aggression on 17, 18 and 19 December. Those atrocious
acts against defenceless civilians and against the police

98. The illegal racist r&ime has now formed a habit of
committing acts of provocation and aggression against the
neighbouring independent African States, Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana have all been victims. Indeed, since the
collapse of Portuguese colonialism, the illegal regime has
become more desperate. We all remember the events of
10

August 1976, when the racist regime sent its troops to
massacre defenceless refugees and rampage through refugee
camps in Mozambique. In that action, which could only be
described as insane, the racist minority rBgime’s forces
invaded refugee camps near Nyazonia and committed
serious crimes by assaulting and killing defenceless and
harmless people, including women and children. Those
refugees who ran away from the persecutions inflicted upon
them by the racist regime in Zimbabwe were under the
protection of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. That is the extent of the desperation of the men
who have, for the last 11 years, illegally usurped power at
Salisbury, defying the British Crown and riding roughshod
over the will of the international community.

Council acts decisively to eliminate the cause and source of
those aggressions.
102. The developments in southern Africa should by now
leave no doubt, even among the cynical few, that the
continued existence of the racist minority regimes not only
constitute a permanent aggression against the oppressed
peoples of southern Africa, but also creates conditions of
permanent tension and a constant threat to international
peace and security. Only the elimination of colonialism and
racism can bring about conditions of normality and
contribute to the peace and security of the region, Failure
to recognize this can only be tantamount to adopting an
ostrich-like attitude, with the attendant repercussions for
all of us. This is why, in the particular case of Botswana’s
and Africa’s current complaint, it is important to consider
that the time has come to take decisive measures against the
illegal racist minority regime at Salisbury. By the very
lawlessness of its nature, that r6gime respects no law-legal,
moral or otherwise. It continues to defy the international
community.

99. Yet, the aggression against Botswana has a particular
dimension of which this Council must take full cognizance,
The unfortunate and difficult geographic position of
Botswana makes it vulnerable to arbitrary attacks from the
racist rigimes. Those regimes think that they can twist the
arm of the Government and people of Botswana and
blackmail them into compromising their position in support
of freedom and human dignity. But, despite the many
obvious difficulties that Botswana has to face, the Government and people of that fraternal State have stood firm in
their commitment to the cause of freedom-the cause of
the United Nations. As a Member of the United Nations,
Botswana has never faltered in fulfilling its obligations
under the Charter, and has at all times adhered to the
decisions and resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. In the process, Botswana has made great
sacrifices. This Organization must commend the Government and people of Botswana. for their dedication to the
cause of freedom and human dignity even under extremely
difficult circumstances.

103. But the Organization need not be put in such a
situation of impotence. If its decisions are scrupulously
adhered to, that regime will be brought to its knees. The
liberation war now raging in Zimbabwe, thanks to the
heroic efforts and supreme sacrifice of the Zimbabwe
freedom fighters, will certainly guarantee the collapse of
the rbgime. However, the United Nations can and should
make an important contribution in reducing the suffering
and bloodshed. Let our new year resolution be that of
absolute fidelity to the goals of the Organization. Let those
who through their actions still give comfort and support to
the rebels, desist forthwith from doing so. In particular, we
urge those who still violate mandatory sanctions to put an
end to their gross violation of international law, as we at
the same time urge the Council to consider, in due time, the
extension of sanctions to cover all measures provided for
under Article 41 of the Charter.

100. But commendation alone is not enough. The Government of Botswana is confronting immediate problems. For
Botswana is not only faced with the growing problem of
refugees who have escaped from persecution in Zimbabwe.
It also has to deal with the refugee situation created
internally as a result of the acts of aggression and the
constant harassments perpetrated by the Smith forces along
the border between Botswana and Rhodesia. I am referring
to the hundreds of innocent Botswana civilians who have
been forced to leave their homes and property in the border
areas and who must be rehabilitated elsewhere in the
country. Such dislocations can cause havoc in any country.
But the damage is all the more significant in a small
developing country like Botswana, particularly when
account is taken of the fact that, in addition to the refugee
problem, the Government of Botswana has no alternative
but to divert some of its badly needed resources frdm
development to security purposes. My Government, therefore, fully supports the request made in this regard by the
Minister for External Affairs of Botswana in his address
before the Council.

104. These are essential measures in the cause of peace
and freedom for Zimbabwe. They are indispensable if we
are to arrest the deteriorating situation in southern Africa.
Those who simply hope for a negotiated settlement in
Zimbabwe, but do nothing in practical terms to create
conditions for the freedom and independence of Zimbabwe, are indulging in an exercise of self-delusion. The
Smith rdgime, by its actions, has more than demonstrated
its determination to cling to power for as long as possible.
The fact that some of the acts of aggression committed
against Botswana and Mozambique have been perpetrated
by the racist minority r6gime at the very time of the
Geneva negotiations, is a clear demonstration of the
intransigence and cunning determination of that r6gime.
The international community has a clear responsibility to
adopt such measures as will bring nearer the end of the
present misery in Zimbabwe.
105. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
United Republic of Tanzania for his kind words addressed
to my country and to me personally.

101. This is not the first time that the Security Council
has had to deal with Africa’s complaints concerning acts of
aggression committed by the racist minority regimes in
southern Africa against independent African States. Nor, I
am afraid, is it likely to be the last occasion, unless the

106. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, I should like, first
of all, to express the gratitude of my delegation for the
11

kind words with which you have welcomed India as a new
member of the Council. I also appreciate your references to
the good relations between our two countries, and may I
say that I sincerely reciprocate the sentiments and hopes
expressed by you.
107. I should also like to take this opportunity, if I may,
Mr. President, to welcome you to the United Nations. Your
debut is quite remarkable indeed, and may well be unprecedented, because your first duty in the United Nations and
the first words that you have uttered have been those of a
President of the Security Council rather than of a representative of the Soviet Union. We congratulate you, and I wish
you much personal success and happiness, both in the
service of your country and in the cause of peace, which we
all serve here in the Council.
108. My delegation would like to extend to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Waldheim, our congratulations on his election
to a second term of office. We are acutely aware of the
frustrations of his job as a catalyst in peace making and
peace keeping, but I fear that a troubled world needs him
and his services. We wish him much success in his efforts,
particularly in his forthcoming journey in search of a just
peace settlement in the Middle East.
109. E should also like to express my delegation’s appreciation of the very important contributions made by the
outgoing members of the Council, especially the valuable
work done by the representatives of the United Republic of
Tanzania and Guyana as members of the non-aligned group,
to which my country has the honour to belong.
110. India returns to the Security Council after three
years and we are deeply grateful to all those countries that
have made this possible. We are conscious of the trust
placed in us by them and we shall do our best to live up to
their expectations. My country’s attitude towards the
United Nations is well known and I need only recall briefly
the words of my Prime Minister, when she addressed the
General Assembly in 1968. She said:
“The United Nations is the trustee of the world’s peace
and represents the hopes of mankind . . . and the agencies
of the United Nations should, in all that they do, sustain
those hopes and promote the causes of peace.“3
Seven years earlier, in 1961, the father of the present Prime
Minister had also addressed the General Assembly4 and
expressed his belief in the search for areas of agreement and
co-operation and in enlargement upon them. My delegation
intends to be guided in its work by those hopes and beliefs:
and by its commitment to the Charter.
111. I turn now to the item before us, that is, the
complaint of Botswana. We listened carefully to the lucid
and restrained statement made yesterday by the Minister
for External Affairs of Botswana [1683rd meeting].
112. I was privileged to visit Botswana last year as a
member of a group of the Committee of 24. I came away
3 OfficiaI Records of the General AssembIy, Twenty-third Session,
Plenary Meetings, 1693rd meeting,
para.150.
4 Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1051st meeting.

from Botswana with the dominantimpressionof a country
hemmedin on all sidesby the forces of racismand white
supremacy. Botswana is virtually an oasis of legality
surrounded by a vast hostile desertof illegality and it is
therefore extremely vulnerable. Botswanais in fact more
than a front-line State; it is, rather, a State behind the
enemy lines of racism. Its situation and, indeed, that of
Lesotho entitle them both to specialconsideration and
assistance
from the United Nationsand especiallyfrom the
Security Council. There is no doubt that, asthe citadelsand
strongholds of racism come increasingly under attack,
Botswanawill be at the receivingend of further retaliation
and reprisals, and it is therefore the collective duty of the
Membersof the United Nationsto bolsterits economy and
buttressits security.
113. The incidents describedby the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana illustrate the easeand facility with
which the Smith regimein SouthernRhodesiacan carry out
attacks againstBotswana with impunity. Thoseattacks are,
without doubt, acts of aggression
againstBotswana. The
definition of aggressionadoptedby the GeneralAssembly
at its twenty-ninth sessionmakesit clear that aggressionis
the use of armed force by a State againstthe territorial
integrity of another State [resolution 3314(XXIX/.
For
that purpose, it does not matter whether or not the
aggressorState is internationally recognized.In the present
case,of course, the aggressoris not a State but an illegal
group occupying Southern Rhodesiaby force.
114. The acts of the Smith regimeagainstBotswanaare of
considerable gravity. They are apparently intended to
harassand destabilize Botswanabecauseit is obliged, on
humanitarian grounds, to grant asylumto refugeesfleeing
from racial repression. As the United Nations is against
racism, it should not only help the victims of racismbut
alsosupport all those Stateswhich grant asylumto refugees
from racism.
115. All the acts of the Smith regimeareillegal; indeed,its
very existence is so. And the mannerin which it cameinto
being is itself an act of aggression
againstthe people of
Southern Rhodesia,if not againstthe United Kingdom. It is
alsoa violation of every singleprovisionin Article 73 of the
Charter. Southern Rhodesiamay continue to be regarded
by us, de jure, asa British colony but, de facto, it is not.
Nevertheless,it is within the systemof international peace
and security and the Charter prescribes
how violations and,
indeed, violators of international peace-suchas the Smith
regime-should be dealt with.
116. In our opinion, the Security Councilshouldcondemn
the acts of the Smith regimeagainstBotswanaand demand
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Botswana. And if the Council doesnot intend, at present,
to act directly to neutralize the acts of aggression
of the
Smith regime,it is bound by the law of natural reasonto go
to the aid of Botswana to enableit to defend itself, by
giving it adequate material and financial assistance.My
delegationwill support any action designedto liquidate the
illegality that prevails in SouthernRhodesiaand to provide
the assistanceneeded by Botswanato repel the attacks of
the illegal Smith regime.

117. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
its regret that the vagaries of the polls will necessitate the
absence of Governor Scranton from our midst. We have
nothing but profound respect and admiration for his
contributions to the work of the United Nations. We wish
him well and hope that the wheel of destiny will bring him
back to the United Nations.
118. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of India for his kind words.
119. The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
120. Mr. PETRI6 (Yugoslavia): May I first of all express
satisfaction at the fact that our new colleague, the
Ambassador of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, His
Excellency Oleg Aleksandrovich Troyanovsky, has assumed
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. It is my privilege to welcome you, Mr, Sambassador, on behalf of the Yugoslav delegation, I am certain
that your experience, diplomatic skill and proved qualities
will contribute to enabling the Council, under your
guidance, to fulfil its tasks in the course of the current
month. I am confident that the friendly relations and
fruitful co-operation existing between our two delegations
will continue in the future also, as was the case during the
term of your predecessor, Ambassador Malik.
121. At the same time, I should like to pay a tribute to
Governor Scranton, who is leaving us soon and who has
known how to uphold the interests of the United States in
a manner that enabled us to conduct a dialogue on terms of
equality and in a spirit of mutual respect. We wish him all the
best and much personal success and happiness in the future.
122. I wish also to welcome the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Archibald Mogwe,
as the representative of a friendly country with which
Yugoslavia maintains fruitful and cordial relations.
123. The Security Council is meeting to consider the
complaint by Botswana regarding the attack on its territory
by the illegal racist rkgime of Ian Smith between 17 and 19
December last year. My delegation considers that this
attack, in a highly tense region and at an important
moment for the process of decolonization, endangers peace
and security, not only ln Africa but also more
widely.
124. The criminal action of Ian Smith’s regime against
peaceful Botswana illustrates clearly the aggressive nature
of that r6gime. This is the. latest in a series of dastardly
attacks against Mozambique and Botswana, for which that
r8gimecannot but be condemnedby the Security Council.

applied by all the Member States, that r6gimewould have
collapseda long time ago.
126. Despite the negotiationsat Genevaunder the chairmanship of our colleague, Ambassador Ivor Richard,
Permanent Representativeof the United Kingdom to the
United Nations, and despitethe efforts that the liberation
movements of Zimbabwe, the front-line States and the
whole of Africa are continuing to exert with a view to
achieving,through negotiations,majority rule in Zimbabwe,
Smith’s racist rigime, while paying lip serviceto negotiations, violates, by its aggressivemilitary actions, the
territorial integrity and sovereigntyof neighbouringAfrican
countries, killing innocent civilians and destroying the
materialgoodsof thesedevelopingcountries.
127. The criminal military actions against Mozambique
and Botswana, whereby Smith endeavoursto arrest the
irresistible processof liquidation of racist policies, are in
vain. They show that the days of this systemof slavery are
numberedand that the peoples’strugglewill finally leadto
the decolonization and liberation of Zimbabwe. The
Geneva Conference offers yet another opportunity to
achieve majority rule in Zimbabwe by peaceful means.By
threatening other independent African States, the racist
regime will only accelerate and strengthen the armed
struggleof the people,which neither Smith nor much more
powerful colonial Powers before him have been able to
crush.
128. The Conference of Non-Aligned Countries at
Colombo and the Summit Meeting of the Organization of
African Unity in Mauritius correctly assessed
the significanceof the struggle of the oppressedpeoplesof southern
Africa againstthe racist regimesof Smith and Vorster and,
in that sense,they addressed
an appealto the international
community to lend even greater assistance
and support to
the liberation movementsand neighbouringcountries, in
their fight for the liquidation of racism and apartheid in
southernAfrica.
129. ’ Yugoslavia maintains very friendly relations and
co-operation with Botswana. In spite of the difficult
si&tion in which that proud and independent African
country finds itself, almostencircled by racist rkgimes,it is
pursuinga peaceful and non-alignedpolicy, linking its fate
with the ending of colonialismand racismin Africa.
130. My country holds in high esteemthe Presidentof
Botswana, Sir SeretseKhama. who is pursuinga constructive and resolute policy. This is reflected in Botswana’s
remarkable activity within the movement of non-aligned
countriesand in the Organization of African Unity. In the
group of five front-line countries, Botswana plays a
significant role both with regard to the struggle against
colonialismand racismin southern Africa and with regard
to all constructive efforts aimed at achieving,by peaceful
means,the liberation of the peoples of southern Africa
from the colonial yoke andfrom racism.

125. The United Nationsand the international community
have beendealingwith, and fighting against,the aggressive
policy of the illegal minority regimeof Ian Smith for more 131. My delegation considersthat the Security Council
action
than 11 years. The economicand other sanctionsimposed shouldemphatically condemnIan Smith’saggressive
againstBotswana and adopt resolute measuresagainstthat
on that regimeby the Security Council constituted a very
racist r&ime. At the sametime, we feel that it is the duty
important action and, had those sanctions been strictly

of the United Nations anadof the international
community
8s a whole to lend effective assistance to Botswana to help
it overcome
all
the
CoIlSeclumces
of
pressures, threats,
armed actions and other difficulties to wllioh that African
country hasbeensubjectedby the racists.
132. The aggressive
action of Smith’s illegal regime against
Botswana points Once more to the iInportance
of the
transfer, as3 matter of ur6ency, of power to the people of
Zimbabweand the Chil~~~iOtl
of the racist system in that
country. That is in the interest Of Zimbabwe, of Africa and
of the world at large. Consequently, the Security Council
must act swiftly and energetically in this matter, so as to
makeit possibleto accelerate the transfer of power to the
people of Zimbabwe and to prevent similar actions by
Smith’s illegal r&gimein that part of Africa in the future.
We believe that the Council will prove equal to its
responsibilitiesand that it will fulfil the hopes placed in it.’
133. The PRESIDENT (interprefatiort
from RUSS&I~): I
thank the representiltivcof Yugoslavia for the kind congratulationshe extendedto me.
134. The next speaker is the representative of Sierra
Leone. I invite her to take a place at the Security Council
table andto make her stntenient.
135. Mrs. GBUJAMA {Sierra Leone): Mr. President, it is
with delight that I associate myself with those who have
extended congratulationsto you
in connexion
with your
assumptionof the high office of President of the Security
Council for the month of January.
My delegation is
extremely pleascdto see YOU guiding the deliberations of
this Council in its consideri\tioI~ of the very grave situation
affecting a State in southern Africa because your country,
Mr. President, has not failed to give active moral and
materialsupport to the clucstion of freedom and justice in
southern Africa. Your wide experience in diplomacy will
undoubtedly enableyou to guide our deliberations to a
conclusionthat will be most tneaningfui to Botswana, to
southernAfrica, to the continent of Africa as a who!? and
to world peaceandsecurity in general.
136. We seize this opportunity to pay a tribute also to
your predecessor,Ambassador Datcu of Romania, under
whosechairmanshipdecisions vital to the Organization’s
well-being were unanimously taken during the month of
December.
137. The subjectunder discussion is of serious concern t,o
my delegationbecauseit is one which affects the peace and
security of the sisterState of Botswana. Not long ago this
Council discussed
a si&Iar topic, namely the aggressionOf
South Africa againstthe territoriaI integrity of Zambia. It
seems as if it is fast becoming the order of the day for
minority regimesin southern Africa to violate the territorial
integrity andsovereigntyof independent States in that area,
for no reasonat all other than the demonstration by those
independent States of their commitment
to full and
unconditional independencein that part of Africa, in giving
support to the freedom fighters and refuge and assistanceto
victims of oppressionin the various occupied territories.
Both Zambia and Angola have been harassed by South

Africa, and both Mozambique and Botswana have been
attacked by Rhodesia on the pretext of attacking training
campsof freedom fighters. One cansee,therefore, that the
aggressionagainstBotswanais not an isolated incident but
part of a well-calculated plan to maintain the rule of white
minorities in southern Africa. Hencethis Councilmust not
lose another opportunity to grapplewith the root of this
problem.
138. We expressour gratitude to the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Archibald Mogwe,
who so eloquently and precisely presented a detailed
analysis of the problem facing his country. [1983rd
meeting]. The available facts which he revealed demonstrate naked acts of aggressionagainsta peace-lovingState,
a State which does not even have an army with v$ich to
fight back.
139, It is important for the Council to nbte that these
latest attacks were carried out while the Conferenceon
Zimbabwewasgoing on at Geneva,a fact that clearly shows
the insincerity of the Smith rCgimein it’s acceptanceof
majority rule. It demonstratesalsothat Rhodesiawill stop
at nothing to maintain the statusquo for aslong asit can.
The Smith rhgimeis so desperateand so scared,becauseit
seesthe inevitable birth of Zimbabwefast approaching,that
it resorts to feverish attacks, not on training campsbut on
refugee camps of unarmed men, women and cl~dren,
including mothers who have fled with their sucklingbabes
from oppressionin Rhodesia,on farmersand cattle-herders
and peace-timepolicemen who are citizens of neighbouring
States. The Rhodesian Government has, by law, given a
mandate to its forces, with specialcommandounits being
specifically trained to carry out missionsof sabotageand
engagein acts of aggressionagainst neighbouring States.
Becauseof Botswana’ssupport for the Zimbabwe freedom
fighters, it has become a victim of a war situation with
Rhodesiain that the Smith rCgimehas declaredthe whole
of the 400-mile border betweenRhodesiaand Botswana a
war zone.
140. A chronological account of the acts of aggression
committed by RhodesiaagainstBotswanahasalready been
given by the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana. It
will therefore suffice to stateonly a few points which are of
utmost concern to my delegation,The Minister stated that
there had been repeated violationsof Botswana’sterritorial
integrity and sovereignty since the accessionto independence of Botswana in 1966. This is therefore not Rhodesia’sfirst offence, but we areparticularly concernedby the
fact that incursions into Botswana by Rhodesia have
recently become more frequent and more serious. When
Rhodesiacontinues to harassBotswanaand even commits
cold-blooded acts of murder againstits citizens becauseof
Rhodesia’s supposed military supremacy, the situation
becomes a dangerous one and a threat to international
peace and security. Rhodesiahas indeed declared a war
zone along the border with Botswana.But we have heard
the Minister state that Botswana has always been a
peace-lovingState and is not in any way preparedfor war.
Botswanahasno army. Most important is the fact that the
development of a third world country -hasbeen adversely
affected in these difficult times by an unprovoked war
created by a rebel rbgime.It becomesnecessary,therefore,

for the Council to view the situation very seriously and to
give the necessary adequate financial assistance to
Botswana, which will enable that country to prevent a
recurrence of the present situation, to make its borders
secure and to maintain its development at the level
obtaining before the attacks. All necessary measures must
also be taken to prevent future acts of aggression by the
minority regimes in Rhodesia and South Africa against any
independent State in southern Africa.

147. The next speaker is the representative of Kenya.
Accordingly, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
148. Mr. KASINA (Kenya): Mr. President, I wish to thank
you and the other members of the Security Council for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council on a
matter that is extremely grave at this moment in southern
Africa. Before going any further, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council at a
time when it is seized of a grave matter concerning our
continent. I wish to thank you for the swift action that you
have taken to convene this meeting, as requested by the
Republic of Botswana with the support of the African
Group.

141. An act of aggression by a minority racist regime
against any independent African State is regarded by my
delegation as an act of aggression against the whole of
Africa-indeed,
against all freedom-loving peoples. My
Government vehemently condemns all such acts of aggression against a sister African State and it has unequivocally
provided moral support and given modest assistance to the
victims of such aggression in order to enable them to
maintain adequate resistance. In like manner, my Government will avail itself of any opportunity afforded by the
Council, or outside it, to provide material assistance within
our means in support of Botswana’s cause.

149. The issue before the Council today is a typical
example of aggression by the racist minority regime of
Smith against the neighbouring States. The racist rCgime of
Southern Rhodesia, which has oppressed and continues to
oppress the black people of Zimbabwe, is now taking its
aggression beyond its borders. We are all too familiar with
the numerous acts of aggression that have been committed
by the racist rigime of Smith against Zambia, Mozambique
and Angola.

142. In conclusion, my delegation would therefore call
upon this body to take a firm and unanimous decision,
consistent with the provisions of the Charter, strongly to
condemn all acts of suppression, repression and oppression
by minority racist regimes which violate the fundamental
rights and freedoms of the peoples of southern Africa, to
condemn the activities of all tBgimes which directly or
indirectly support and provide military assistance to the
illegal regime of Rhodesia, thus enabling it to perpetuate its
aggressive activities and defy with impunity the decisions
and resolutions of our Organization, and to take all
necessary steps for the provision of material and financial
support for Botswana, to enable that country to continue
its development projects, which have been interrupted as a
result of Rhodesia’s attacks.

1.50. We have heard the eloquent statement by the
Minister for External Affairs of the Republic of Botswana
[1983rd meeting/ in which he cited numerous acts of
aggression committed by the Southern Rhodesia r&me
against the people of the Republic of Botswana. Botswana’s
territorial integrity is being violated by the security forces
of Southern Rhodesia. As the Council has been informed
by the Foreign Minister of Botswana and also by newspaper
reports, those incidents have included murder, arson,
kidnapping and the destruction of property by Rhodesian
armed forces.
151. These latest acts of aggression by Southern Rhodesia
against Botswana leave us ifi no doubt that the racist regime
of I$odesia is interested not in peace but in a continuation
of its illegal rigime and the oppression of the majority in
that country. To achieve that goal, the racist regime has
tried to frighten, intimidate and even commit acts of
aggression against the neighbouring independent States.
Thus the people of Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana
have experienced frequent barbaric raids on the part of the
Smith r6gime. We commend the peoples and the Governments of those countries for the stand they have taken and
the courage they have shown in resisting intimidation by
‘the racist rkgime.

143. Botswana’s offence against Rhodesia has been its
unfailing support for the liberation struggle in southern
Africa. But we are confident that Botswana will continue
undaunted in rendering such support to the liberation
struggle, and no acts of blackmail and aggression by
Rhodesia against Botswana can stop the inevitable victory
of the Zimbabweans. My delegation pays a tribute to
President Seretse Khama for his personal commitment and
that of his Government and people to the cause of freedom.
144. My delegation seizes this opportunity solemnly to
reaffirm its belief in the inalienable rights of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination and independence in Rhodesia on the basis of majority rule.

152. We know too well why the racist regime of Smith has
embarked on those attacks against Botswana. The Republic
of Botswana has unequivocally declared its determination
to give political asylum to those who flee from oppression
in the minority-ruled States of southern Africa. The
harassment and intimidation by the Rhodesian rBgime is an
attempt to force Botswana to abandon that noble stand.
My country would like to pay a tribute to the people and
the Government of Botswana for the courage they have
shown in upholding this principle, despite such flagrant acts
of aggression by the Smith rCgime. It is the moral
responsibility of all Members of the United Nations to help

145. I thank all the members of the Security Council most
sincerely for acceding to my delegation’s request to be
allowed to participate in this important debate.
146. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): 1
thank the representative of Sierra Leone for her kind words
about my country and her congratulations to me. It was a
particular pleasure to hear them from her.
15

those people in southern Africa who are fleeing

from

this important body and to assureyou of my delegation’s
co-operation with your leadership.As I mentionedin our
recent consultations, I well rememberyour work at Camp
David, at the time of the famous“spirit of CampDavid”,
and the reputation you had then, and have now, of not
only being an assiduousand effective hard worker but an
outstanding linguist who not only speaksEnglish better
than many of the English but also speaksour American
vernacular better than we “warpers” of the English language.

oppression at the hands of the racist rkgimes.

153. The racist &imc, wl&h has no legal status anywhere is now realizing that its days are numbered. Because
of thi increased pressure from the llberatron movements
and because of international condemnatron, the regime has
become desperate, and its actions are .theref-ore desperate
and have grown more inhuman. At thrs crltroal stage, the
world community
must not allow that regime to continue
its oppression against the people of +Zifnbabwe and the
neighbouring
States. We believe that rt 1sttme fof the Smith
rddme to be forced to acknowledge that the Afrrcan people
of Zimbabwe wiB accept nothing short of majority rule in
Zimbabwe, The Smith clique should understand that it
cannot deceive the people of Zimbabwe in the current
constitutional talks on that country. Smith hea ahown his
unwillingness, even at this late hour, to accept the principle
of majority rule for the people of Zimbabwe. The tactics he
is using in the current constitutional negotiations are all
well known to US. His aim is to perpetuate the white
minority rdgime for as long as he can.

.159. Likewise, I should like to thank AmbassadorDafcu
for ,his outstanding leadershipduringhis presidencyof this
body in December. Though I have been in the Security
Council but a very short time, no one has given us more
effective leadershiptham AmbassadorDatcu and, asI have
told him personally, his supervisionof the recent.re&ction
of the Secretary-Generalwas truly remarkable;even in my
home constituency of Pennsylvania,suchan election would
probably have resulted in at least16 ballots.
160. It is a pleasureto welcomethe new membersofthd
Security Council-our friends from Canada,the Federal
Republic of Germany, India, Mauritius and Venezuela. We
know that they will add enormouslyto the effectivenessof
this body in its deliberations.

154. The people of Botswana, like their brothers
in
Zambia and Mozambique, have set an example to the
international community by refusing to bow to the
pressures from the racist regimes. In doing so, we know,
they have made enormous sacrifices. Botswana is being
challenged by Rhodesia for granting political asylum to
refugees coming from Rhodesia. Botswana, as we were
informed by its Minister for External Affairs, is determined
never to abandon this position, despite all the difficulties
which are consequences of that noble policy. In upholding
and defending this policy, Botswana is now confronted
with a state of war with Southern Rhodesia. In fact,
Rhodesia has declared a war zone along the border with
Botswana. The Security Council should treat this issue as a
threat to peace and act quickly, while there ia time. The
situation warrants the attention of the Council without any
further delay.

161. I cannot overlook commentingon those who have’
just left this body. AmbassadorsJackson,Vinci, Abe, Salim
and Rydbeck are all outstanding men and diplomats and
served both their countries and the Security Council itself
most meritoriously. If I may be forgiven one personal
comment about the change that has taken place. Having
been formerly seatednext to my friend, AmbassadorSalim,
and just one seat away from AmbassadorRichard, I notice
a profound difference now. That profusion of pacifying
perfumery perpetrated by their prestigious speciesof
pollution-otherwise known as their cigars-+&emsto have
I’,
disappeared.
‘162. Now, with regard to the matter immediately before
us. The real solution of this problem and of many other
problems that have arisen with regardto the relationships
of near neighboursto the presentillegalregimein Southern
Rhodesia is clearly a changeoverto majority rule in that
country assoonaspossibleand with aminimumof violence
and human suffering. The extremely important and very
difficult negotiations now going on to bring about just such
an objective have been undertaken by the United Kingdom
and are being led by our friend andcolleague,Ambassador
Richard. Those negotiations and the hoped-foroutcome of
majority rule in Southern Rhodesiaare a real test of the
countries and persons directly involved therein, and likewise a test of the United Nationsandof thoseof ushere in
the Security Council.

1%. In presenting his country’s case to the Seourity
Council, the Minister for External Affairs of Eotau(aa
made an appeal to the Council and to the international
communltY to provide financial assistance to Botswana
because of the economic dislocation caused by the state of
war between his country and Southern Rhodesia. We urge
that all necessary assistance be given to Botswana to enable
it to meet

those

acts

Of agpXSion

corm-&ted

by

the

Smith

clique. Wc urge the United Nations and the world oomm”nitY as a whole to come to the assistance of Botswana a0
that that CountV Cm overcome the challenges of imperialism and racism.
ls60

The PRESIIWT

(interpretation

from

Russjan):

I

thank the rePreSentativeof Kenya for hiskind words.

163. The United States Government has assured the
Government of the United Kingdomon severaloccasionsof
its complete support of the efforts the latter is undertaking
to bring about majority rule in Southern Rhodesia.We
believe that this effort is of paramount importance.
Accordingly, our delegation has beeninstructed to follow
and support the United Kingdom on the matter before us,
in view of its closereference to thoseefforts.

157. Mr. SCRANTON(United Statesof America): In
accordancewith the precedent of the President of the
United States,theseremarkswill be my last at the United
Nations-maybe,
1% First, Mr. President,I wish to congratulate you
whole-heartedlyon Your assumptionof the presidency of
16

:
’
i
j
;

164. I do not wish to end my comments right there, in the
event of any misunderstanding about our deep concern for
the issue immediately before us. I was tremendously
impressed by the presentation yesterday of the Minister for
External Affairs of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Archibald
Mogwe (1983rd nzeetilzgj, both by his exposition of the
issue and the facts and, especially, by his considered
objectivity. Both my Government and I, personally, feel
very strongly that Botswana and its concerns are concerns
of ours. The United States has in the past provided
developmental assistance to Botswana and will continue to
do so in the future. Our Government will continue to
pursue close relations with the people and Government of
Botswana and work for the kind of peaceful ,political
settlement in southern Africa that will truly ensure the
independence and integrity of Botswana.

167. Last, but by no means least, I wish to express deep
gratitude for the kind words directed to me by speakers
during the current debate. I leave this body in a few days
and, in doing so, I have a very warm feeling for it, for all of
you and for the United Nations.
168. The PRESIDENT (interpretutbz fronz Russiarz): I
thank the representative of the United States for his kind
words. Since he referred to my linguistic abilities, I have no
alternative but somehow to continue my statement in
English. [The speaker con tirzued in English.]
169. I want to say a few words addressed to Governor
Scranton, our distinguished colleague and the representative
of the United States. The members of the Security Council,
in spite of the comparatively short period of time during
which they have had an opportunity to work with him,
have come to value highly his personal qualities and
diplomatic abilities, which have enabled Governor Scranton
to co-operate actively in the work of the Security Council
and of the United Nations as a whole. This has found its
confirmation in the warm words which have been spoken
about Governor Scranton by the representatives of many
Member States. I can only express my regret that I did not
have the opportunity to sit at the same table with him for a
longer period of time. Perhaps we shall have a chance later
on to sit at the dinner table together. We sincerely wish
Governor and Mrs. Scranton health and happiness.

165. In June of the past year, I had the high privilege-and
I mean just that-of visiting Gaborone and meeting with
President Khama and some of the members of his Cabinet
to discuss some of the problems facing his country and
southern Africa generally. To say that I was deeply
impressed with his dedication to finding solutions for
Botswana’s internal problems and for the problems confronting southern Africa is to put it very mildly indeed. In
my judgement, he is an outstanding leader, a man of very
high principle and deep conviction, who has worked
untiringly for a peaceful multiracial society in his country
with a democratic government.

170. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
the hope that the relations between our two countries, the
Soviet Union and the United States, will develop further, in
the United Nations and elsewhere, for the good of peace
and the relaxation of international tension. We arc convinced that the consolidation of peace which would thus be
brought about would answer the interests of all countries.

166. Though of sizable territory, Botswana is small in
population. But, like many small countries with impressive
leadership and a dedicated people, it is very meaningful in
southern Africa, and if all of us were to give to that country
the due study that it richly deserves, it would be manifest
that it is likewise very meaningful for the whole world. I
look for the day soon when the bringing about of majority
rule in southern Rhodesia will terminate the constant
afflictions of those two countries and I reiterate the United
States Government’s dedication to that objective.

The meeting rose at 6.25 pm,

1

-

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNlTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
dBpositaires
clu mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes. New York ou GenPve.
KAIC

IIOJIY’INTh

CONSEGUIR

COMO

ZiSAAHMR

PUBLICACIONES

OPI’AHM

3A9NM

DE

LAS

OWhEAUHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAIKMFI

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas
estsn en venta en librerlas
y casas distribuidorns
en todns partes de1 mundo.
Consulta
a su librero o dirljase
a: Naciones
Unidas, SeccMn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

~.
Nations,

~~
New York

Price: $U.S, 2 ,OO (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

70009-April

1977-2,200
