S/PV.8623

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8623rd meeting

Thursday, 19 September 2019, 11.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-28656 (E)
*1928656*

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2019/756 and S/2019/757, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions. The Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolutions.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I speak on behalf of
the co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in
Syria — Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.
For the past few months, we have endeavoured
to draw the attention of the Security Council to the
plight of the civilians in Idlib. We have taken an
incremental approach to this matter, first, convening
closed consultations, followed by formal meetings,
and then attempts to issue press elements and a press
statement. However, it has proven impossible to reach
agreement in this Chamber on any public statement of
the Security Council.
All the while, the violence in Idlib has continued
over the past month and has led to the displacement
of more than half a million civilians and the deaths of
more than 1,000 people. It has caused extensive damage
to medical and educational facilities, as well as other
civilian infrastructure. We remain convinced that the
Council cannot stay silent and must act.
That is why we have submitted this humanitarian
draft resolution (S/2019/756) calling for a cessation
of hostilities. We negotiated the draft resolution in a
transparent manner and with a thorough process, and
engaged extensively and in good faith with all Council
members on the text. The outcome of those negotiations
is now before the Council.
2/16

19/09/2019

We believe that the draft resolution is balanced,
has a purely humanitarian focus and also acknowledges
that counter-terrorism measures must be taken in
accordance with international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution. The Council has a clear responsibility
to fulfil today. Many lives are at stake. We need to do
all we can to live up to our obligations.
We are well aware that there is another initiative on
the table, which was neither shared nor discussed with
the majority of Council members in advance. No round
of negotiations took place. That contravenes what is
agreed in paragraphs 80 and 81 of note 507 (S/2017/507),
which clearly states that the drafting of resolutions
should be carried out in an inclusive manner, enabling
the participation of all Council members, ensuring that
penholders can engage in timely consultations with
Council members, and allowing for the convening of at
least one round of informal consultations. Furthermore,
the focus of this other project is different and provides
an insufficient reflection of the complexity of the
situation we are faced with in Idlib today. On behalf of
the co-penholders, we urge all Council members to vote
in favour of our draft humanitarian resolution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Today, we will vote on the draft resolution
submitted by the humanitarian troika of Kuwait,
Germany and Belgium (S/2019/756). First, we should
define what goals have been set and which are actually
being pursued by its authors. Since the beginning of
the discussion, they have said that they have been
guided exclusively by humanitarian considerations, are
not pursuing hidden objectives of any kind and do not
wish to undermine the unity of the Security Council. If
that were true, we would support the draft text without
hesitation. However, regrettably, the content of the draft
resolution and the course of its preparation are clear
indications of the real objectives of our colleagues — to
save the international terrorists who are entrenched in
Idlib from their final defeat and present Russia and
Syria as being guilty of creating the situation in Idlib.
I would like to emphasize from the start and in
particular the fact that the authors of the draft text have
ignored the need to combat terrorists is the very factor
that does not allow us to support the draft resolution
before us. In that way, the humanitarian penholders
19-28656

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

have not taken into account the decisions that have
been coordinated in the Security Council. While
calling on us to comply with the Sochi memorandum
of understanding on Idlib of 17 September 2018, the
sponsors stubbornly refused to include in the draft
resolution the key provision that the ceasefire does not
cover terrorist groups.
We experienced déjà vu throughout the work on
the draft resolution. Time and again, the humanitarian
work of our colleagues coincides with another area
falling into the hands of and under the control of
terrorists, as occurred in eastern Ghouta and Aleppo
and is now occurring in Idlib. It is strange — although
not strange to us — that they did not demonstrate their
humanitarian ideals when Raqqa was being razed to
the ground, which we have addressed dozens of times
in the Council. Each time, they sing the same song.
As the Syrian Government forces move closer to the
strongholds of the terrorists, those terrorists suddenly
become the representatives of the Syrian opposition
fighting against the regime of Mr. Al-Assad.
The representative of the United Kingdom
convinced us recently that there were more infants
than terrorists in Idlib. Improbable and unsubstantiated
statistics about mass movements of people have emerged.
Where are those people going? Where will they live
afterwards? Various sources, including United Nations
sources, cite population statistics in Idlib that vary by
hundreds of thousands. Furthermore, we increasingly
hear that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham has allegedly become
an emancipated responsible structure, a kind of civilian
administration that is striving to allow people to live
peacefully in those areas. We also heard that said
about Al-Nusra, its predecessor. We should underscore
that both groups are listed by the Security Council as
terrorist organizations.
Lastly, another important point to note is the fact
that the humanitarian troika hastily introduced the
draft resolution and did everything to accelerate its
negotiation because of the reported mass murder of
civilians in Idlib. However, the situation is very different.
First, no large-scale operations have been or are being
conducted in Idlib. The province is observing a ceasefire
that is periodically undermined by terrorists. It is the
terrorists alone who violate the ceasefire. Secondly,
the reliability of the data fed to the mass media and
later used by our colleagues in the Security Council is
dubious. On Monday, 16 September, we gave a detailed
press conference at which we provided irrefutable data

S/PV. 8623

to demonstrate that the allegedly flagrant cases of air
strikes by Russia and Syria on civilian infrastructure in
Idlib were falsifications. The de-confliction mechanism
is being used for misinformation.
Today, the representative of the United States
began her statement by saying that, once again, we are
hearing about air strikes on hospitals. We, however,
did not hear Ms. Mueller make that claim. She noted
that the situation had changed since 31 August. With
regard to hospitals, I will provide two examples of that
issue, which we also mentioned at the press conference.
The Kafr Zeta hospital had allegedly been bombed but,
instead, we saw that the coordinates provided were for
a dugout shelter with a makeshift medical warehouse
four kilometres from the hospital itself. With regard
to the Maarat Al-Numan central hospital, which had
also allegedly been bombed, it was a police post 10
kilometres from the hospital itself, which was being
used as a weapons depot. The two hospitals had not
been damaged. The underground cell and the police
post had not been bombed either. That information had
been conveyed to us by the United Nations through the
de-confliction mechanism. The coordinates had been
provided to the Organization by reliable sources in Idlib
because, as is very well known, the United Nations is
not present on the ground in Idlib. It was only in July
that we received 12 sets of such false coordinates. We
showed photographs of before and after the alleged
bombings. The buildings and facilities, including
medical facilities, were untouched.
I understand that this situation is unpleasant and
uncomfortable for some members of the Council. It
is no coincidence that no Western media houses from
those present at my press conference had the courage to
provide any information on this matter. We agree that
there can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict,
but only a political one, as is the case with any conflict,
regardless of its location. However, to ease the process,
it might be a good idea to remove from Syria all foreign
armed groups whose presence in the country is illegal
if we wish to advance the political process.
We believe that we cannot be guided by lies and
misinformation when taking decisions in the Security
Council, even if such lies and misinformation are
beneficial to someone. It is unacceptable and immoral
to speculate about the suffering of civilians who are
hostages of the terrorists patronized by some of our
Western colleagues. Furthermore, we all understand
that a position taken by our Western colleagues that

19-286563/16

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

was not constructive from the outset and did not change
during the course of work on the draft text demonstrates
that their genuine objective is to force Russia to use its
veto on the Syrian issue.
From the start, we warned the sponsors that in
its current form their draft resolution was doomed to
failure. They knew it and they know it. Despite that
warning, they will put the draft resolution to the vote in
order to deliberately undermine the unity of the Council.
I would like to ask the authors of the draft resolution a
few questions. What do they want to achieve and what
will they achieve by doing that? What signal will they
send to the international community? Do they wish to
see us veto a draft resolution during our presidency
of the Security Council, just before the beginning of
the high-level week? Is that their contribution to the
establishment of the constitutional committee?
I call on delegations that genuinely wish to see a
solution to the situation in Syria and to depoliticize
humanitarian issues to vote together with us against the
draft resolution submitted by the humanitarian troika.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolutions before it. I shall first put to the vote
the draft resolution contained in document S/2019/756,
submitted by Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Equatorial Guinea
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, two against
and one abstention. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
4/16

19/09/2019

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I take the floor again
on behalf of the humanitarian co-penholders on
Syria — Kuwait, Belgium and Germany.
As caretakers of the humanitarian situation in
Idlib, we are deeply disappointed with the result of
the voting. Once again, the Security Council will
not be able to fulfil its duty to protect the lives of
3 million people, mainly women and children, in Idlib
governorate. How can we explain to them and the world
that, even on a purely humanitarian draft resolution,
no consensus could be reached? We the co-penholders
tried to achieve consensus among the members of the
Council. As an honest broker, we tried to reach out
and engage in a transparent and constructive manner.
We were aiming for a focused text, built around clear
humanitarian objectives, namely, the cessation of
hostilities, the protection of civilians and the alleviation
of human suffering. We received plenty of support for
our initiative and thank everyone who has supported
our efforts, especially those Council members that
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2019/756.
Other members did not support us, and we regret
that. Divisions are visible and ongoing. We tried hard in
recent days to bridge gaps, which revolved around the
issue of counter-terrorism. While we all stand firm in
our resolve to combat terrorism, we once again reiterate
our position that counter-terrorism operations do not
absolve parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law. That is what we tried to reflect in
the draft resolution we put forward. Unfortunately, that
was not acceptable to some.
On the other hand, we saw another initiative put
forward only yesterday without any transparent process.
It was neither shared nor negotiated beforehand. We
have seen such tactics in the past and regret their
use. They can never lead to the unity in the Council
that is so desperately needed. In terms of content, the
other initiative does not focus on the protection of
civilians or on human suffering and it does not prevent
a humanitarian catastrophe — core issues the Council
has to address.
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, in
her briefing this morning (see S/PV.8622), clearly
described what all this is about. She gave us numbers
and examples in a bid to measure a humanitarian
disaster. We promise today that we will not stop here.
The draft resolution was not adopted, but our work and
our responsibility do not end here. We will continue to
19-28656

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

use the instruments of the Council to address the most
urgent humanitarian issues in Idlib and other places
in Syria.
Let us join our efforts as we look ahead to the
renewal of the cross-border mechanism at the end of
the year. The mechanism is crucial for the survival of
millions of Syrians. Being united on this upcoming
issue is the least that we can do for the Syrian people,
who have suffered greatly for the past eight years.
Finally, there is no military solution to the crisis
in Syria. The only solution is a political one based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). We reiterate our strong support for
the efforts of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): Today’s
vote on draft resolution S/2019/756, on a humanitarian
ceasefire in Idlib, underscores the commitment of the
international community to bringing peace and stability
to north-west Syria. The Security Council must act to
end the violence, in particular against civilians in Syria,
and to enable humanitarian actors to provide assistance
to the most vulnerable populations. After nearly nine
years of conflict, the Syrian people deserve nothing
less. The United States is proud to have voted in favour
of the draft resolution, authored by Belgium, Germany
and Kuwait, in order to uphold our shared responsibility
to protect civilians whose lives are at stake. It is deeply
regrettable that the Council was not able to agree to a
ceasefire draft resolution that would have saved lives
in Idlib, especially as the Al-Assad regime and its
allies prepare to launch another offensive on the people
of Idlib.
It is also regrettable that the Council cannot agree
on a draft resolution that includes language that would
have held the Al-Assad regime and Russia responsible
for their vicious attacks against the Syrian people.
Let there be no mistake: for five months the Al-Assad
regime and its allies have engaged in attacks that have
devastated civilians, as well as civilian infrastructure,
such as schools, hospitals and water facilities. The
Al-Assad regime and Russia were responsible for 1,031
civilian deaths in Idlib province between 29 April
and 29 August, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
While they can continue to try to hide behind lies
and disinformation in the Council today, there is no
doubt that the regime and Russian forces responsible for
those attacks must be held accountable for their actions.

S/PV. 8623

The world knows that, despite their denials, Russian and
Syrian planes dominate the skies in north-west Syria,
and so far, the Russian Federation has failed to comply
with the United Nations de-confliction arrangements
intended to keep civilians and hospitals safe. The
Al-Assad regime and its allies tell the international
community that they are merely conducting counterterrorism operations. But we have seen this before. What
we are witnessing is not counter-terrorism but an excuse
to continue a violent military campaign against those
who refuse to accept the Al-Assad regime’s authority.
Russia’s veto of today’s draft resolution — Russia’s
thirteenth veto on Syria — represents yet another
attempt to absolve itself and the Al-Assad regime of
their culpability in the deaths of thousands of Syrian
men, women and children.
Russia has unequivocally proven, through its
actions in the Council and on the battlefield, that it
has no interest in protecting Syrian civilians in Idlib,
Aleppo, eastern Ghouta or Dara’a. Nor does it have
an interest in a lasting humanitarian ceasefire. We
are disappointed that China decided to be complicit
in those activities, joining Russia in its decision to
veto the draft resolution. What Russia cares about is
protecting Bashar Al-Assad, at the expense of the
lives and peaceful aspirations of the Syrian people.
We once again call on Russia to join the international
community in a process that will result in the definitive
stabilization of the country.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): The Dominican Republic voted in favour
of draft resolution S/2019/756, presented by Germany,
Belgium and Kuwait, the humanitarian co-penholders
on the Syrian Arab Republic. We acknowledge the
herculean efforts of the co-penholders to achieve unity
in the Security Council on a draft resolution that is
crucial for the lives of 3 million civilians in Idlib. That
is an aspiration shared by the Dominican Republic, and
for which we have worked actively.
Throughout the negotiation process, the Dominican
Republic remained convinced that the overriding need
to put an end to hostilities and protect the civilian
population in north-west Syria would prevail over
all other interests. Unfortunately, that is not what
happened. Today the Council was not up to the task
of meeting the expectations not only of the United
Nations but also those of a population beaten down by
years of conflict. It is impossible not to feel a sense of

19-286565/16

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

19/09/2019

failure and disappointment in the light of what we have
just witnessed.

There is little time left to prevent a catastrophic
worsening of the humanitarian situation.

However, it also compels us to think about how
we are tackling one of the most significant challenges
the Security Council has faced in recent times and its
impact in resolving this conflict — its polarization. The
political process that is finally moving in a direction that
seems acceptable to all parties deserves an unequivocal
response from the Security Council in the form of a
resolution that, first, establishes an unconditional
ceasefire and, secondly, recognizes the need to ensure
its impact on the ground through a monitoring and
accountability mechanism and to maintain as safe a
space as possible for humanitarian assistance to reach
populations in acute need.

As well as establishing an unequivocal ceasefire,
the text that Russia and China today vetoed set out
clearly the importance of adhering to international
legal obligations. A vetoed draft resolution does not
alter the fact that there can be no excuse for targeting
civilians. Indeed, the deliberate targeting of civilians is
a war crime.

We believe that this draft text managed to address
the concerns of all Council members in a balanced way
that respected the humanitarian spirit underpinning it.
We stress in particular the emphasis in the text we all
negotiated on the need for counter-terrorism measures
to be fully aligned with international humanitarian
and international law and for all parties to uphold
their obligations to protect civilian populations
and infrastructure.
The text we have been unable to adopt would have
established a ceasefire starting on 21 September. That
very day sees the beginning of a new school year in
the Syrian Arab Republic. Are the conditions in place
for the children Idlib can got to class without fear?
Are schools protected? Are teachers protected? Are
children protected?

By contrast, the Russian and Chinese text on
which we will vote next pretends that the humanitarian
situation in Idlib is caused solely by terrorists rather
than by the indiscriminate aerial bombardment that is
being carried out with scant regard for the principles
of distinction and proportionality. The exemption for
counter-terrorism activity, which Russia proposes,
seems designed to allow indiscriminate attacks to
continue. We have heard Russia’s explanation that
it is striking at terrorists, but, even if that were true,
it still has legal obligations, including to ensure the
proportionality of its actions.
I am afraid that over the years in Syria, we have
seen the reality of the Al-Assad regime’s military
action and that of its Russian ally, in particular its
use of air strikes. We all saw what happened after
the Security Council adopted resolution 2401 (2018)
and the deaths of civilians that followed. Russia’s and
China’s text would be of no service to those on the
ground who so desperately need the protection of the
international community.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): There were two
draft resolutions on the table today. The humanitarian
penholders’ draft resolution (S/2019/756) would have
protected civilians. The Russian and Chinese draft
resolution (S/2019/757) imperils them.

The fight against terrorism cannot be an excuse
for indiscriminate attacks or, worse, targeted attacks
on civilians. We cannot in good conscience support a
text that would allow this. We appeal to all Council
members to join us in voting against the Russian and
Chinese text.

We thank the humanitarian penholders, Belgium,
Germany and Kuwait, for their considerable efforts
to incorporate the views of all Council members in
drafting the text on which we have just voted. This was
a balanced text that reflected the dire situation in Idlib
and rightly called for a lasting ceasefire, the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure and humanitarian
access. The draft resolution was vitally needed. Since
the Council’s first emergency humanitarian session to
discuss Idlib on 10 May, we have focused repeatedly
on the indiscriminate violence against civilians there.
Civilian deaths and displacement continue to increase.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
shares the United Nations assessment of and concern
regarding the grave humanitarian impact on the civilian
population of the escalation of violence in north-west
Syria and therefore supports all initiatives that are
aimed to protect that population. We therefore thank
the delegations of Germany, Belgium and Kuwait, in
their capacity as co-penholders for humanitarian issues
in Syria, for their considerable efforts to achieve a
compromise acceptable to all members of the Council
on the content of the draft resolution (S/2019/756) put
to the vote this morning. We further appreciate the

6/16

19-28656

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

fact that the final text managed to satisfy many of the
concerns expressed by our delegation in the course of
negotiations, in which we participated constructively
with a view to achieving a truly effective cessation
of hostilities and provide genuine relief to the civilian
population suffering in Syria. We underscore,
moreover, the emphasis the draft placed on respect
for international humanitarian and human rights law
in all situations and circumstances, which includes, of
course, in the fight against terrorism.
Given all of the foregoing, we were able to vote
in favour of the draft. Peru therefore notes with
grave regret that the draft resolution submitted by
the co-penholders, which we viewed as balanced and
timely, could not be adopted.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need to ensure
that the Council devote grater effort to seeking unity
on such delicate matters so as to discharge the lofty
responsibilities that have been entrusted to us.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): As mentioned
in our statement to the Council earlier (see S/PV.8622),
my delegation continues to be very concerned about
the devastating human tragedy unfolding in Syria, in
particular the situation in and around Idlib. The highest
priority of the Council should be to stop the killing and
end the suffering of innocent civilians. There has to be
an immediate end to the violence and talks must begin
to reach a Syrian-led political transition reflecting the
will of the Syrian people.
South Africa condemns all human rights abuses,
in particular violations of the rights of vulnerable
groups such as women, children and ethnic minorities.
South Africa also condemns the lack of respect for
international humanitarian law.
We welcome the initiative taken to develop a
resolution to create an environment necessary to
provide those in need with much-needed humanitarian
support. However, my delegation is concerned at the
politicization of the humanitarian situation. We instead
believe that the Council should strictly focus on helping
those caught in the middle of this devastating conflict.
It is for this reason that South Africa voted in favour
of the co-penholders’ draft resolution (S/2019/756),
as we believe that the dire humanitarian situation on
the ground outweighs our concerns regarding some
elements of the text.

S/PV. 8623

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire decided to support the draft resolution
introduced by the co-penholders on humanitarian
issues in Syria (S/2019/756). We did so because, while
we firmly support the fight against terrorism, we are
nonetheless convinced that efforts in that regard must
take into full account norms established regarding
respect for international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law.
In our consistent calls for dialogue to resolve the
Syrian conflict, Côte d’Ivoire also underscores that
military operations, wherever and under whatsoever
circumstances conducted, must respect international
law and human rights. International norms make it
incumbent on the parties to a conflict to apply the
principles of distinction and proportionality and oblige
them to take necessary measures to protect civilians
in conflict.
While my country commends the importance that
the two draft resolutions (S/2019/756 and S/2019/757)
give to the humanitarian situation in the country, which
has suffered a number of years of deadly conflict, it
nevertheless condemns the deeply differing approaches
that they support. Unfortunately, the Council is once
again deeply divided. Côte d’Ivoire regrets that neither
draft resolution found unity among the Council because
the parties did not exhaust the opportunities for dialogue
needed in such circumstances.
We therefore reiterate our call for further dialogue
among Member States, which is the only way to achieve
a consensus draft text that takes into account the
concerns of all the parties concerned.
Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets that we did not reach an agreement today in
response to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Idlib.
We welcome the efforts of Germany, Belgium and
Kuwait to try to reach a balanced draft text that would
have merited our unanimous support.
While the situation in Idlib has continued to
deteriorate in recent months, I call on all of us to
demonstrate our responsibility and to work together
to find a compromise in the coming days. Those
who are directly involved have the responsibility to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law. The
situation in Idlib and, more generally, in Syria requires
that we have a constructive dialogue within this body.
It is in that spirit that France, for its part, remains ready
to work.

19-286567/16

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we reiterate our support for the statements
made by the representative of Germany on behalf of
the penholders at the first meeting this morning (see
S/PV.8622), as well as at this meeting.
We regret and express our disappointment that
the Council has failed to shoulder its responsibility.
History will undoubtedly remember this meeting and
the positions of all Security Council members on the
balanced humanitarian draft resolution S/2019/756, put
forward by the State of Kuwait, Germany and Belgium,
which sought to protect civilians in Idlib by calling for
a cessation of hostilities there so as to prevent further
suffering of its population. The people, including the
elderly, children and women of Idlib, will remember the
result of the voting on this draft resolution and will be
harsh in their judgment of the Security Council.
The failure of the Council to adopt a draft
resolution on a merely humanitarian issue is added to a
series of Council failures on the Syrian issue. For many
years, there has been no real and tangible progress
in the Council towards ending the suffering of the
Syrian people. The use of the veto today means that
the lives of millions of Syrians in north-west Syria will
continue to be jeopardized, as the United Nations has
repeatedly warned against the emergence of the worst
humanitarian situation of the twenty-first century if
military operations continue there.
The United Nations figures reflecting the scale
of the humanitarian suffering in Idlib were the main
reason for our action and the submission of the draft
resolution, as penholders, which was negotiated
transparently and inclusively with all members of the
Council for three weeks. A counter draft resolution
was submitted. It was not negotiated. It was put in blue
yesterday. That clearly demonstrates the sharp division
in the Council on the Syrian issue even though our
objective is purely humanitarian.
The military escalation in north-western Syria
since late April has led to the displacement of more than
half a million people and the killing of almost 1,000
civilians, half of whom are women and children. Health
care, educational and civilian facilities have been
heavily damaged. Such developments and violations of
international humanitarian law in Idlib did not prompt
the Council to take a unified and correct position. We
reiterate our condemnation of the targeting of civilians
by any party, as well as attacks on hospitals and
8/16

19/09/2019

health-care facilities. Those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law should be held accountable.
Terrorism is a serious scourge that threatens
international peace and security. We all agree on and
are decisive in combating terrorism wherever it occurs,
including in Idlib governorate. However, we reiterate
what has already been said by many Council members
and by the Secretary-General himself, namely, that
counter-terrorism operations do not exempt parties
from meeting their commitments under international
humanitarian law, including the commitment to
protecting civilians and civilian facilities, as well as the
principles of distinction, proportionality and caution.
In conclusion, I thank all Member States that
supported the efforts of the penholders and voted in
favour of the draft resolution. We reiterate that the
failure of the Council to adopt the draft resolution will
not deter or discourage us. We will pursue our efforts
to protect civilians and to improve the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
We once again stress that there is no military solution
to the crisis in Syria. The only solution is through a
political settlement that takes into consideration the
legitimate aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people and
upholds the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): We fully subscribe to the statement made
by the representative of Germany on behalf of the
three penholders. Let me to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.
First, we deeply regret the fact that certain
members of the Council were not able to support draft
resolution S/2019/ 756, on the humanitarian situation
in north-western Syria, which we proposed. From
the beginning, the three co-penholders worked in
a transparent and constructive manner. We did our
utmost to bring together the different positions up to
the last day of negotiations.
For us, the protection of human lives should be at
the heart of any resolution on Idlib. By not achieving
consensus on the draft text, whose purpose is purely
humanitarian, the Council has unfortunately failed the
people of Idlib.
19-28656

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Belgium remains resolutely determined to combat
terrorism. That is the collective will of the Council
but, for us, one thing is clear: counter-terrorism
operations do not absolve the parties to a conflict of
their obligations under international humanitarian
law. The parties must respect the norms applicable
to armed conflict and the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. Bombing civilians,
schools and hospitals has nothing to do with fighting
terrorism. To the contrary, all it does is to create fertile
ground for more terrorism.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted against draft resolution S/2019/756, on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which has been put to
the vote just now.
The Security Council closely follows the
humanitarian situation in Syria and has convened
meetings to that end many times. With regard to the
issue of Idlib, since 31 August the Russian and Syrian
Governments have been implementing the ceasefire in
Idlib, which in general has been upheld. The diplomatic
efforts of the relevant international stakeholders are
ongoing and the situation in Idlib is developing in a
positive direction. In that context, to steamroll a draft
resolution that has major controversies towards a vote is
clearly not constructive. Such a move will not achieve
the desired outcome.
Terrorist organizations continue to expand their
sphere of influence in the north-west region of Syria.
That is the source of the humanitarian issue in Idlib and
poses a grave risk to safety and security in the region.
The Council should be united in tackling jointly this
grave challenge. China has constructively participated
in a negotiation of the text and has proposed reasonable
revisions. However, unfortunately the draft resolution
that was just put to the vote did not touch upon the
essence of the issue or address China’s core concerns.
For that reason, China voted against the draft resolution.
The humanitarian situation in Syria is a very
complicated and sensitive issue. All categories of
humanitarian issues in Syria should be considered in
a comprehensive manner and addressed in a balanced
way, instead of only selectively focusing on certain
issues, much less politicizing a humanitarian issue.
The international community must fully respect
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria; fully listen to the views of the Syrian

S/PV. 8623

Government; and seek a comprehensive solution to the
Syrian issue by political means.
At the same time, we should pay close attention to
the post-war reconstruction of Syria and its economic
and social development and help the Syrian people live
peaceful, stable and happy lives.
China also attaches great importance and pays
close attention to the humanitarian situation in Syria.
For that reason, Russia and China are proposing an
alternative draft resolution (S/2019/757) that takes
into consideration humanitarian and counter-terrorism
issues in Syria in a comprehensive manner. The draft
includes a call for the observance of international law
in counter-terrorism efforts and to ensure humanitarian
access, and it reflects the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people. We hope that all Council members will
support this draft.
I must point out here that China firmly rejects the
groundless accusations made by the representatives
of the United Kingdom and the United States against
China. China has the right to make an independent
decision on how it votes, according to the rights and
wrongs of a situation and proceeding from the interests
of a certain people. No country has the right to make
wilful accusations such as this. I would also like to
point out that the current situation and suffering of the
Syrian people are precisely the result of the wrongful
conduct of some countries, and it is those countries that
should reflect on their behaviour.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We are submitting a draft resolution on Idlib
(S/2019/757) as part of the effort to rectify the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Unlike the other draft
resolution (S/2019/756) — I have already spoken about
our reason for vetoing it — our text is characterized
by an exclusively humanitarian approach and does not
contain any politicized or controversial passages. It is
aimed at maintaining the ceasefire that was entered
into on 31 August in order to continue the fight against
terrorism and to guarantee humanitarian access to Idlib.
The representative of the United States, when
speaking in explanation of vote on this draft, said
that the Council could not reach an agreement on the
ceasefire. But we do not need to, because the ceasefire
has been in effect in Idlib since 31 August. It is ironic

19-286569/16

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

that the first party to violate the ceasefire was the
United States Air Force, on the very day the ceasefire
entered into force, on 31 August.
We have also been urged to stop the brutal attacks
in Syria. I think the United States should direct such
appeals to itself. We remember well how the United
States Air Force fought terrorists in Iraq, Mosul and
other areas. We remember how it abided by international
humanitarian law there. Our Russian Aerospace Forces
do not raze whole cities to the ground; they only make
strikes against targets where terrorists are located
if there is reliable and verified intelligence, while
avoiding any attacks that might put the civilians at risk.
I certainly do not believe that any member of the
Security Council can speak against any of the points
in our draft resolution. Today we have an opportunity
to reach an agreement on the humanitarian situation
in Syria. But if there are such objections, then we and
the entire international community would be very
interested in hearing them.
We encourage colleagues to take the following into
account in voting on the Russian draft.
The armed-combat phase in the Syrian conflict has
essentially come to an end. Those who are genuinely
interested in a political settlement have joined in the
process. A lot of work has already been done, and
we must support this concerted effort, including by
the United Nations, instead of using humanitarian
issues to achieve political aims. The only ones who
are prolonging the war, with a view to destroying the
Syrian State and causing suffering to civilians, are the
terrorists. Attempts to shield them or present them as
deradicalized opposition are unacceptable.
In addition, as our draft stipulates, the international
community should take all of the measures necessary
to improve the humanitarian situation in Idlib. We
hope that a constructive approach will be taken by
the members of the Security Council in supporting
our draft.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/2019/757, submitted by China and the
Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
10/16

19/09/2019

In favour:
China, Russian Federation
Against:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, France, Germany,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Indonesia, South
Africa
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received two votes in favour, nine against
and four abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Poland voted against the
draft resolution contained in document S/2019/757.
Let me reiterate that it is both our moral and legal
obligation to provide immediate, full, safe and
unhindered access to humanitarian aid and to prevent
the human catastrophe unfolding in Idlib province. It
is equally important that all activities undertaken by
States aimed at countering terrorism be fully in line
with their obligations under international humanitarian
and human rights law. Countering terrorism must not
serve as a pretext for violations of human rights, nor
can there be any justification for the indiscriminate
targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Poland continues to strongly condemn any acts
of terror and remains deeply committed to the fight
against terrorism. The draft resolution proposed by the
Russian Federation and China is missing this important
point. Therefore, we were not in a position to support it.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation is taking the
floor following the voting on the two draft resolutions
(S/2019/756 and S/2019/757).
Indonesia has always called for unity within the
Security Council for the very urgent task of saving
people’s lives. That has always been our priority. We
share the message the Secretary-General delivered
yesterday during the press conference at the outset of
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly:
“Put people first. Their needs. Their aspirations. Their
rights.” That applies to the 3 million people in Idlib;
19-28656

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

they need to be protected. Their aspirations are to stay
safe, and their right is to live in peace.
In that regard, it is indeed regrettable that the
Council could not reach consensus. Indonesia voted
in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the
co-penholders, since the draft text contains critical
elements that are necessary to immediately enhance
our efforts in alleviating the suffering of the people in
Idlib governorate and prevent any further deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the area. The process
of negotiating the text was lengthy and complex, with
many divergences among the Council members. We
therefore thank the co-penholders for their hard work.
While we appreciate the efforts of Russia and China
in formulating the other draft resolution, we consider
that the potential of the text to address the real situation
on the ground has not been fully explored. The text was
introduced only yesterday, and the Council was not able
to comprehensively discuss it. We also believe that, at
this critical juncture, the humanitarian situation in Idlib
needs a resolution that fully captures the urgent need
to immediately alleviate the people’s pain, frustration
and suffering. Indonesia sincerely believes that we
need a breakthrough to save those people’s lives. As I
mentioned this morning, the Council needs to ensure
that it is not too late to respond to the humanitarian
situation in Idlib (see S/PV.8622).
It is imperative for the Council to agree to avoid
the politicization of any humanitarian situation. Only
through such a collective agreement will the Council
be able to effectively fulfil its mandate. My delegation
is very hopeful that the Council will continue exploring
ways to address that very important issue in unison.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We abstained in the voting on the two draft
resolutions S/2019/756 and S/2019/757 to demonstrate
our dissension over the lack of understanding and unity
within the Security Council on an issue that is so vital
and important as the Syrian conflict, in which many
human lives — including those of civilians, women,
children, pregnant women and people with special
needs — are being sacrificed. That division and lack
of understanding are all the worse given our efforts to
address a grave humanitarian situation, such as that
currently prevailing in Idlib.
We had hoped that the negotiations would broaden
and deepen on the draft resolutions presented by the
penholders in a spirit of flexibility and good will,

S/PV. 8623

taking into account, above all, the critical situation of
the civilian population in Syria, especially in Idlib, and
setting aside the geostrategic interests of countries with
major influence on the parties to the conflict. We had
hoped to repeat our experience of a few days ago with
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
when we were ready to give up the relevant draft
resolution for lost until, happily, we reached an
understanding and voted unanimously. Why can we not
do the same with the humanitarian situation in Syria
and the chemical weapons in that country?
That is why we decided to abstain in the voting on
both draft resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Once again, we find ourselves in the Security
Council, facing a surreal, absurd scene that the three
Western permanent members of the Council keep
repeating as they don the mantle of the humanitarian
penholders. Since the last briefing delivered by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(see S/PV.8593), they have engaged in drafting a
biased political draft resolution (S/2019/756) — not a
humanitarian one — under what they call a ceasefire in
north-west Syria.
It is now confirmed that the ink of that pen dries
up when it comes to the war crimes and crimes against
humanity that were committed and are still being
committed by what is called the international coalition,
led by the United States and its proxies from terrorist
organizations and affiliated illegitimate militias. The
ink of that pen also dries up when it comes to the illegal
foreign presence on the territories of my country, be they
United States, British, French or Turkish. It dries up,
too, when it comes to the repeated Israeli aggressions,
encouraged by the silence of the Council and the
immunity provided by some permanent members of
the Council to the practices of the Israeli-occupying
authorities for decades.
Some colleagues have said that combating terrorism
does not exempt us from respecting our relevant
commitments under international humanitarian law.
However, I have not heard those same colleagues say, for
example, that producing terrorism does not exempt one
from respecting commitments under international law
and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Both international law and the provisions of the Charter

19-2865611/16

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

take precedence over international humanitarian law,
or they are at least on equal footing. But if international
humanitarian law is to be respected, the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
must first be upheld.
History will remember this meeting because it was
sought to disrupt the Russian presidency, as was the
case on 8 October 2016 when the Russian Federation
presided over the Council (see S/PV.7785). Attempts
were made by some countries at that time to introduce
a draft resolution to disrupt the Russian presidency
of the Council. It is a case of history repeating itself,
because the objective of this meeting is not to provide
humanitarian help the Syrian people, but rather to
misuse this agenda item politically and embarrass the
Russian presidency.
As with previous such resolutions adopted by
the Council, the draft resolution (S/2019/757) before
us sets forth in the second preambular paragraph
that the Security Council reaffirms “full respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic”. However, the
practices of the penholders have proved the existence
of a significant gap between the principle and the
application of that particular paragraph. The penholders
of the humanitarian slogan have violated the sovereignty
of the Syrian Arab Republic, which is unacceptable.
How can the humanitarian penholders undertake
their duties and lead that movement, which is supposedly
underpinned by humanitarian drivers, at a time when
they have called for this meeting and presented a draft
resolution without genuine coordination or consultation
with the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic? It is
our delegation that is concerned, first and foremost,
in the discussion of such a draft resolution. How can
they disregard the fact that the Syrian Government has
agreed to a ceasefire in the de-escalation zone in Idlib,
starting on 31 August, while maintaining the right to
respond to any violation by terrorists, in line with the
Astana agreement, on establishing the de-escalation
zones, and the Sochi agreement?
We have the right to wonder why the co-penholders
fail in their draft resolution to make any reference
to excluding terrorist groups from the cessation of
hostilities. It is known to all that the Astana agreement
on establishing de-escalation zones does not include
the armed groups designated by the Security Council as
terrorist entities. The agreement provided for a number
12/16

19/09/2019

of pledges, including compelling the armed groups
that signed the Astana agreement to disengage from
terrorist organizations, especially Da’esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and other affiliated groups.
Both the Astana and Sochi agreements underlined
the right of the Government of Syria and its allies to
counter terrorist organizations, regardless of their
names. All of that is absent in the draft resolution
submitted by the humanitarian penholders. How can
those humanitarian penholders claim to be earnest
on the humanitarian situation in Syria when they fail
to include, in the draft resolution, the main reason
behind the humanitarian crisis in the country, which is
terrorism supported, unfortunately, by some countries
that are members of the Council? They also disregard
the fact that there are thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters in Syria.
By way of example, we note that the German
Federal Government announced recently, in response
to a parliamentary question submitted by Konstantin
Kuhle, an internal affairs expert of the German liberal
party, that the number of German foreign fighters in
Syria and Iraq amounts to 500 terrorists, of whom
approximately 360 are still fighting in the ranks
of terrorist organizations. These are the German
Government’s statistics, which underline what has been
confirmed — the presence of thousands of terrorists
from Europe. How can my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, ignore that important
information issued by his own Government? How can
he fail to make any reference of the need to counter the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and for their
countries and masters to withdraw them from Syria?
By the way, I would like to touch upon what my
colleague the representative of Kuwait said in the most
recent Council meeting on this topic (see S/PV.8609),
that the Salafist movement in Kuwait did not exist and
that the terrorist Al-Mteiri did not exist either. I have
here a poster distributed by the Salafist movement on
the streets of Kuwait. We can see pictures of Kuwaiti
nationals under the banner “Wage war — jihad in
Syria”. They are all Kuwaiti members of the Kuwaiti
Salafist movement. Here is another such poster.
I have also a copy of a New York Times article that
my colleague the representative of Kuwait also said did
not exist. It speaks of Mr. Al-Mteiri, a Sergeant in the
Kuwaiti army. It says,
19-28656

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

(spoke in English)
“Ghanim al-Mteiri gathers the funds and
transports them to Syria for the rebels fighting
President Bashar al-Assad. Mr. Mteiri — one of
dozens of Kuwaitis who openly raise money to arm
the opposition — has helped turn this tiny, oil-rich
Persian Gulf state into a virtual Western Union
outlet for Syria’s rebels, with the bulk of the funds
he collects going to a Syrian affiliate of Al Qaeda.
One Kuwait-based effort raised money to equip
12,000 rebel fighters for $2,500 each. ... Donors
earn ‘silver status’ by giving $175 for 50 sniper
bullets, or ‘gold status’ by giving twice as much for
eight mortar rounds.”
(spoke in Arabic)
The American Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace has produced two studies on
the Kuwaiti Salafist movement and on the support it
provides to terrorism in Syria and Iraq. The Kuwaiti
representative said that if I had any names or documents,
I should present them. Here I am, presenting those
documents. Anyone who wants a copy can get it from
the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations in New York.
How can the humanitarian penholders and sponsors
of the draft resolution claim that they are earnest about
the humanitarian situation when they have participated
from day one in the illegitimate so-called Global
Coalition against Da’esh, which has not combated
terrorism in any way? Instead, it has intentionally
and systematically destroyed Syrian infrastructure,
including bridges over the Euphrates River, grain
silos, schools, hospitals and safe villages. It has killed
thousands of civilians and has saved Da’esh terrorist
leaders in the two towns of Hajin and Baghouz in Deir
ez-Zor and in Raqqa city, in order to recycle them and
use them in other countries as the moderate terrorist
democratic opposition.
How can the humanitarian penholders claim that
they are earnest about humanitarian issues when the
draft resolution disregards the dangerous announcement
of the United States and Turkey about reaching an
agreement on establishing a so-called safe zone on
Syrian territories and starting joint patrols? Such an
agreement would complicate and prolong the crisis in
Syria by establishing new facts on the ground in areas
where the forces of those two occupying countries are
illegally deployed.

S/PV. 8623

How can the humanitarian penholders claim that
they are earnest about humanitarian issues when they
contribute to economic terrorism by imposing unilateral
coercive economic measures with grave catastrophic
consequences for Syrians? Such measures undermine
the ability of the Syrian Government to respond to the
people’s daily needs.
In conclusion, based on all this, my Government
would like to thank all countries that have voted against
the draft resolution, especially the Russian and Chinese
delegations, and those that abstained in the voting in
order to uphold the principles of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations — first
and foremost, respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Kuwait has asked for the floor to
make an additional statement.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to apologize to the Security Council
for asking for the floor at this late hour.
I did not really want to deviate from the topic under
discussion. However, the representative of the Syrian
delegation referred to Kuwait more than once, and
presented some documents that are merely newspaper
articles. The objective is clear — to attack Kuwait in an
attempt to characterize the crisis in Syria as a terrorist
crisis. The representative maintains that the main
reason for the crisis in Syria is terrorism. However, it
was not at all a terrorist crisis at the beginning.
The little clips that he presented, such as those
published in Kuwaiti newspapers or the article in
the New York Times, were all published in 2012 or
2013. He likes to refer to clippings of such articles
in every meeting. I wonder why my colleague the
Syrian representative enjoys repeating what has been
published in newspapers. I would have preferred him
to talk about Kuwait’s formal position so that we could
respond, instead of referring to announcements made
by individuals seven years ago and attempting, in one
way or another, to link the Kuwaiti Government with
terrorism. He claimed at last meeting (see S/PV.8609)
that he is attached to the Government of Kuwait more
than I am, but it is clear that the main objective is to
defame Kuwait.
I have already responded to the information on
terrorists and individuals he brought up from 2012

19-2865613/16

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

and 2013. I said that if Ambassador Ja’afari has any
proof or evidence, he should bring it forward. Why has
the Government of Syria not provided those documents,
if they were reliable, to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)? If such individuals
are terrorists and have committed gross violations,
such as genocide or crimes against humanity, he can
present the evidence to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, established
by the General Assembly. Such documents can always
be presented to that well-known Mechanism so that
everyone who has committed a crime in Syria can be
held accountable.
We are among those countries that adopted
General Assembly resolution 71/248, establishing the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
so as to ensure that people are held accountable for
crimes they commit in Syria. However, Syria rejected
that Mechanism that is now functional. It is therefore
up to Ambassador Ja’afari to present any evidence he
wants. As I said last time, I wish that he would refer to
United Nations documents and not just press cuttings
that are not wholly accurate. At times, the New York
Times publishes articles in favour of Syria, but in many
instances it publishes articles that are critical of the
Government of Syria. I do not want to address these
articles. We always rely on statements issued by the
United Nations and its various organs, in particular
concerning the gross violations committed in the various
governorates of Syria. Crimes have been documented
that have been confirmed by satellite images. There are
documents and witnesses; they cannot be challenged.
Therefore, we would like Ambassador Ja’afari to rely
on such documents. If there is an individual or group
of people who he thinks have committed crimes against
the people of Syria, he should present evidence to the
sanctions committee or to the Mechanism, which his
country voted against it.
Ambassador Ja’afari criticized the penholders at
length from the beginning of his statement. He claimed
that Israeli aggression was not under the spotlight. We
constantly condemn Israeli aggression against Syria and
underscore the security, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. When the United States
endorsed the sovereignty of Israel over the Golan, we
were among the countries that called for discussions
14/16

19/09/2019

here at the Security Council and for the adoption of
a draft resolution pertaining to this issue. However,
Syria opposed this request and did not want us to come
to the Security Council. Members did not want us to
come to the Security Council in order to present a draft
resolution that would have condemned the sovereignty
of Israel over the Golan.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, my country is deeply attached to
brotherly relations with Kuwait. Each time that I have
spoken about the presence of Kuwaiti terrorists in
Syria, I have very clearly stated that I was not targeting
the Government of Kuwait. However, we must draw
the Kuwaiti Government’s attention to the existence
of these terrorists and those who sponsor terrorism.
They are Kuwaiti citizens responsible for promoting
terrorism and raising funds to be sent to terrorists in
Syria. In other words, there are Kuwaiti citizens who
kill Syrians on Syrian territory. I do not understand
why my colleague the representative of Kuwait is so
sensitive when we talk about Kuwaiti terrorists in
Syria. There are Belgian terrorists, French terrorists,
British terrorists, Australian terrorists and so on.
There are terrorists from 100 different Members of this
international Organization in Syria, who are fighting
and killing Syrians.
Not one of those nationalities represented here has
been particularly moved. This information was included
in a formal report issued by a subsidiary committee of
the Security Council involved in counter-terrorism.
Why is there such excessive sensitivity when we say that
there are Kuwaiti terrorists fighting in Syria and killing
Syrians who belong to a Salafist movement? How can
we reject such remarks when the Carnegie Institute
has published two studies on the Salafist movement in
Kuwait? What I am holding up are not press cuttings but
posters that were distributed in Kuwait by a number of
individuals, some of whom are members of the Kuwaiti
Parliament. Those individuals have raised hundreds
of millions of dollars to send to Syria and support
terrorism. Many articles have been published by several
newspapers, including the New York Times. We have lot
of proofs and evidence that we have submitted to the
Security Council and to subsidiary bodies responsible
for the fight against terrorism.
19-28656

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We pair words with deeds. We have sent hundreds of
pieces of evidence to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
about the presence of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria.
They include Kuwaiti nationals. There are Syrian
terrorists fighting the Syrian Government. Should I
be sensitive if someone told me that there are Syrian
terrorists fighting against the Syrian Government
in Syria? No, because it is a fact. There are Syrian
terrorists and foreign terrorist fighters who are fighting
the Syrian Government on behalf of their outside
users. We are very transparent. We are not fabricating
stories. Everybody in the Council knows what we are
talking about. Reports have been published by the
Council on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters in
Syria. Four or five years ago, the Council denied that
there were foreign terrorist fighters in Syria. Today,
the Council has moved from total rejection to complete
acknowledgement of the fact that there are foreign
terrorists in Syria.
Many members are simply competing with us
and with our allies in the fight against this foreign
terrorism. They are liars and hypocrites. We should not
be sensitive when we speak about our pain. Hundreds
of thousands of Syrians have been killed by terrorists.
Terrorists have destroyed our country’s infrastructure
as a result of foreign interference. I do not want a
draft resolution. We have 22 resolutions that must be
implemented. Do we really need any more resolutions?
We have 12 resolutions aimed at addressing terrorism.
Let us implement them. Let us implement those 12
Security Council anti-terrorism resolutions. That will
end the problem. But if we say something and then
behave in an entirely contradictory manner, that is the
height of hypocrisy.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Kuwait has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize once again for taking the floor.
I shall begin where the Syrian representative
ended, asking the Security Council to implement its
own resolutions on counter-terrorism. I, in turn, call on
the Syrian authorities to implement the resolutions of
the Council on chemical weapons and political affairs,
foremost among which is resolution 2254 (2015). That
is the official position of Kuwait in public meetings of
the Council. He knows Kuwait’s official position very
well. We want a political solution in Syria — one that

S/PV. 8623

is based on Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). I do not think that
this position should bother our brothers in Syria.
Another position concerns the fight against
terrorism, which does not exempt any party from its
responsibility to respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. That is our
position and we always reiterate it. We are consistent
in our position with those of the League of Arab States
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, as well as
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Concerning what the Syrian representative said
about the existence of Kuwaiti terrorists, he always
refers to documents with the names of Kuwaiti citizens
who are fighting in Syria. We are aware that there are
foreign fighters in Syria. That is why Kuwait and a
group of States have sponsored a General Assembly
resolution on human rights in Syria, the text of which
demands the exit of foreign fighters, condemns them
and prohibits their presence in Syria to fight for any
party. We know also that certain militias are fighting
alongside the Syrian Government. Some of the militias
in the region are considered by many countries around
the world to be terrorist militias. There are nationals of
the same country fighting on both sides. That is why we
have presented a draft resolution demanding the exit of
all foreign forces.
The reason I am taking the floor is that the
representative of Syria cites numbers and gets his
information from the press, claiming that a sergeant,
as stated by the New York Times, raised $400 million.
That is in addition to an earlier claim that an individual
managed to raise billions of dollars and sent weapons.
That is beyond reasoning. When there is evidence, we
take action against them. We reject the very idea that
individuals have links to terrorist groups.
At the beginning of the crisis in Syria, no one had
heard anything about Daesh or the Al-Nusra Front.
At the time, the international community and League
of Arab States adopted resolutions in the interest and
support of the Syrian people. Then resolutions were
adopted to suspend the membership of Syria in the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. Its membership is still suspended to date.
The President (spoke in Russian): While I respect
the right of delegations to make additional statements,

19-2865615/16

S/PV.8623

The situation in the Middle East

and I will give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, I feel that our discussion has
become somewhat stuck and that it is time to end it. I
ask members to abide by this decision and be brief.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor for a third time,
I will not be long.
The last thing I want is any personal sparring
between my colleague the Ambassador of Kuwait and
myself. I look after the interests of my people. What I
am saying is directed to him and to all present here. We
are no longer a member of the League of Arab States
since it came to the Council in an attempt to pit it against
us and militarize the situation in Syria. Therefore, my
colleague the Ambassador of Kuwait is wrong to cite the
League of Arab States as a credible reference. We are a
member neither of the League of Arab States nor of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Therefore, to us
those two organizations are not credible pertaining to
any political position that is binding for the Government
of my country.
We do not get information only from the press.
We have a responsible Government that has robust
intelligence service and institutions. We also have tens
of thousands of documents that we have obtained from
terrorist hideouts, documents written by terrorists,
containing vast amounts of information demonstrating
that certain Gulf parties are complicit in sponsoring
terrorism in Syria. This is a proven fact. We have sent
the Council hundreds of letters containing names,
addresses, accusations and places. We still have a lot
more information that will be revealed in due time.
All Council missions that visit us and are involved

16/16

19/09/2019

in counter-terrorism are stunned when they receive
information from Damascus. Members should ask
the head of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for the outcome of his latest visit
to Damascus. We do not rely on newspaper articles
only; we have proven and established information and
confessions, a great deal of which has been sent to the
Security Council.
Maintaining the error is worse than the error itself.
Let us stop doing that. Support is being provided to
terrorism in Syria and Iraq. Did Daesh and the Al-Nusra
Front, this human garbage, appear out of thin air? Who
sponsored those terrorists and issued them visas? Who
allowed them to move across international capitals?
Who gave $2,500 to each terrorist in order to work as
a sniper and kill Syrians? Who trained them? How are
they being redeployed from Idlib to Nigeria, Algeria,
Afghanistan and Yemen? We are asking all these
questions to professional diplomats, not to amateurs. It
is a big issue.
What we are suffering today will hit others tomorrow
or the day after tomorrow. If Council members are
negligent about fighting terrorism in Syria, terrorism
will beset them all. Monsters have come to us from
Europe, Arab States and Central Asia. They are humanshaped monsters. They must be returned to their homes
if international humanitarian law is to be enforced. Let
the monsters return to the countries and capitals they
came from. We do not want them. We have the right to
fight them until the very last among them. It is a matter
of sovereignty under international law.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

19-28656
