United Nations

S/PV.3607

Security Council

Provisional

Fiftieth Year

3607th Meeting
Friday, 15 December 1995, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Martinsen
Mr. Legwaila
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Rovensky
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Eitel
Mr. Martínez Blanco
Mr. Wibisono
Mr. Fulci
Mr. Ayewah
Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Mr. Bakuramutsa
Sir John Weston
Mrs. Albright

Agenda
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1026 (1995) (S/1995/1031)

95-87051 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The meeting was called to order at 5.30 p.m.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1026 (1995)
(S/1995/1031)
The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Canada, Croatia, Egypt, Japan, Malaysia, Norway, Spain,
Turkey and Ukraine in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misić (Bosnia
and Herzegovina) and Mr. Nobilo (Croatia) took seats
at the Council table; Mr. Valle (Brazil), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Owada (Japan),
Mr. Yoogalingan (Malaysia), Mr. Biørn Lian
(Norway), Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo (Spain), Mr. Celem
(Turkey) and Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I have
received a request dated 15 December 1995 from
Mr. Vladislav Jovanovic to address the Council. With the
consent of the Council, I would propose to invite him to
address the Council in the course of the discussion of the
item before it.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovic took
a seat at the Council table.
The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in

2

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1026 (1995), document S/1995/1031. Members
of the Council have before them document S/1995/1033,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by
Argentina, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1995/999, letter dated 29 November 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary- General;
S/1995/1021, letter dated 7 December 1995 from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/1995/1029, letter dated 11 December 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/1995/1034,
letter dated 14 December 1995 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
In view of the exceptional importance of the entry
into force as soon as possible of the draft resolution under
consideration today, members of the Council agreed in
the course of prior consultations on the following
procedure for the meeting: First, representatives of the
three countries whose Presidents signed in Paris the Peace
Agreements on Bosnia and Herzegovina will be invited to
speak; the Council will then proceed to the voting; upon
the conclusion of the voting, the representatives of those
countries that have expressed the wish to speak in the
course of the discussion of the agenda item will be called
on to speak.
Taking into account the fact that the content of this
draft resolution has been the subject of fairly detailed
discussion, in particular in the briefing given a short while
ago by the President of the Security Council for the
non-members of the Security Council, and also in the
light of the urgent need to which I have already referred
to ensure its immediate entry into force, members of the
Security Council express the hope that Member States
concerned will show understanding of this proposed
procedure.

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3607th meeting
15 December 1995

The first speaker is the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on whom I now call.

important, partnership in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement.

Mr. Misic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. The task
before you is challenging and I recognize the able manner
in which you have led the deliberations of this body so far.

With the Peace Agreement initialled in Dayton on 21
November and signed yesterday in Paris, one of the most
savage aggressions against a Member State may have
come to an end and the restoration of the culture of peace
may be under way. In this regard, the international
community must make sure that any further economic or
other assistance be tailored in such a way as to promote
peace, democracy and human rights for all.

Allow me also to extend my sincere congratulations to
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman, who presided over the
Council last month. His leadership was outstanding.
Today, the Council will decide upon a comprehensive
resolution on the various aspects of the implementation of
the Peace Agreement reached in Dayton and signed in Paris
yesterday. Allow me to express our appreciation to all the
members of the Contact Group for their tireless efforts
towards a peace agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
special gratitude goes to President Clinton, his
Administration, the American people and the United States
Congress, and to the French people, President Chirac and
the French Government for their recent hosting of the peace
talks in Dayton and yesterday’s signing ceremony in Paris.
As we move on, ushering the new mission for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement into my country —
for too long a victim of aggression — I note with
appreciation the overall efforts of the United Nations Peace
Forces to help create the conditions for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to provide protection for various humanitarian actions,
which has often placed many of them in perilous situations.
I also recognize the role that the United Nations has played
in the promotion of human rights, though in some
instances, regrettably, as has been the case in parts of my
country under Serb control, it had little effect.
I would also like to take a moment to remember all
those committed and devoted peace-keepers and aid
workers who have spent some of the last three-and-a-half
years of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina trying to alleviate
the suffering of the innocent civilians. In particular, we
remember all those peace-keepers and humanitarian workers
who have given their lives in the performance of their
noble duties in my country. Their work and commitment
will always be remembered with solemn gratitude, but also
with sadness for their loss, by the people and the
Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a host country to the Implementation Force, we
pledge our unwavering support, cooperation and, more

This Peace Agreement may have many faults now.
Primarily, it can hardly be seen as a perfect or just one.
However, we believe that it is more just than the
continuation of war and that, in the long run, it can work
for all people in my country and against notorious war
criminals and the crimes they have committed. We tend
to believe that, in the course of time, this peace will
mature and become just and that, through measures
ensuring the return of refugees and guaranteeing human
rights for all, the logic of peace, tolerance and coexistence
shall gradually replace the logic of division along ethnic
and religious lines, even on the side and in the minds of
those who have pursued it for too long. They shall have
to learn that the effects of crimes must be reversed and
that they will have to abide by law and by the standards
of civilized society, since that will be the only way to
final peace.
However, they will also have to accept the fact that
there will be no refuge from justice, since absolution from
the crimes committed has never been, and will never be,
a part of a peace deal. In this regard, the commitment to
the pursuit of justice through the international war crimes
Tribunal must be unwavering on our part and on the part
of all members of the international community. Without
justice, there shall be no reconciliation. Without
reconciliation, this peace may not endure.
As for us, we will not seek revenge. We have
learned, despite painful concessions for peace, to define
our victory in the lives that we can save and in the
opportunity to rebuild and reinstate, throughout our
country, democracy, the highest standards of human
rights, safety and security for all our citizens, and at least
a minimum of conditions necessary for a decent life.
In this context, I should like once again to stress the
reassurances of my Government to the Serb population
that will come under the control of the Government of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Federation, emphasizing that we

3

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3607th meeting
15 December 1995

have always believed that a multi-ethnic Bosnia can be
preserved only with Bosniacs, Croats, Serbs and others
living together in equality, tolerance and respect for all.

The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the kind
words he addressed to me.

In the coming days, we will have to exercise
enormous patience, sensitivity and forgiveness. But above
all, we are committed to furthering existing democratic
institutions and establishing new ones in order to restore the
rule of law and order in every part of our country, which
will guarantee safety, justice and respect for all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of their ethnic or
religious background.

The next speaker is the representative of Croatia, on
whom I call.

Restoration of mutual confidence will be possible if
Bosnian Serb authorities do the same in the territories that
will be under their control at the beginning of the process
of peace and normalization in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This will be possible if those who have committed war
crimes are brought to justice and are prevented from
playing any future political role. Justice must not be
sacrificed, as such a sacrifice would only threaten to
destroy this whole peace project.
Not a single part of this peace package may be
undermined, abandoned or deformed in its implementation,
as that would shake confidence in the wholesomeness of the
good intentions of the international community, a
confidence which, after years of disappointment, has begun
to return.
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its people have the
courage for peace. Our ultimate goal is an undivided Bosnia
and Herzegovina, with democracy and human rights fully
restored throughout the country and with prosperity for all.
We do not want to build ethnic divisions or walls in our
country. We have a long tradition of tolerance and of a
common and harmonious life among diverse communities.
Sarajevo, as a united and undivided capital and as an open
city for all its citizens, shall again be not only a symbol of
the ethnic, religious and cultural diversity and richness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but a new Babylon and the
birthplace of new international hope and solidarity.
We have endured horrendous suffering during this
long aggression, and we hope we shall even better endure
the challenges of peace.
In conclusion, I would like remember and pay respect
to all those Bosniacs, Croats and Serbs for whom the
promise of peace came too late.

4

Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): At the outset, I should like to
congratulate the Russian Federation on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to assure you, Sir, of my delegation’s full cooperation on
the two other important regional issues that will come
before the Council next week.
Likewise, I should like to commend the delegation
of Oman for the able way in which it led the work of the
Council last month.
My delegation welcomes the Security Council’s
prompt consideration of and action upon the present draft
resolution. This timely effort is another demonstration of
the international community’s firm and resolute
commitment to finally rescue Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its people from four years of aggression, genocide
and suffering.
History often tells us that this century began in 1914,
with the tragic events in Sarajevo. The action by the
Security Council today, to establish a multinational
implementation force to police a final peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, will show that the Council, in effect,
has turned the closing page on the twentieth century. The
ending of what we hope is the last European war has
yielded not a just peace, but a fair peace based on a
balance of power and the reality of scarce resources. A
just peace remains attainable, however. It can come about
only with the full implementation of all aspects of the
Peace Agreement.
It was four years ago, on 1 October, that the first
Bosnian-Herzegovinian village, Ravno, was “ethnically
cleansed” by units of the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA)
and irregulars that entered Bosnia and Herzegovina from
Montenegro. A few months later, at Kupres, the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina took up arms for the first time
to defend themselves in an organized way from another
long column of advancing JNA tanks. The defenders of
Kupres, like the innocent victims of Ravno, paid a heavy
price. What followed thereafter in Sarajevo and elsewhere
in Bosnia, as we all know, was much worse.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
However, what made it all somewhat less devastating,
if that seems possible, was the people themselves — such
as the people of Kupres, who founded the Croatian Defence
Council (HVO), which was the first institution to defend
Bosnia and Herzegovina and was the first reason why
Bosnia and Herzegovina was able to survive; such as the
people of Sarajevo, who stood up bravely and relentlessly
to defend the principles and ideals that today’s civilization
holds dear and irreplaceable. They gave Bosnia the vitality
and spirit to fight the ills imbedded in ideologies of the
past, ideologies that were intent on destroying it and two of
its peoples.
To this we can add the people who came to Bosnia
and Herzegovina from all corners of the world. The
political leaders, the peace-keepers, the journalists and the
humanitarian workers: all of them helped Bosnia — some
more, some less, but nevertheless, they helped all the same.
My delegation, therefore, would like to note with emphasis
paragraph 35 of draft resolution S/1995/1033, which
recognizes the good will and sacrifices of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
No matter how difficult and tragic the past four years
have been, the peace that was reached in Dayton on
22 November and signed in Paris yesterday will move
Bosnia and the whole region forward. Many injustices are
yet to be remedied, but we are confident that they will be.
The momentum of peace that has carried us through since
early autumn gives us hope and confidence. The timely
deployment of the multinational Implementation Force
(IFOR), which will be authorized by the present draft
resolution, will continue this momentum.
The momentum of peace, however, cannot stop there.
The economic and electoral aspects of the Peace Agreement
must be implemented with the same commitment and
vigour. IFOR alone cannot secure a lasting and just peace
in Bosnia. To recall the words of my President spoken at
Paris on Wednesday,
“All of us participating in this historic act face
the responsibility not to allow the peace efforts that
have been achieved with such difficulty to fail”.
We regret that the agreement on normalization of
relations between Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), including mutual
recognition, was not signed in Paris. It has always been
Croatia’s position that unconditional recognition is a
prerequisite for the equitable resolution of all outstanding
issues between any two sovereign States.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Bearing in mind that the present draft resolution is
extensive in its content, my delegation would like to
emphasize just one paragraph that is of particular
importance to my Government. Paragraph 8 recognizes
the right of all Bosnian refugees and displaced persons to
return to their homes of origin in safety and calls on the
United Nations to play a leading role in their repatriation.
My Government, as members may well know, is
greatly burdened by the costs of the care of about
400,000 refugees and displaced persons now in Croatia,
costs that are now approaching $2 billion. But we are
even more concerned about the welfare of the close to
320,000 Bosnian Croat refugees and displaced persons
who are now living throughout Europe. This number
represents almost one half of the whole Bosnian Croat
community. They must be provided with an opportunity
to return to their homes or must be compensated for their
property fairly and in a timely manner. We, of course,
would prefer the former. The Bosnian Croat community,
but also Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole, would be
significantly weakened politically if the majority of them
did not return to their homes.
The present situation may allow the earliest
repatriation to those Bosnian Croat refugees and displaced
persons whose homes of origin are on Federation
territory. Their number is by no means small. It may be
as high as 200,000. The viability of the Federation and of
the multiethnic fabric of Bosnia rests primarily upon the
ability of this group of Croats to return home before the
elections planned for next autumn. This Bosnian Croat
community, which has often weathered severe
international criticism — some of which may have been
warranted — also deserves enormous praise for its
defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its struggle for
national rights and autonomy was wholly justified in view
of the persecutions and depopulation it has suffered
throughout the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me conclude by briefly presenting the position
of my Government on the 12 December report of the
Secretary-General concerning the implementation of
another Dayton-related accord, the Basic Agreement on
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, or the
occupied Vukovar region of Croatia. Croatia is concerned
that the options outlined in the report put counterproductive emphasis on region-external risks and not
enough emphasis on the most important element of the
Agreement, namely, rapid demilitarization.

5

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The Croatian Government cannot accept an attempt to
build a new and improved safe area in the occupied
Vukovar region, nor should the Security Council. This
approach would achieve nothing more than to preserve the
status quo. This is not in the interest of the parties nor of
the international community. Therefore, I should like to use
this opportunity to state for the record that the proposals
contained in the Secretary-General’s report of 13 December
regarding the deployment of a large international force to
Croatia is unacceptable to my Government.
Croatia is still of the view that a force of less than
5,000 is satisfactory for implementation of the Basic
Agreement. The size of the force that is at present in the
Vukovar region may even be adequate. But if the Council
should decide to increase the size of that force, its numbers
can again be reduced immediately following the first month
of the implementation period. In fact, the military aspect of
the new implementation force can be drawn down
completely after the 30-day demilitarization period ends.
The civilian aspect, meanwhile, can be strengthened.
The demilitarization period should begin as soon as
possible, and therefore we call on the members of the
Council to consider and decide on this issue next week, and
certainly before 25 December. We believe that any delay in
addressing the implementation of the Basic Agreement
would minimize the possibility of its success. Croatia,
therefore, cannot, under any circumstance, accept a new
force that would take more than a month to deploy. The
momentum for peace that is evident in implementing the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia should be emulated and utilized
to secure peace in Croatia as well. This important linkage
between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina is also noted
in the 13 December report of the Secretary-General, which
notes the threat that:
“failure to implement one would present to
implementation of the other”. (S/1995/1031, para. 46)
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Croatia for his statement on the item
on the Council’s agenda, as well as for his remarks on the
item to be considered next week. I also thank him for his
kind words addressed to me.
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I now call upon Mr. Vladislav Jovanovic.
Mr. Jovanovic: First of all, I should like to express
my satisfaction at seeing you, Ambassador Lavrov,
presiding over the Security Council. Knowing your high

6

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
professionalism, diplomatic skill and integrity, I have no
doubt that you will discharge your duties in an exemplary
fashion.
I should also like to extend my appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Oman,
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby, for the objective and
professional manner in which he presided over the
Council during the month of November.
Yesterday in Paris the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia signed the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, fully convinced that it establishes the
equality of the constituent peoples of that country —
Muslims, Serbs and Croats — and of its two entities, the
Republic of Srpska and the Muslim-Croat Federation,
thereby creating the conditions for a long-sought, lasting
and stable peace.
Following the signing of the Peace Agreement at
Paris, which officially put an end to the civil war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the successful conclusion of
the London Conference, the basic task that now lies ahead
is full implementation of the achieved Agreement. The
responsibility lies, not only with the Republic of Srpska
and the Muslim-Croat Federation and other interested
parties, but with the key international factors as well,
particularly those assigned major tasks in the
implementation.
It was not an easy task to have this comprehensive
Agreement signed. All sides were compelled to make
concessions. Consequently, there were no winners or
losers. The essential thing is that peace finally prevailed
and that full implementation of the Agreement will
contribute to the strengthening of stability, not only in
Bosnia and Herzegovina but further beyond, in the
Balkans and Europe.
For its part, Yugoslavia stands ready to honour and
implement fully all the commitments it has undertaken
under the Agreement. After the signing of the Agreement,
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
international community as a whole are confronted with
the difficult challenges of the implementation of peace
and the normalization of life. For success to be achieved,
it is imperative that the military and civilian components
of the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
take an impartial and objective position towards all
parties.

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3607th meeting
15 December 1995

During the negotiation process many difficult and
painful compromises had to be made in order for peace to
be achieved. One of the most sensitive issues is, without a
doubt, the status of the Serbian population of Sarajevo. It
is imperative that the Serbs of Sarajevo receive concrete
and reliable guarantees that their freedom, security, equality
and human rights will be fully and unconditionally
respected. Throughout the whole process, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and President Milosevic in
particular, steadfastly invested their efforts towards finding
a peaceful solution. In so doing, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has repeatedly affirmed its peaceful and
principled policy and commitment that all peoples in the
region should be treated equally, which has been
acknowledged by the international community.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that
the Security Council did not take a decision to restore
Yugoslavia’s status in the United Nations. That is even
more surprising in view of the fact that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is expected to cooperate fully
with the international organizations which play a specific
role in the implementation of the peace agreement while
the decision to suspend Yugoslavia from such cooperation
is still kept in place.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Carl Bildt as the High Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The balanced and serious
approach that he has embraced during his involvement in
the crisis in the former Yugoslavia up to now will serve
him in good stead in the challenges that will confront him
in the future.

We had rightfully expected that the Security Council
would, after the Dayton Agreement, the London
Conference and the signing in Paris, take such a decision
on the full restoration of Yugoslavia’s rights in the United
Nations, without any problems. This would have been a
normal continuation of the whole process, based on the
landmark Dayton Agreement, which should create a
favourable climate for the resolution of the problem as a
whole.

We rightfully expect that, in accordance with the
Agreement, the Security Council will soon undertake
measures totally to lift all sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
Economic reconstruction and cooperation are of vital
importance, and all parts of the former Yugoslavia should
receive their equal share.
Crippled by international sanctions and isolated from
the international community, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is eagerly seeking to restore its rightful place in
the family of nations. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
believes that by pursuing a constructive policy geared to the
establishment of peace in the whole territory of the former
Yugoslavia it has earned the right to normalize its status in
all international organizations, especially in the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank and to normalize relations with the European Union.
We do appreciate the efforts made in the Contact
Group with relation to normalizing the status of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, particularly those made by
the Russian Federation and France, as well as by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Italy.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia certainly cannot
be responsible for unavoidable negative consequences. We
consider that the new spirit of Dayton and Paris should
not be burdened with the old approach to problems.

It is surprising that the decision to restore
Yugoslavia’s rights in the United Nations has not been
taken, in view of the recognition that the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia has received for its peaceful policy and
engagement in achieving the peace accord.
As a founding Member, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia requests the Security Council to allow it to
resume its rightful place in the United Nations without
delay, on the basis of continuity and in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The Security Council once again has succumbed to
the pressures of some of its members. This negatively
affects the credibility of this organ, whose task is the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia can accept neither this
nor the constant attempts to impose new conditions,
contrary to the Agreement or any of its basic
principles regarding the equality of all sides and an
objective and impartial stance towards all of them.
It is particularly unacceptable that additional
conditions are now being set for the normalization of the
status of Yugoslavia in the United Nations. The exclusion
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the work of

7

Security Council
Fiftieth year
the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council has been directly linked to the crisis and war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the signing of the Peace
Agreement and its implementation, it is only logical that
Yugoslavia’s rights should be fully restored. Any delay in
that regard would weaken rather than strengthen the peace
process as a whole, and may be wrongly understood by
some as a signal to take advantage of an uneven-handed
and discriminatory approach.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia considers that it
is not entitled to more than the others — that is to say, that
its rights and duties should be equal to those of the other
Member States of the United Nations. We cannot agree to
fulfil our duties and at the same time have no rights, or to
have more duties than other Members.
It is regrettable that Croatia has tacitly placed the
burden and blame on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
for the fact that the draft accord on normalization of
relations and mutual recognition between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia was not reached in
Paris yesterday. For the sake of truth, it should be noted
that it was in fact Croatia that reneged on the draft
agreement that it reached with our delegation in Dayton on
the conditions for mutual recognition. Croatia voluntarily
accepted these commitments and, according to the letter and
the spirit of the draft agreement on the normalization of
relations, was obliged to fulfil them.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia fully implemented
its commitments. It is open to the normalization of
relations, including mutual recognition in the sense of the
draft agreement, as soon as Croatia fulfils its obligations.
The President (interpretation from Russian): It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the
vote on the draft resolution (S/1995/1033) before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The signature of
the Peace Agreement in Paris this week, following the
London Peace Implementation Conference last week, and
the imminent adoption of the draft resolution before us
sound the clarion call for the most comprehensive operation
to reconstruct a European country to be mounted by the

8

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
international community since the Marshall Plan half a
century ago. Sustaining that process will be vital if the
promise of peace is to become a reality.
One important aspect of that task is military in
nature. British troops have been in Bosnia from the
beginning of efforts to reach a political settlement, first of
all as part of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), facilitating the humanitarian aid effort to
hundreds of thousands of people and keeping alive the
chances for a negotiated settlement, even when at times
that appeared to be no more than a remote possibility.
Now British troops will take part in a multinational force
to help provide the security necessary to allow the
rebuilding of Bosnia. Out of the overall total of 60,000
troops that will make up the Implementation Force, the
United Kingdom is sending over 13,000 for approximately
one year. This is the clearest possible indication of our
full-hearted commitment to European security.
The Implementation Force’s role, which has been
accepted by all the parties, will be even-handed and
limited in scope and duration. The force is not imposing
the peace settlement, but it will take the necessary action
to ensure compliance. And let me at this point also make
it clear that should it be decided that, in the execution of
its assigned tasks, the Implementation Force should detain
and transfer to the appropriate authorities any persons
indicted by the Tribunal who come into contact with it in
Bosnia, then the authority to do so is provided by the
draft resolution before us, read together with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement.
The Implementation Force will indeed be a joint
endeavour, involving troops from 32 North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and non-NATO countries.
It will also be the first time that NATO and Russian
forces have worked together side by side for a common
purpose — a fitting way in which to mark the end of the
United Nations fiftieth-anniversary year. This gives me,
as the former British Ambassador to NATO, particular
satisfaction.
But implementation is not simply a military
operation. The multinational military force is a necessary,
but not a sufficient, condition for rebuilding the civil,
political and economic institutions and structures that
must form the basis of any society that wishes to remain
unified, stable and prosperous — for, in a word, making
peace stick. The scale of the task is daunting. It involves
providing for the safe return of some 2 million refugees
and creating the conditions by which multiethnic

Security Council
Fiftieth year
communities can once again flourish; it involves ensuring
that the human rights of all the Bosnian people are fully
and equally respected; it involves encouraging the
emergence of an open and dynamic market economy to
underpin peace with prosperity; it involves the holding of
free and fair elections in the next six to nine months; and,
last but not least, it involves convincing not only the parties
but also other countries in the region that they must work
earnestly and urgently towards a regional arms-control
regime.
We are fortunate that this work, involving a number
of different organizations and agencies, including the
United Nations, will go forward under the able coordination
and guidance of Mr. Carl Bildt, with the backing of the
Peace Implementation Council recently established by the
London Conference. It is perhaps appropriate here to note
in particular the important continuing role for the United
Nations and its agencies, as set out in the
Secretary-General’s report, in such areas as humanitarian
relief and refugees, civilian police, human rights protection,
rehabilitation of infrastructure and advice on elections and
on information networks and databases in the field of demining. This shows that the United Nations remains very
much a part of the picture.
I agree with Mr. Jovanovic that the most pressing task
in the immediate future is to convince the Serb population
of Sarajevo that its future is secure and that its rights will
be respected. The same, of course, applies to all other
ethnic minorities elsewhere in Bosnia. That is why it is
essential that this Council take urgent action to get the
International Police Task Force recommended by the
Secretary-General up and running as soon as possible. The
action foreshadowed in paragraph 30 of this draft resolution
on the International Police Task Force and on the United
Nations civilian office needs to follow promptly next week.

All this adds up to a huge commitment from the
international community. That commitment now needs to be
matched by a similar determination from the Bosnian
people, and also from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Croatia, to make peace work. Failure
to do so can only jeopardize the progress painfully achieved
so far. In particular, failure by the Bosnian Serbs to
cooperate could only lead to the continuation of economic
sanctions. The challenge for each one of the Bosnian parties
is formidable. But the international community is ready to
help them face up to that challenge. The United Kingdom
intends to remain in the vanguard of that effort.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
With the English poet, let us be optimists this time.
“And not by Eastern windows only
When daylight comes, comes in the light,
In front the sun climbs slow, how slowly,
But Westward, look, the land is bright!”
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of the United Kingdom for his kind
words addressed to me and for the poetic words addressed
to all of us.
I now call on the representative of Germany.
Mr. Eitel (Germany): Although we are already
approaching the end of the first half of your presidency,
Sir, it may not be too late for me to state the pleasure I
derive from working in the Security Council under your
able guidance. It is well in line with the kind and
successful stewardship of last month’s President, that is,
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman.
Germany fully supports the statement to be made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. In addition to what he will be saying, let me say
that the draft resolution before the Security Council
confers upon its members a challenging responsibility. By
their affirmative vote, they set effectively in motion an
enormous international operation — both in military and
in civilian terms.
Today’s New York Times carries a photo of
American soldier Peter Long of Buffalo, holding his wife,
Stephanie, before leaving his Army base in Mannheim,
Germany, en route to Bosnia. In the same manner,
soldiers and civilians of many countries, including many
Germans, will very soon go to Bosnia to safeguard peace,
to help rebuild the country, to provide security by police
work and to assist in bringing about democratic
elections — all united in a joint, complex and
far-reaching international peace endeavour.
For some time, at the end of the twentieth century,
almost five decades after the Second World War, we did
not really think that such an inhuman and brutal war
would be possible in the middle of Europe, a war
affecting millions of people, taking more than 250,000
lives, and displacing 2 million persons — 400,000 of
whom have taken refuge in Germany and currently are
waiting to be able to return to their homes in Bosnia.

9

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Thus, today’s draft resolution is a signal of hope for
the people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stand at the
beginning of another even more intensive, phase of
peace-securing and peace-building.
The draft resolution authorizes the deployment of a
multinational force to implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement, signed yesterday in Paris. This force will go to
Bosnia for about one year. Until then, a durable peace will
have to be achieved. In this context, it is important to note
that all parties have consented to the deployment of the
Implementation Force (IFOR) — including the use of force
should this be necessary. It is absolutely essential that the
parties comply with their commitment to refrain from the
use of force and that they fully cooperate with IFOR also
in the military side of the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement.
Another remarkable aspect of the implementation of
the Peace Agreement is, as has just been said by our British
colleague, that the Russian Federation — for the first
time — will cooperate with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in such an operation. We sincerely
hope that this will give a new quality to the relationship
between NATO and Russia.
The military part of the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement is the foundation of the peace we are all
hoping for. The actual construction — equally important —
is, however, a civilian task. Among other things: we have
to strengthen the political consensus that has been achieved
and should lead to the holding of free and fair democratic
elections; we have to assist the local security forces
through the work of the members of the International Police
Task Force to be established next week; human and
minority rights must be monitored; important humanitarian
tasks must be fulfilled; and we have to begin with the
reconstruction and development of a devastated country and
its economy.
In this effort, the United Nations will continue to have
an important peace-keeping role in Bosnia. We fully
support the concept of a strong International Police Task
Force and of a United Nations civilian mission.
One remark on Sarajevo, this very special place: Out
of our own sad experiences, the German side has made it
clear right from the beginning that we would oppose any
solution which would lead to a division of yet another
European capital. This view has been confirmed in Dayton.
On the other hand, we are also following with concern the
current expressions of fear and anguish among the Serb

10

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
population of Ilidza and other suburbs of Sarajevo — and
this has just been voiced also by Mr. Jovanovic. While
we trust that the Bosnian Government will honour its
commitment to respect the rights of its Serb citizens, we
support steps to strengthen security and
confidence-building also in those parts of Sarajevo.
Since I have just mentioned Mr. Jovanovic, allow
me a word concerning the admission of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to the
General Assembly. Let me say that we shall welcome
it — of course, under the conditions which have been
determined by the respective organs of the United
Nations.
The comprehensive endeavour on the civilian side
will be led and coordinated by the High Representative,
Mr. Carl Bildt, and his team, including German
Ambassador Steiner, his Deputy in Sarajevo. There, as
elsewhere in Bosnia, the many international organizations
involved must all work in the same direction and must
not stand in each other’s way. It is important that there be
no overlapping or duplication of efforts. In this respect,
the draft resolution spells out clearly the responsibilities
of the High Representative as the final authority in theatre
regarding civilian implementation and as coordinator of
the civilian operation with the authority to give guidance
as appropriate.
Both in the military and in the civilian fields
Germany will contribute actively to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. The deployment of 4,000 troops
marks the first time in the history of the Federal Republic
of Germany that we are contributing on this scale to such
a military mission abroad.
After having relied for decades on the solidarity of
our allies, we think that it is now time for Germany to
demonstrate solidarity and to show our readiness to
assume responsibility in the maintenance of international
peace and security on a larger scale.
Economic, political and social reconstruction is one
prerequisite for stability. Other requirements are
disarmament, arms control and a comprehensive system
of confidence-building measures. As far as these are
concerned, we hope that the Petersberg Conference to be
held in Bonn on Monday will be the starting-point for
intensive and successful negotiations in this regard.
While we are concentrating our efforts to restore
peace in Bosnia, we must not forget that yet another,

Security Council
Fiftieth year
similar problem has to be solved in Eastern Slavonia — a
region to which our Croatian colleague drew our attention.
If the international community and the members of this
Council are unable to live up to the responsibilities
conferred upon them by the Basic Agreement, there is an
additional risk that the peace process in Bosnia will be
endangered.
In this hour, our thoughts go, with the highest respect,
to the men and women who for more than three years have
devoted themselves, and in some cases sacrificed their
lives, in the service of the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Among them, our French partners have paid
the heaviest price, with the death of 56 French Blue
Helmets. Also for this reason, we have followed with
particular joy the happy end of the release of the two
French pilots who were held hostage for more than 100
days of uncertainty.
While we today look ahead, with cautious hope, to a
better future for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
are aware that wounds will not heal easily and that the
families of the victims will need time. Those responsible
for war crimes and violations of international humanitarian
law must be brought to justice. Here, I agree fully with our
colleague from Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 16 November
1995 the International Tribunal issued indictments against
the Bosnian Serb leaders Karadžić and Mladić for their
supposed role in the atrocities committed against the
Bosnian population of Srebrenica in July 1995.
Without uncovering of the truth, without justice,
national reconciliation can hardly be achieved. It is
therefore right that the draft resolution before us stresses
the importance of full cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This draft resolution
also makes it clear that the Implementation Force has a role
to play in this respect.
The international community will not be able
indefinitely to sustain the peace operation that effectively
begins today. Therefore, the parties themselves must face
their responsibility. They must fully use this best chance in
a long time to achieve peace with the help of the entire
community of nations. If this effort fails, the parties will be
alone — very alone — for a long time.
But, for now, together with the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina — Bosnian and Bosnian Serb citizens alike —
we are putting all our hope in the unique chance that the
Peace Agreement and its full implementation offer to all of
us. It seems that, for the first time in four years, people in

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Bosnia and in Europe will be able to celebrate Christmas
without war.
Germany will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Germany for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Martinsen (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): The draft resolution on which we shall be
voting sets in train a decisive phase in the peace process
begun in Dayton, in which the entire international
community has placed its hopes for the achievement of a
lasting peace in the Balkans.
As is clearly set forth in one of the preambular
paragraphs of the draft resolution, the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia remains a threat to international peace
and security. This explains the concern of one and all and
the fact that, probably, the principal role for the United
Nations, through action taken by the Security Council,
will be to keep the implementation of the Peace
Agreement under permanent review. In this sense, we
take the view that it would be excessively naive to
imagine that the signing of a Peace Agreement, of itself,
means that peace has been achieved once and for all.
There are a number of factors and variables impossible to
predict, and these will have to be treated with the greatest
care to avoid jeopardizing what was achieved in Dayton.
With this draft resolution, we also begin work of the
greatest importance to the United Nations in such
sensitive areas as the protection of human rights,
humanitarian assistance, civil policing and the removal of
mines. We applaud the fact that the parties opted for the
proposal that these functions be undertaken by the United
Nations. In our view, history will judge and experience
will show that this was their best option.
However, we are stuck by the fact that the
supervision of electoral processes — an area where the
United Nations has outstanding and unparalleled
experience and aptitude — has been assigned to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Therefore, we support the Secretary-General's offer to that
Organization that the invaluable experience of the United
Nations in this field might be put to use in Bosnia to
ensure that its political institutions are placed swiftly on
a secure basis.

11

Security Council
Fiftieth year
We consider it of great importance that the parties
have entered into the agreements on the status of the peace
forces that are to operate in Bosnian territory. Our basic
assumption is that the outrages suffered recently by
personnel of the United Nations Protection Force will pass
into history as just a dubious distinction of the parties to
this conflict.
In our view, it is indispensable that the Force to be
deployed in Croatia in due course have a status agreement
enabling it to play effectively the role required of it.
Once again in history, geographic and political
frontiers are being drawn in this part of the Balkan region.
This may mean that, as on countless occasions in the past,
the migratory movements which have caused so much pain
and suffering for the entire civilian population of Bosnia
will recommence. This prospect is a source of great concern
to us, and we take the view that the Security Council, as
well as the bodies and entities that will deal with problems
of this kind, will have to be aware of the instability factor
which, of course, arises from the possibility that new
migratory flows will be triggered as a result of the Dayton
accords.
I take this opportunity to emphasize the importance
that my delegation attaches to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. It is our view that only
if those responsible for the atrocities which, until recently,
convulsed the entire region are made to face the
consequences of their actions, and if justice is done, will
the peace be lasting.
In conclusion, we should like to highlight, for the
record, that when discord dominated the work of the
Security Council the international community was
powerless to handle the difficult Balkan crisis. When, in
contrast, the major Powers achieved consensus in their
decisions, hopes for peace began to appear. God willing,
this essential spirit of joint endeavour will be maintained
until the obstacles that we have still to overcome together
are indeed behind us.
Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me, Sir, on behalf
of the delegation of Oman, to congratulate you and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We assure you of our cooperation
at all times. We also appreciate the kind words addressed
to me and my delegation.
My delegation received with great joy the good news
from Paris on the official signing of the Peace Agreement

12

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
between the parties to the conflict in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has been nearly four years
since the war broke out in that part of the world, resulting
in the deaths of more than a quarter of a million people,
and almost half of that nation’s population have become
either refugees or displaced persons. Words cannot
describe the events that occurred in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Bosnia will surely remain in our
memory as a symbol of a nation’s unwavering defiance
of tyranny, hatred and “ethnic cleansing”. The Bosnian
nation wrote its independence with the blood of its
people, and, undoubtedly, that is something the
international community cannot and should not forget.
We cannot add much to what has been said and
what will be said, here, today, or in Paris, except to
remind the parties once again that they should live up to
their commitments, for the world cannot see this
Agreement violated or not adhered to in full. The price
that has been paid so far is greater than words can
describe.
“To save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war”: With these words the Charter of the United Nations
begins, and with these words, we believe, a new era
should begin in war-ravaged Bosnia. We cannot fail to
remind the parties that the road to peace is not going to
be easy. It is, rather, going to be tough and challenging.
What has occurred in that part of the world over the last
few years is greater than that which can be changed in
days, months or even years. That chapter of history
cannot be changed, but let us all ensure that the future
will be made better and safer.
Many say that this Agreement is a new page in the
chapter of events in Bosnia. We, on our part, say that this
page does not mean changing to a new book. Thus, we
believe justice must be exercised and mistakes of the past
should therefore be corrected, and those involved,
wherever they are in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina or elsewhere in the area of the former
Yugoslavia, if they have committed crimes against
humanity or massive violations of international
humanitarian law, should bear full responsibility for their
acts. War criminals should not in any way roam freely
before the eyes of the victims who have suffered under
them; otherwise, we will risk a return to chaos that might
lead to events similar to those we have witnessed in the
past. Through resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993, the
international community established an International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to investigate these
violations and prosecute those responsible for crimes and

Security Council
Fiftieth year
acts against humanity. We believe that much support should
be given to the work of the International Tribunal in order
to help it discharge its mandate effectively.
Oman welcomes the latest achievements, which have
been long- awaited, and in this regard we commend the
efforts of the Government of the United States in having
hosted the proximity talks that led to the initial signing of
the Peace Agreement at Dayton, Ohio. Our appreciation
also goes to all those countries and organizations that
participated at some stage in a collaborative effort to
establish peace in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly that of the Contact Group which has seriously
invested so much effort and time, the results of which we
can all witness now, at last. We call on the parties to fulfil
in good faith the commitments entered into in that
Agreement, stressing that compliance with it is of vital
importance in achieving a lasting peace and the creation of
conditions conducive to the reconstruction and development
of that country.
The days to come will test the intentions shown by the
parties at Paris with regard to their commitments to this
valuable peace. Oman will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us on the understanding that the Peace
Agreement will be respected at all times, by all the parties
concerned, in its entirety, and that they will refrain from
any acts that might undermine the Peace Agreement. The
new force that is going to be established will discharge its
duties to the best of its ability, in accordance with the
mandate given to it and with the Peace Agreement,
respecting fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and United
Nations efforts to help the people of Bosnia will continue.
The President: I thank the representative of Oman for
his kinds words addressed to me.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): As a result of the joint efforts of the international
community, the peace process in the former Yugoslavia
recently achieved an important breakthrough. Following the
initialling of the Peace Agreement last month by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia, the international Conference in London made
decisions with regard to carrying out civilian tasks. The
parties officially signed the Peace Agreement yesterday,
thus providing an important opportunity for the speedy
overall political settlement of the situation in the former
Yugoslavia.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
We warmly welcome these positive developments.
We believe that the signing of these Agreements
conforms with the fundamental interests of the people of
the various countries in the former Yugoslavia and is
conducive to the peace and stability of Europe and the
world. We hope that the parties will respect this
Agreement and work continuously for an early realization
of peace and stability in the former Yugoslavia so that the
countries of that region can live in harmony and its
peoples and national groups can enjoy a peaceful life.
The fundamental solution for the former Yugoslavia
is to achieve an overall political settlement by peaceful
means. The international community should respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries of the
region and strive to enable those countries to live in
harmony. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has made
unremitting efforts in the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and should be acknowledged and encouraged
by the international community. The Security Council
must strive to resolve soon the question of the status of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the United Nations.

In the last three years, the United Nations has made
considerable efforts for the peace process in the former
Yugoslavia. It has deployed peace-keeping forces in the
former Yugoslavia and has played a role in containing the
conflict, in providing humanitarian assistance and in
preventive deployment. The actions of the United Nations
in this area have achieved some results, but there are also
lessons that can be used as references in undertaking
future operations of this kind.
Implementing the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina is undoubtedly an important operation, and
the United Nations and the Security Council must
shoulder important responsibilities. Therefore, the Security
Council, when it takes a decision, should abide strictly by
the purposes and principles of the Charter.
On the basis of China’s position in support of the
peace process in the former Yugoslavia and of its hope
for an early realization of lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and also in view of the urgent wishes of the
parties concerned and the fact that this draft resolution
calls for extraordinary action in extraordinary
circumstances, the Chinese delegation will vote in support
of the draft resolution before us. This does not mean
however that China’s position has undergone any change:
that is, China has all along disapproved of operations
authorized by the Security Council when at every turn it

13

Security Council
Fiftieth year
invokes Chapter VII of the Charter and adopts mandatory
measures. Still less can it approve the Security Council’s
authorization of the unlimited use of force. We believe that
the implementation force (IFOR), in carrying out its task,
must maintain neutrality and impartiality and avoid wanton
use of force so as to avoid damaging the image of the
United Nations. We believe that IFOR should provide the
Security Council with timely and full reports on its
implementation task so that it can accept the necessary
control of and guidance from the Security Council.
China is particularly concerned with the former
Yugoslavia and the development of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We do not have, nor do we seek, selfish
interests in the former Yugoslavia. We support the peace
process in the former Yugoslavia and sincerely hope that
peace, lasting peace, security and development can be
realized as soon as possible and that the people will be able
to live peaceful lives in this area. China will continue to
make efforts to promote the peace process in the former
Yugoslavia. On the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence, China has developed friendly and cooperative
relations with the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda)(interpretation from
French): The delegation of Rwanda would like to thank and
commend the countries that have helped to promote peace
in the former Yugoslavia and have made it possible to put
an end to four years of war. We also welcome the
negotiated political settlement of the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia, particularly as regards the preservation of the
territorial integrity of all States within their internationally
recognized borders.
My delegation also welcomes the fact that these
agreements put an end to a war which has caused suffering
to innocent people, particularly women and children and
others who did not take part in the fighting, and has caused
the death of hundreds of thousands of people, many of
whom died an atrocious death — for nothing.
My delegation notes with satisfaction that the draft
resolution has a clause on the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We firmly hope that the persons who
have committed crimes against humanity will be
prosecuted, that the prevailing impunity in this region and
in the Great Lakes region will be lifted and that this will
serve as an example for the world.
My delegation would like to conclude by expressing
a wish — a request to the Council and the States Members
of this Organization — that the impressive means which

14

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
have just been made available to the former Yugoslavia
to ensure respect for peace, and that the energy and speed
used to arrive at this draft resolution and to implement it
may provide a good example to be followed in the future
and applied in the same way and without discrimination
to any Member State of this Organization that finds itself
in need.
Rwanda will vote in favour of this draft resolution.
Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): With the signing of the
Peace Agreement in Paris yesterday, the parties in the
former Yugoslavia have taken another important step in
their search for peace in their homelands. Although it is
an important step, it is none the less a symbolic one: now
comes the hard part of the implementation of the various
accords they have entered into. We congratulate in this
specific instance all the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and their leaders for what seems like the
dawn of peace in a country that has been ravaged by war
during the last four years.
After the initialling of the Dayton Agreement on
21 November 1995, my delegation observed that the
development represented an important breakthrough in the
peace process. We saw it as a first step in what would
undoubtedly be a long and difficult journey to peace. We
none the less believed then, as we do now, that this
agreement represents the best opportunity thus far to end
the conflict. We therefore repeat our call to all the
Bosnian parties and their respective allies to back their
commitments with concrete steps on the ground.
The agreement reached will have a lot of
humanitarian and emotional implications. It is likely to
lead to the movement of peoples, with implications for
their lives. People may have to make difficult decisions
on whether to remain where their families have lived for
hundreds of years or move to new areas where they
would feel more secure. These are emotional questions,
the resolution of which will determine the success of the
Peace Agreement.
There is also the important question of justice as
opposed to the exigency of securing peace for the present
time. Let me, however, say that my Government will
extend its full cooperation to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This is because in
the end there can be no lasting peace without justice, and
unless justice is done, and seen to be done, the cycle of
killings in the Balkans may never cease.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
There will be no easy answers to all of these issues,
yet there is no viable alternative to a determined effort to
confront and resolve these problems if the peoples of
Bosnia are to start enjoying peace and begin the process of
rebuilding their lives and their homes. My Government will
be behind them and give them all the support within our
means. We wish them well.
In addition to the foregoing, the parties to the conflict
and particularly all the States in the region must recognize
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of one another. There must be a genuine effort and
commitment to abandon the military logic and the illusion
that there could be the victor and the vanquished. In this
regard, all the States must respect Annex 1-B of the Dayton
Agreement on arms control and regional stabilization. And
we call on the States in the region, many of them with the
capacity for the production of armaments, to be responsible
in their dealings with the parties. Furthermore, the multiethnic, multireligious and multicultural nature of the States
in the region must be recognized, respected and preserved
by all.
The draft resolution before us has been described as
urgent and very critical to the implementation of peace in
Bosnia. The Security Council has been requested to adopt
this draft resolution so as to enable the implementation
process to start. In principle, my delegation has no
problems with that view. We are all for peace. However, let
me state the following.
We would have preferred a United Nations operation
under the policy control of the Security Council and the
managerial supervision of the Secretary-General, in spite of
the fact that the parties to the Agreement have requested a
multinational force. We are of course mindful of the
observations of the Secretary-General about the inability of
the United Nations at present to undertake such an
operation. In our view, what our Organization lacks in the
present circumstances is the political backing and resource
support of Member States to directly undertake enforcement
operations as envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter.
My delegation believes that we should not continue to
contract out what would normally be a United Nations
responsibility to a group of powerful States. It is my
delegation’s belief that, with the necessary political will and
commitment to the ideas of collective security enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, multinational forces for peace
enforcement should be placed at the disposal of the United
Nations and operated under the command of the SecretaryGeneral.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Concerning the various provisions of this extensive
draft resolution, we should like to observe that it took
members of the Contact Group about two weeks to
discuss and resolve among themselves the various
intricacies of what is undoubtedly a complex military,
political and humanitarian operation. To have expected
other members of the Security Council to make
meaningful contributions towards its enrichment in less
than 48 hours was certainly unrealistic. We would not like
to believe that it was deliberately done to achieve the
purpose of their not being able to contribute meaningfully.
For example, questions about the time-frame and
concept of the operation are not quite clear, nor can one
say exactly whence the post of High Representative — in
spite of the qualities of the nominee — derives its
legitimacy and authority. As Member States of the United
Nations, we should not support decisions that have the
effect of subordinating our Organization or our
Secretary-General to another organization, no matter how
powerful its members. After all, ours is still the most
universal expression of the will of the international
community.
However, in view of my Government’s policy of
supporting all peace initiatives and the primary objective
of helping to resolve the Balkan conflict, we are able to
go along with the overriding purpose of this draft
resolution. We are therefore able to support it.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Security Council is
meeting today at a critical juncture in the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our deliberations will have
significant and far-reaching ramifications for progress
towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement
reached in Dayton, Ohio. In this respect, the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 13 December provides a firm basis on
which to address the issues contained in the draft
resolution before us today.
My delegation attaches great importance to the
resolution of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
because it has inflicted enormous suffering and carnage
on all who have fallen into its path, including thousands
of defenceless women and children. Indeed, few have
been spared the unrelenting physical and emotional pain
that has left profound scars on the people of that region.
The signing of the Peace Agreement in Paris on
14 December offers the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia real hope that they will
be able to put behind them the worst conflict in Europe

15

Security Council
Fiftieth year
since the Second World War. The continuation of the
conflict would not only adversely affect the people of the
countries of the former Yugoslavia, but also bring
instability to the region.
My delegation is of the view that the draft resolution
before us today provides a valuable framework for the
process of reconciliation to begin and for facilitating the
framework for peace in the region. This draft resolution
also encompasses important elements of further progress
towards mutual recognition among the concerned parties in
the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which
is the key element for providing peace and prosperity in the
former Yugoslavia.
Peace and reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia
would be elusive without the commitment of the parties,
particularly in their relationships with one another, as set
forth in operative paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, and
without the urgently needed sustained efforts of the
international community to provide assistance for
programmes of reconstruction that address both the
immediate and long-term needs of the country.
In this regard, my delegation believes it essential to
create an atmosphere conducive to the pursuit of arms
control, thus sustaining a climate that promotes sustainable
development and prosperity. This will also require the
neighbouring countries to bear the responsibility to
cooperate in the implementation of these measures and to
extend all assistance towards that end.
This draft resolution envisages the eventual conclusion
and termination of the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). We should therefore like
to pay tribute to all the women and men of UNPROFOR
who have dedicated their talents and untiring efforts to the
relentless pursuit of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina over
the past four years, particularly those who have made the
ultimate sacrifice. As a troop-contributing nation, Indonesia
is proud to have lent its support to the cause of peace.
The nearly four years of hostilities have created more
than 2 million refugees and displaced persons, while
crippling the country’s economic infrastructure. In this
regard, my delegation supports the observations of the
Secretary-General in his report that we need to focus on the
problems and concerns of repatriation and the relief of
refugees and displaced persons, as well as those pertaining
to the promotion of human rights. We believe that these are
areas in which the United Nations can continue to play a

16

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
vital and indispensable role, thereby bolstering the peace
process.
My delegation believes, moreover, that a
considerable and sustained effort must be directed towards
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country’s
economic infrastructure. We therefore strongly urge the
international community to provide assistance for
programmes of reconstruction that address both the
immediate and long-term needs of the country.
In our view, the credibility of this Peace Agreement
will be greatly impacted by the level of cooperation
which the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia receives. The Indonesian delegation wishes to
stress the importance of the provisions contained in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of this draft resolution and reaffirms
the call for all parties to comply with requests for
assistance.
Having carefully examined the draft resolution
before us today, we conclude that it provides the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the opportunity to end
long years of bloodshed and strife that have torn at the
very fabric of their country. While my delegation is
cognizant of the fact that numerous circumstances will
impact the future fate of the peace process, we
nevertheless reiterate that the two critical conditions
contained in the Secretary-General’s report for enhancing
the peace process should be met. In this regard, the
Security Council should remain actively seized of this
crisis. My delegation also attaches great significance to its
comprehensiveness and views it as an important conduit
for providing an environment that is conducive to the
peaceful resolution of this tragic war.
In view of the foregoing, my delegation, after careful
deliberation and reflection, will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The prospects for peace
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina have never been
brighter. The General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina initialled in Dayton, Ohio, last
month and signed in Paris yesterday ushers in a new era
of hope where there was despair, accommodation and
cooperation where there were confrontation and conflict.
This is in no way a perfect peace; that is to be expected
after three and half years of hostilities. There is no doubt
that the scars of the deep wounds that the people of
Bosnia inflicted upon one another during the war will
remain visible for a long time to come, but the

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Agreement signed yesterday offers the best prospects for a
peaceful future. The onus is squarely on the parties:
resumption of hostilities or adherence to the Dayton Peace
Agreement. They should seize the opportunity presented by
this Agreement to create conditions conducive to a secure
and durable peace in their country. They should turn over
a new leaf and start a journey on the road to national
reconciliation and healing and a peaceful future. They owe
this to future generations of Bosnians. The international
community can only assist them in building a sense of
nationhood and unity, justice and a shared destiny.
We urge the donor community to contribute
generously to the process of reconstruction and
development in Bosnia. But this too will depend upon the
readiness and willingness of the parties to cooperate not
only with their partners but, more important, among
themselves.
As we bid farewell to the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR), we bow our heads in homage to the
United Nations peace-keepers who paid the supreme price
in the service of peace in the former Yugoslavia. We also
pay a well deserved tribute to all the men and women of
UNPROFOR who tried in difficult conditions to keep the
peace when there was clearly none to keep. Their work, as
well as that of those who lost their lives, was not in vain.
Many lives were saved thanks to their contribution and
sacrifices.
A lot has been said and written about the United
Nations peace-keeping operation in the former Yugoslavia.
The lessons to be drawn from it are not ordinary lessons.
We have to do a lot of soul-searching in order to draw
conclusions about the many setbacks and about the
successes. There is no doubt that the United Nations peace
forces played an important role in Bosnia. But they were
sent on a mission impossible. The ferocity displayed by the
warring parties, to kill each other with total abandon, made
it imperative for the international community to intervene
to rescue Bosnia from self-destruction. When the United
Nations made the decision to get involved in Bosnia, this
was in a bid to search for a peaceful solution to the
conflict. Unfortunately, the United Nations peace-keeping
operation became one of the victims of the war.
First of all, the parties to the conflict became
unreliable partners in the search for peace. They felt, with
differing degrees of bellicosity, that they could gain more
on the battlefield than at the negotiating table. Secondly, the
United Nations did not have at its disposal the financial,
manpower and logistical resources required for the task.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
UNPROFOR came under heavy attack for failing to do
things it was not equipped to do. Those who bore the
main brunt of the war thought that UNPROFOR would
fight the war on their behalf. In their situation of distress
this was understandable. But they missed a fundamental
point: UNPROFOR could not fight the war on the side of
any of the parties, nor was it ever mandated to fight a
war. It was of paramount importance that it remain an
impartial arbiter, since its primary mission was to keep
the warring parties separated and to ensure delivery of
humanitarian supplies to the needy. But it was certainly
not a fighting force. The population was disappointed that
UNPROFOR could not provide them with the
impenetrable protection against attack that they had hoped
for.
Thus, the credibility of the United Nations was put
on the line. Its reliability as an instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security was
called into question. The perceived failure of the United
Nations to restore peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina
resulted in the parties seeking help elsewhere.
Nevertheless, the victims of tragedies, such as that which
befell the people of Bosnia, continue to look to the United
Nations for assistance in the mitigation of their conflicts
and the alleviation of the misery and wretchedness visited
upon them by these wars.
To recap, the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina offers the best promise
for peace in that area so far. Whether there will be a
bright or a bleak future in that country and its
surroundings rests with the people of the area themselves
and with their neighbours. The Peace Agreement has laid
down the framework, the starting point from which they
can make improvements where there are shortcomings in
the Agreement. But what is most important is the political
will and the commitment to give peace a chance.
Excruciating as it may sound, the unhappy past should, as
much as possible, be forgotten and the innocent people
exculpated so that they can resume leading normal lives.
The machinery is in place to deal with the perpetrators of
war crimes. There should be no place for them to hide;
they must be pursued to the ends of the Earth and
punished for their crimes.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation
from Spanish): My delegation welcomed yesterday’s
official signing, at the Paris Peace Conference, of the

17

Security Council
Fiftieth year
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto by the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and other interested parties.
That was a significant event, which my delegation applauds,
for, together with the Basic Agreement on the Region of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, it permits
us to hope for a peaceful settlement in the region of the
former Yugoslavia and for the end of a conflict that has
brought unspeakable suffering to the peoples of that area.
We were also pleased by the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference, held at London on 8 and
9 December, on the need for the creation of a climate of
stability and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
establishment of political arrangements that will lead the
country along the path of democracy and the rule of law,
for the protection and promotion of human rights, for the
return of refugees and displaced persons, for the rapid
commencement of national reconstruction, and for the
normalization of relations with neighbouring States and
with the international community. My delegation supports
the objectives and tasks set out at the Conference, and
hopes and expects that the international community will
lend its support to this fresh opportunity for the inhabitants
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to rebuild their lives in a
climate of peace and prosperity.
The transition from the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) to the multinational military
Implementation Force (IFOR) is an important aspect of the
implementation of the military aspects of the Peace
Agreement. That step will ensure continuity in complying
with the Agreement on the cessation of hostilities, the
withdrawal of forces from the Zone of Separation agreed
upon for the purposes of the cease-fire, and assistance in
ensuring freedom of movement to the civilian population,
refugees and displaced persons as well as supervision of demining activities and, in so far as possible, assistance to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and other international organizations in
their humanitarian missions.
My delegation agrees with the establishment of the
multinational Implementation Force under unified command
and control to carry out the duties set forth in annexes 1-A
and 2 of the Peace Agreement. We urge the Government of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate with
the multinational Implementation Force and to afford it
every facility in carrying out its tasks.

18

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
The paramount objective of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has been to protect the
carrying out of humanitarian activities. In carrying out its
mandate, UNPROFOR has provided invaluable support to
UNHCR, which, under annex 7 of the Peace Agreement,
is to continue to coordinate humanitarian aid and the
implementation of a plan for the return of refugees and
displaced persons. There are over a million refugees and
displaced persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and their
movement must be facilitated. We therefore view it as
essential that help be provided by the multinational force
for the implementation of the Peace Agreement to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other humanitarian organizations. Similarly,
my delegation is of the view that measures must be
adopted to build confidence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and, in view of the human rights situation, that an
International Police Task Force must be established to
monitor respect for human rights, to ensure law
enforcement and to oversee and assist in the training of
personnel responsible for such activities and to help the
parties to create conditions for the holding of free and fair
elections in the country.
The human rights situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be carefully monitored. Thus, an
important step towards the implementation of annex 6 of
the Peace Agreement was the decision taken at the Peace
Implementation Conference that the High Representative
should preside over a human rights task force at Sarajevo
to be made up of the organizations and bodies involved
in this task.
My delegation recognizes and emphasizes the
enormous importance of the adoption of this draft
resolution to implement the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support it and we will vote in favour of it.
I should like to conclude by expressing our
admiration and respect for all the personnel who, with
great courage and dedication, have participated in the
peace-keeping operation in the former Yugoslavia and our
appreciation for all the efforts in favour of peace that
have been made by the Secretary-General's Special
Representatives and the commanders of the United
Nations Protection Force.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I now
put to the vote the draft resolution in document
S/1995/1033.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Nigeria, Oman,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President (interpretation from Russian): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1031 (1995).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.
Mrs. Albright (United States of America): For four
years, we have assembled in this Chamber to condemn
violence, penalize aggression, authorize humanitarian relief
and urge an end to the killing in former Yugoslavia.
While much of our work has borne fruit, often our
resolutions and statements have promised much but
accomplished little. On many of those occasions I have sat
in this Chamber in anguish as I looked over at the
representative of Bosnia, whose country was the victim of
such brutal aggression. For often the Council's message to
the people of Bosnia was a tragic one: We cannot defend
you and we will not let you defend yourselves.
Today, our message is a new one. Today, I am happy
to say to the representative of Bosnia: We can talk about
what we have done and will do to make peace in your
country. We have helped Bosnia to negotiate a peace
agreement, we are authorizing a powerful military force to
implement that peace, and we will enable Bosnia to ensure
that peace when we leave.
The Agreement forged in Dayton and signed yesterday
in Paris is a historic achievement. It is the product partly of
diplomatic skill, partly of courage and sacrifice and partly
of simple exhaustion with the war. Our task now, and our
responsibility, is to transform the Agreement's vision of a
united and democratic Bosnia into an enduring reality.
This resolution authorizes the Member States to
establish a multinational force, under unified command and
control, to implement aspects of the Peace Agreement. It
notes that the deployment of this force, called IFOR, was
requested by the signatories. It calls upon all Members,
including those in the region, to cooperate with that force,

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
and it recognizes the right of that force to take all
necessary measures to defend itself from attack or threat
of attack.
My Government welcomes the decision of more than
two dozen countries to contribute troops to the Bosnia
peace implementation force. Let me express my
Government's pleasure that the Russian Federation will
participate in this path-breaking operation. We recognize
as well the vital contribution being made by Belgium and
others who we hope will help implement the Peace
Agreement in Eastern Slavonia.
The decision to send troops to Bosnia was difficult
for my Government, as it was for others. The men and
women of our armed forces are our most precious
resource. Even when the mission is to save lives, we must
always bear in mind the lives we put at risk and the
worry we will cause to families whose loved ones are so
far away from home.
The forces we send will be well equipped, well
trained and well endowed with courage and skill. We
hope and expect that they will be able to accomplish their
mission in approximately one year. But we are deeply
conscious of the sacrifices already made there by troops
serving under the command of the United Nations. We
are mindful of the terrible carnage inflicted during the
war, and we are aware of — but not deterred by — the
dissatisfaction with which some in Bosnia have responded
to the Peace Agreement.
So we remind ourselves that the Agreement is
important not because it was easy to achieve, but because
it was so hard, because the wounds it seeks to bind are so
deep, and because the violence it is designed to end was
so intolerable.
As President Clinton said yesterday in Paris, the
mission of the Implementation Force is to allow the
Bosnian people to emerge from a nightmare of fear into
a new day of security, under terms that the parties
themselves have approved. IFOR's purpose is to make
peace work, not to fight a war or to occupy a hostile
country. It will treat all Bosnians with respect, and it will
deal with contentious issues fairly and in accordance with
its mandate.
But let no one doubt that if there are those in Bosnia
foolish enough to attack or threaten these forces, they will
regret doing so. That is a promise, and that promise will

19

Security Council
Fiftieth year
be kept whether the forces that are attacked are American
or any other nationality.
The resolution we have adopted recognizes that the
parties shall cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The resolution further
recognizes that IFOR has the authority to take actions,
including the use of necessary force, to ensure compliance
with Annex 1-A of the Peace Agreement. This is a
welcome supplement to the duties and authorities stemming
from resolution 827 (1993).
Let me emphasize that Annex 1-A of the Dayton
Agreement obligates the parties to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal. The North Atlantic Council can now
underscore this obligation by explicitly authorizing IFOR to
transfer indicted persons it comes across to the Tribunal
and to detain such persons for that purpose.
My Government again stresses the importance of
every country’s obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal
and to comply with its orders. Unless they comply with
their obligations, the parties to the conflict cannot expect to
reap the benefits of peace, ensure the permanent easing of
economic sanctions or hope to rejoin fully the community
of civilized nations, including as a Member of the United
Nations. Let me recall here today the important statement
in the document approved at the London Conference, which
underlined the relationship between the parties’ fulfilment
of their obligations in this area and the readiness of the
international community to commit financial resources for
reconstruction. It is a simple proposition, but a critical one.
The benefits of economic and financial assistance should
not go to those who thwart the will of this Council’s
requirement to cooperate with the war crimes Tribunal.
The resolution before us also stresses the importance
of implementing the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement. The success of this effort will be just as
important as the success of IFOR. For if the civilian
challenges are not met, IFOR’s military success will
quickly fade, and Bosnia’s hopes for peace will remain
unfulfilled.
As the United States made clear during the Peace
Implementation Conference in London last weekend, we
will cooperate fully with the new High Representative,
Mr. Carl Bildt, in ensuring a well-coordinated and
multifaceted effort on the civilian side.
Special attention must be given to holding democratic
elections, ensuring respect for human rights, planning for

20

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
the safe return of refugees and displaced persons, creating
a professional police force and initiating a comprehensive
programme of economic reconstruction. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report illustrates, United Nations agencies will
be deeply involved in many of these activities.
Over the past four years, a great deal has been said
in this Council about the killing and destruction in
Bosnia. The disparity between those words and the awful
reality devalued language itself as a means for conveying
truth. For as we listened, we also saw the shattered bodies
of little children, the anguished faces of grandparents
forced from their homes, the tears of young women
brutalized and raped and the grisly evidence of newly
upturned earth.
In the light of that painful history, let me share with
this Council part of a letter written to President Clinton
by a young girl whose moving account of life in Sarajevo
made such an impact on civilized people everywhere.
“Dear Mr. President:
“I would like, ... in the name of the children of
Sarajevo, my home town, ... to thank you most
sincerely.
“Thank you for helping the civilization not to
die, because ordinary people and children truly do
not deserve it. Thank you for opening the door to
the future for the children of my country, because
everything that happened to them was a historical
injustice.
“This century started with a war in Sarajevo;
let it end with peace in Sarajevo.
“Once again, in the name of the children who
have suffered, thank you, and we will not forget.”
[Signed] Zlata Filipovic, age 11.
Three weeks ago, in Dayton, and yesterday in Paris,
one era ended and another began. The test of this new era
will be whether the vows of peace will be matched by the
symptoms of peace, by children playing, parents working
and families gathering without cause for fear in city
parks, village squares and busy markets.
Our task, set out in this resolution, is to give
confidence to the people of Bosnia so that those prepared
to work for peace will find its reality within their grasp.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Our hope, as this holiday season approaches, is that
Bosnians of all ethnic and religious backgrounds will seize
that opportunity. Our prayer is that, through our combined
efforts, the dark Balkan winter will finally give way to an
enduring and bountiful spring.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The President of the French Republic, Mr. Jacques Chirac,
and the French Minister for Foreign Affairs yesterday
expressed France’s views at the Paris Peace Conference,
during the signing of the Peace Agreement. I should like to
quote the conclusion drawn by the President of the French
Republic:
“All the peoples of the former Yugoslavia have their
place in the European family. France, since the time
of General de Gaulle, has always rejected the barriers
erected in the heart of our continent. Today we offer
to the peoples of the former Yugoslavia a promise of
peace. But true peace remains to be built in people’s
hearts and minds, and with it democracy, human
freedom and the reconciliation of peoples”.
It was in this spirit that France sought the immediate
initiation of a process of bringing stability and goodneighbourliness to south-eastern Europe. In the wake of the
results already recorded at the London Conference, that
process represents one of the achievements of the Paris
Conference. It will be developed in Bonn, at the Petersberg
conference. But we welcome the substantial progress
already achieved towards mutual recognition among the
States of the former Yugoslavia, and in particular the
agreement reached in Paris between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This
progress strengthens the Peace Agreement and the prospects
of a lasting reconciliation in the region.
Our duty today, and that of this Council, is to look
ahead to the future and assume our responsibilities by
giving, as soon as possible, full effect to all the provisions
of the Peace Agreement.
In my country’s view, the Security Council must take
on three tasks. It must finalize the necessary arrangements
to implement the civilian and military aspects, which are
inextricably linked in the Peace Agreement.
It must also maintain the United Nations presence
wherever it is indispensable. The United Nations played a
fundamental role in the former Yugoslavia during the
harshest years of the conflict. Quite rightly, the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization recalled this fact yesterday in

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Paris. The United Nations has made peace possible, and
its role will continue to be irreplaceable.
Finally, the authority of the Security Council must
be affirmed. It is the Council, and the Council alone, that
under the Charter can give legitimacy to the military
means that will be used. Only the Council can — and it
must — ensure the overall coherence of the operation by
regularly assessing both the civilian and military aspects
of its implementation.
The resolution we have just adopted meets these
objectives. It authorizes the establishment and deployment
of a multinational Implementation Force for the Peace
Agreement, endowed with a specific mandate and
necessary and adequate means. France will play a key
role in this effort on the ground in Sarajevo and
throughout southern Bosnia, in Mostar and Gorazde. It
will continue to act as it has done, in tribute to its soldiers
who have fallen under the flag of the United Nations, in
whose memory my German colleague so movingly spoke.
As regards the International Tribunal, the resolution
in paragraph 5 recognizes the role that IFOR may play to
ensure proper cooperation with this body. The resolution
enables the Atlantic Council to specify the modalities for
the intervention of the Force for this purpose.
The resolution simultaneously establishes an
important civilian apparatus whose role will be crucial for
the success of the Peace Agreement. The resolution
establishes the major role to be played by the High
Representative and endorses the designation of Mr. Carl
Bildt. His task is fundamental. In the framework defined
by the resolution, the High Representative is, indeed, not
only required to monitor the implementation of the peace
plan and to report to the Security Council, but also has
general responsibility for guidance and coordination in all
civilian matters related to the Agreement's
implementation. France is gratified that Mr. Carl Bildt,
whom it had proposed last June as mediator on behalf of
the European Union, has accepted this weighty and grave
responsibility. It should like to assure him of its full
support.
The resolution defines the role which remains for the
United Nations on the ground: a civilian mission, civilian
police, indispensable tasks inter alia in Sarajevo. In all
these areas, as in that of humanitarian issues, assistance
to refugees and displaced persons and human rights
monitoring, the experience accumulated by the United
Nations and the devotion of its staff is irreplaceable. The

21

Security Council
Fiftieth year
coordination of all United Nations activities under the
authority of the Secretary-General will contribute to their
effectiveness. In the immediate future, these tasks will be
performed in Bosnia and Herzegovina by staff already
present on the ground in the former Yugoslavia. France
expects, as our colleague from the United Kingdom just
underscored, that the arrangements for the civilian mission
and the police force intended by the resolution will be
determined as early as next week.
Lastly, the resolution is the expression of the authority
of the Security Council. The resolution that has been
adopted determines the imminent deployment of the
multinational force. Reports on the activity of this Force
will be regularly submitted to the Security Council. It will
thus be able to follow the conduct of the operation. Lastly,
it is important for the Security Council to take a further
decision on the mandate which it has today delivered and
to decide whether the extension of that mandate is
necessary. The High Representative for his part will also
report regularly on overall progress and implementation of
the peace plan.
On the eve of this new era — the new era that Mrs.
Albright has welcomed — France's hope is that the next
few months will finally bring peace, security and dignity to
all the inhabitants of a devastated Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which should nevertheless remain united, multicultural and
democratic, as an example of the victory of our values —
the values of concord and peace over hatred and war. With
that hope our thoughts go out to all those who have
suffered and to all those who have given their lives in the
last four years to achieve peace. Our thoughts accompany
all those who will henceforth make peace a reality.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): To begin, allow me to subscribe
fully to the statement the Permanent Representative of
Spain, Ambassador Yáñez-Barnuevo, will shortly make on
behalf of the European Union.
It is with particular satisfaction that Italy co-sponsored
and voted in favour of today's resolution on Bosnia and
Herzegovina — a resolution indeed of historic importance,
since it creates a new scenario for the implementation of
the Peace Agreement signed yesterday at the Paris
Conference.
In the first place, the resolution authorizes the
establishment of a multinational force — lFOR — to
implement the Agreement. Italy will participate in this
Force with a contingent of 2,300 men in the theatre, with
naval forces that will continue to operate in the Adriatic

22

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Sea, and air force and naval personnel at 20 air bases and
nine ports directly and constantly supporting the new
Bosnian operation. This makes for a total of 11,000 men.
Our troops will be deployed alongside those of other
countries in the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) — that same NATO that without
firing a single shot prevented a third world war from
happening in the second half of this century. NATO will
assume a central responsibility in this new operation,
which is also open to the contributions of the Russian
Federation and other countries not members of the
Alliance, which we warmly welcome.
We are convinced that the presence of a force of
60,000 men in Bosnia will have a decisive impact on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, acting as an
effective deterrent to any and all attempts to destabilize
the situation. In this way, the Force will also help
facilitate the peace process.
In the second place, paragraph 26 of the resolution
endorses the establishment of a High Representative and
the appointment of Mr. Carl Bildt to this post. The High
Representative will be a central figure in the civilian
component of the operation, in view of the guidance and
coordination functions assigned to him by the Dayton
Agreement. The civilian activities sector is one in which
the United Nations will maintain a key position, thanks
largely to the leadership role granted to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the area of the return of refugees and
displaced persons, and to other significant responsibilities
in the humanitarian field, which are entrusted to a United
Nations Coordinator, as announced in a recent report by
the Secretary-General.
With regard to these competences, the establishment
of a United Nations police force — which we hope can
be decided on as soon as possible — will be crucial in
stabilizing the situation and safeguarding human rights.
The withdrawal of the forces behind the Zones of
Separation established by the Peace Agreement must not
cause a new exodus of the civilian population, or new
instances of “ethnic cleansing”. The presence of
International Police Task Force monitors can play a
fundamental role in protecting the local population against
this threat.
Today's resolution also emphasizes the need to
safeguard human rights, which the Bosnian parties
pledged to respect according to the highest international
standards. There cannot be peace in Bosnia and

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Herzegovina without a full restoration of human rights,
which have been repeatedly and tragically violated in the
last few years.
Reconstruction and development are another priority
for the consolidation of peace and for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. These are areas in which the European
Union is called on to play a guiding role, and in which
Italy is ready to make a generous and qualified
contribution. The meeting on development, organized in
Rome last October, demonstrates our commitment to this
key aspect of the peace process.
Today’s resolution also establishes the modalities for
the expiration of the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). UNPROFOR has played
an essential role in recent years, often with inadequate
means. International public opinion has not always given it
proper recognition. We have heard uncharitable and often
unjust criticisms. For my part, I wish to pay tribute to the
thousands of people who performed their duties in
extremely difficult conditions, particularly the many
members of UNPROFOR who lost their lives or who
suffered serious injuries — beginning with the brave French
soldiers who paid the highest price of all. The prospects for
peace that seem to be unfolding these days are also the
legacy of their dedication and the sacrifice of their lives.
Today’s resolution continues a process that has
recently gone through important stages: the initialling of the
Dayton Peace Agreement; the London Conference, which
created a new institutional framework for the
implementation of the Agreement, with a Peace
Implementation Council and its Steering Board; the Paris
Peace Conference, where the Agreement was signed
yesterday, and where progress was made towards the
mutual recognition of the successor States of the former
Yugoslavia. In the view of Italy, such recognition remains
a basic feature of a comprehensive political solution to the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.
Other important appointments await us in the future:
the meeting of aid donors in Brussels, scheduled for 20 to
21 December; the meeting in Bonn, for the opening of
negotiations on regional stabilization and on the reduction
of weapons; the first meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council, which Italy will host next June. The last of these
will be an important occasion for a first verification of the
progress in implementation of the peace plan and of the
prospects for reconstruction.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
This process will in all likelihood be long, difficult
and complex. It will not be easy to heal the wounds of
four years of fighting or to forget the untold misery, the
devastating violence and the long suffering of war. But
the process has begun, and today’s resolution constitutes
one of its essential moments. We are convinced that it
will ultimately lead to the normalization of life in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to the peaceful coexistence of
communities that have lived side by side in the same
territory for centuries. Having exacerbated their
differences, they have now come to the time to rediscover
and appreciate the far greater importance of what they
have in common, of what must unite them.
For Italy, Bosnia is a neighbour and a friend, whose
tragedy has deeply moved our public opinion. It is a
country that can rise again — that will rise again —
forget the past and move towards a better future. This is
the message that the Italian delegation would like to
convey to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, through
their representative at the United Nations, Ambassador
Ivan Misić.
Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): Since this is the
first time my delegation has spoken this month at a
formal meeting of the Security Council, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of December. I
should also like to express my delegation’s deep
appreciation to Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman for
the efficient way in which he and his delegation guided
the affairs of the Security Council during the month of
November.
The formal signing of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina by the
Presidents of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia
in Paris yesterday is the most important milestone so far
in the effort to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia. We could almost hear the world
sigh with relief that the most terrible conflict to have
rocked Europe since the Second World War was at last
over.
After four years of war, after hundreds of thousands
of dead and maimed, after horrific destruction, there is
finally a solid basis for peace. Guns must remain silent in
Bosnia, and the order of the day for former adversaries
must be reconciliation and reconstruction.
While today we applaud the political leaders of the
South Slavs for the courageous step that they finally took

23

Security Council
Fiftieth year
in Dayton and sealed in Paris, we cannot but think of all
the death, human suffering and destruction that particularly
the civilian population of the region had to endure over the
past four years.
Was it really impossible to achieve a political
settlement that would have prevented this senseless war?
Was it really unavoidable to spill the blood of all those
innocent people and to endure all the horrific destruction
and suffering, before it dawned on some politicians that
true and lasting peace does not come out of a barrel of a
Kalashnikov, but is achieved through dialogue at the
negotiating table?
The resolution that we have just adopted gives a green
light to the deployment of the multinational Implementation
Force (IFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Among the IFOR
contingents that will in the next days pour into Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be almost a thousand young men and
women from my country. The decision of the Government
and Parliament of the Czech Republic to participate in
IFOR is an unequivocal expression of my country’s deep
interest in the establishment of durable peace and stability
in the region of the South Slavs. It is also the continuation
of the Czech involvement in the United Nations
peace-keeping efforts.
IFOR, authorized by the Security Council and under
the command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), will be in Bosnia to keep peace at the request of
the parties themselves. IFOR forces will be tough and
uncompromising in carrying out their mandate. Their oneyear mission has clear objectives, and IFOR has the
necessary means to fulfil them.
The deployment of IFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina
constitutes a serious commitment on the part of the
international community to help the peace process.
However, let there be no mistake: the main burden of
responsibility for the success or failure of the peace process
rests squarely on the shoulders of the Bosniacs, the Croats
and the Serbs. They have one year to translate, with the
help of the international community, the still-fragile peace
into an irreversible process.
Despite our great satisfaction over the success of the
peace talks in Dayton and the signing of the Peace
Agreement in Paris, we are very much aware of the crucial
linkage between maintaining and strengthening peace in the
region and the urgent need for its reconstruction. We
therefore welcome the establishment, at the London
Conference on implementing civilian aspects of the Peace

24

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Agreement, of the office of the High Representative, who
will coordinate the reconstruction effort in the regions
devastated by war.
The Czech Republic also welcomes the
establishment of the Peace Implementation Council and
its Steering Board. By taking this decision, the London
Conference has established a proper framework for the
implementation of particularly the civilian aspects of the
Dayton Agreement and is moving the process of
reconstruction into its practical phase.
The role of the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not end today. On the contrary, it
should be revitalized. The United Nations should, together
with or in parallel with other institutions and
organizations, focus on activities which will contribute
most to the advancement of the peace process in Bosnia.
In this endeavour it can count on the full support of the
Czech Republic.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I
would now like to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Russian Federation.
The successful conclusion of the London and Paris
Conferences, where we witnessed the signing by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia of the Peace Agreement, began a culminating
breakthrough in the peaceful settlement of the problem of
the territory of the former Yugoslavia, which was begun
with the Dayton Agreement. As a result of the steadfast
efforts of the United Nations and the Security Council,
the Contact Group, the European Union, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and international mediators, it
was possible to convert the compromises reached in the
course of the negotiating process into a tangible language
of international agreements.
Clearly, no diplomatic efforts at that time or today
can replace the sincere efforts of the parties themselves to
resolve existing differences through negotiations and
through their rejection of solutions of force. Today the
Security Council has adopted a draft resolution which
makes it possible to begin the practical implementation of
the Peace Agreement. Thereby, the parties receive the
support of the international community in their aspirations
for peace. But at the same time they must now bear the
full responsibility before the international community for
compliance with the commitments that they have entered
into.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
It is of prime significance that, in full accordance with
the Dayton Agreement, the resolution deals with the
forthcoming operation in all its civilian and military
aspects. The Security Council has welcomed the readiness
of Member States to respond to the requests of the parties
and to render assistance to them in implementing the
military aspects of the Peace Agreement through the
deployment of the multinational force.
I would like to emphasize the most important feature
of the resolution, which is that the Member States providing
forces are authorized by the resolution to do only what the
Bosnian sides themselves have agreed to, together with the
leaders of the Balkan States that signed the Agreement.
Thus, should force be used against violators of the
Agreement, the resolution clearly makes those sides’
agreement conditional on an equal, impartial approach to all
sides in the Bosnian conflict. Russia will consistently
defend the need to avoid unjustified use of force in the
course of the operation.
It is important that under the resolution the Security
Council of the United Nations specifically — and no other
Council — must in a year take a decision regarding the
need to extend the military component of the operation.
This provision, together with the regular reports to the
Council on the conduct of the entire operation, ensures
reliable political control by the Security Council and clearly
indicates that the massive military operation under way in
Bosnia in no way means a replacement of the United
Nations by individual or regional organizations.
This will not be the first time that Russia has taken
part in a military peace-keeping operation, side by side with
Western partners. In the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) Russian soldiers and officers serve together
with French and Belgian soldiers. In the multinational Force
they will serve together with Americans on the basis of
mutually agreed procedures.
Genuine peace can be achieved in Bosnia only on the
basis of political decisions. A particular role here must be
played by the political structure for the implementation
machinery, headed by the High Representative, machinery
elaborated and agreed at the London Conference and
“sanctified” by the resolution. We welcome the designation
of Mr. Carl Bildt to this post, and we will support him in
his activities.
The resolution defines the need to strengthen regional
stability and control over armaments. It clearly follows
from the resolution that all sides must ensure that the arms

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
reserves of the Bosnian side should be reduced, rather
than built up. The Security Council has confirmed that the
achievement of a just and lasting peace is impossible
without securing internationally recognized human rights,
including the right of refugees and displaced persons
freely to return. Another necessity is all parties’
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, in accordance with Security Council decisions
and the commitments entered into by the parties
themselves in Dayton.
Of primary importance in creating an appropriate
climate in relations between the parties are the immediate
measures to strengthen and build confidence, particularly
in areas where ethnic groups live side by side. The most
complex situation arises in Sarajevo, where there is an
urgent need to prevent a massive exodus of the Serbian
population. We expect immediate implementation of the
tasks entrusted to the Secretary-General by the resolution
to ensure a speedy redeployment to Sarajevo of additional
contingents of the United Nations Civilian Police.
An important stage in the process of a peaceful
settlement was the adoption by the Council of its
resolution 1022 (1995) on the suspension of sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, without
which we would not have had the successes of Dayton,
London and Paris. At the same time, events are
developing so fast that today the situation in that regard
cannot be a source of satisfaction; the signing of the
Peace Agreement has resulted in a qualitatively new
situation. We are in favour of deciding on an immediate
repeal of sanctions against Belgrade and against the Serb
Republic, which undoubtedly would foster the successful
implementation of the Agreements that have been
reached. Similarly, the time is ripe for reaching an
agreement on the return of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council.
The signing in Paris of the Peace Agreement does
not complete the peace process; it only opens its most
responsible phase. In the course of the year to come
multilateral meetings on Bosnia will continue, aimed at
further promoting the peace process. The Russian
invitation to hold a meeting in Moscow still stands.
Today I must dwell specifically on the role of the
United Nations and of its “blue helmets”, who bore the
greatest burden of peace-keeping in the former
Yugoslavia at the most difficult time. Risking their lives,
and often paying with their lives, the “blue helmets” have

25

Security Council
Fiftieth year
saved the defenceless and have delivered clothing,
foodstuffs and medicine to the homeless, the hungry and
the sick. The mandate of the “blue helmets” was not
impeccable. But this mandate was approved not by them,
the “blue helmets”, but by us. The greatest of pressures
were brought to bear on the United Nations and its “blue
helmets” to force them to exceed their authority. It is not
surprising that in the light of all this, the United Nations
peace-keepers made mistakes in the course of an
unprecedented operation designed to deal with humanitarian
problems in the midst of a war and, in such circumstances,
only someone who did nothing would have made no
mistakes.
Let us not forget that United Nations peace-keepers
were in Bosnia precisely when all Bosnian sides were
counting on a military solution and were not prepared for
peace. It is universally recognized that if the United Nations
had not gone into Bosnia, the number of victims in the
conflict would have been immeasurably greater.
The unique peace-keeping experience the United
Nations has accumulated at great cost in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be preserved. One of the most important
lessons of the crisis is the need for joint action on the part
of all parties concerned, including those in the United
Nations and its Security Council. Such joint action is
extremely important in the present phase if we are to
overcome the consequences of the conflict, restore peace to
the region and ensure that it shall enjoy democratic rights
and freedoms.
We are convinced that without the active role of the
United Nations, it would be difficult to solve these
problems. Russia will from this time on work consistently
towards strengthening peace and stability in the Balkans
and other regions to preserve and develop the potential of
the Charter of the United Nations in the area of peacekeeping and security.
I now resume my function as President of the Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): May I convey to you,
Mr. President, first of all, my delegation's satisfaction at
participating in this debate under your competent
presidency. We are certain that the Security Council will
benefit greatly from your wide-ranging diplomatic
experience and personal talent during this busy month. I

26

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
also take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Al-Khussaiby of Oman for his excellent performance as
President of the Council during November.
The signing ceremony which took place at the
Elysée Palace in Paris yesterday among the leaders of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia represents
a momentous diplomatic achievement.
For all those who participated in the struggle for
peace in the Balkans, the entry into effect of the
Agreement comes as a belated relief and heralds a new
era of hope. To the innocent victims of the conflict and
to the peace-keepers who lost their lives, we pay our
heartfelt tribute. To the tortured and the maimed, to the
displaced and to all the survivors of the hateful practices
carried out under the evil banner of ethnic and religious
rivalry, we lend our solidarity.
Having celebrated the end of several decades of
East-West tension, the international community was taken
by incredulity when the ominous forces of intolerance and
destruction were revived in the Balkans after having been
defeated in 1945. The United Nations, rising from the
ashes of the deadliest world conflict ever, became
involved in the efforts to thwart this new threat to
international security with the only weapons at its
disposal: its Charter, and its commitment to peace.
This involvement became a major operation, draining
considerable human and material resources, for which a
useful role had to be devised in a shifting and complex
scenario. In cooperation with those more closely affected
by the conflict, the Security Council attempted to contain
the war, to minimize the suffering and to present peaceful
alternatives for settling differences. As a country that
contributed military observers and police officers to the
United Nations peace-keeping effort in the former
Yugoslavia, we are convinced that the Organization has
made a positive contribution to setting the stage for peace
in the region.
An opportunity has now been created for the leaders
of the former Yugoslavia to choose a new path: one that
leads to reconciliation, to democracy, to economic and
social reconstruction and development.
Having participated in the work of the Security
Council during two of the four years in which the
situation in the Balkans has been permanently on its
agenda, Brazil experienced the difficulties in dealing with

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3607th meeting
15 December 1995

the war in the Balkans with extreme concern and intense
frustration. Persuaded — by our own historical legacy —
that fruitful coexistence among peoples of different
religious, racial and cultural backgrounds is viable and
natural, we consistently and vigorously rejected the twisted
logic of the ethnic borderline.

Mutual recognition among the three States having
signed the Peace Agreement in Paris seems to be a
prerequisite for its success. We welcome the decision of
two of the parties to recognize each other and urge those
not having done so to complete the necessary procedures
for there to be full official ties among the three capitals.

This logic has yet to be defeated in the Balkans as it
was during the Second World War in Europe, and as it has
been overcome — with the active assistance of the United
Nations — in South Africa. The Peace Agreement, which
will, we hope, usher in a new chapter in the tragic history
of the Balkans, deserves credit for putting an end to bloody
fighting and to an institutional breakdown. But it is now up
to the leaders and the peoples who have lived through this
nightmare to create a new environment through tolerance
and respect for diversity.

I am pleased to announce that Brazil established full
diplomatic relations with the Bosnian Government on 6
December. We look forward to developing close and
mutually beneficial ties with all States in the region in the
context of a lasting peace and improved living conditions
for all in the Balkans.

As we contemplate the transfer of authority from the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia
to an implementation force (IFOR) whose command will be
entrusted to a regional organization, we must reflect upon
the role of the Security Council in matters relating to the
former Yugoslavia in the stages that lie ahead.

The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

In the resolution that has been adopted the States
Members of the Organization referred to in Annex 1-A of
the Peace Agreement are requested to report to the Security
Council on a monthly basis. As the implementation force
takes up its position in a terrain that is still fraught with
uncertainties, it is essential that the organ responsible for
safeguarding international peace and security be given the
necessary tools to enable it to exercise the role ascribed to
it by the Charter.
The creation of multinational forces at the behest of
the Security Council has ceased to be an unusual feature. If
these forces are to be perceived by the international
community as legitimate and credible, however, the
necessary accountability towards the Security Council must
be strictly observed.
As an organ acting on behalf of the entire United
Nations membership, the Security Council is given wide
powers in responding promptly to evolving situations. That
it should envisage the creation of multinational forces for
dealing with certain situations and not with others is a
matter that deserves to be clarified for all United Nations
Members in the most satisfactory manner if support for
such decisions is to have the desired firmness and
unanimity.

The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Brazil for his kind words addressed
to me.

Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
The conflict that degenerated into violence in the former
Yugoslavia in 1991 forced us to come to grips with a
virulent nationalism and an undemocratic power struggle
that was an assault on our fundamental values.
Yesterday, in Paris, a historic Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, aimed at putting an end to the
bloodshed in that country, was signed. We hope that it
will pave the way to lasting peace. We can now turn to
the task of building a democratic society that fully
respects human rights.
In marking this achievement, it is important to
recognize the contribution of the international community.
The role of the United Nations and its Blue Helmets
merits special mention. From the outset, the presence of
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
helped to moderate the scope, intensity and consequences
of the conflict, in many, often unheralded, ways.
UNPROFOR allowed peace negotiations to proceed. It
was UNPROFOR personnel who made it possible for
humanitarian organizations — in particular the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees —
to bring essential food, medicine and other humanitarian
supplies to the long suffering, isolated and needy civilian
population.

Blue

For the past three and half years, United Nations
Helmets and other personnel have served

27

Security Council
Fiftieth year
courageously under dangerous and often degrading
circumstances. Many, including 10 Canadians, have given
their lives. Many more will bear the scars of their all too
often thankless task for the remainder of their lives. As we
look towards the end of UNPROFOR’s mission, my
delegation joins others in paying tribute to every one of
these dedicated individuals from more than 35 countries
who participated in and supported this operation.
(spoke in English)
The difficulties experienced by the United Nations in
the former Yugoslavia provide important lessons for the
future. We welcome the views and observations of the
Secretary- General in his report on the implementation of
the Basic Agreement on Eastern Slavonia. His remarks
strongly echo the views we and a number of others have
expressed in a wide variety of United Nations forums over
the past many weeks.
As we begin the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, it is clear that the challenges facing us are
daunting and complex. Most importantly, it will require
from the parties sustained commitment and the willingness
to make and adhere to difficult compromises. It will also
require the continued and active involvement of all of us.
Canada will contribute to this process, working closely with
allies and friends. The Security Council has given the
Implementation Force (IFOR) the key task of carrying out
the military aspects of the Peace Agreement. Through our
participation in IFOR, we will be working to help ensure
the full success of the Force in fulfilling its mandate.
Moving forward rapidly and effectively on the civilian
component of the Peace Agreement is equally important to
building lasting peace. In this regard, we regret that it was
not possible to authorize today the United Nations civilian
police mission and the United Nations civilian office
recommended by the Secretary- General. We look forward
to early action by the Security Council in this area.
For its part, Canada will continue its engagement on
the humanitarian front and in providing assistance to
refugees. We will engage ourselves fully in the
multinational efforts aimed at economic reconstruction and
social rehabilitation in the former Yugoslavia.
Implementing the Peace Agreement involves more
than just separating the forces and economic reconstruction.
We must also use the next year to press forward urgently
on the political and humanitarian aspects of the Agreement.

28

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
As peace, justice and good governance take root, a return
to war will become ever less likely.
The international community has made great
sacrifices over the past four years in the former
Yugoslavia. The cost in resources and in people has been
enormous. This demonstration of international solidarity
will continue, but in the end it is for the parties
themselves and their neighbours to consolidate and ensure
the peace. It is for the parties themselves to take
advantage of the opportunities at hand and of the
willingness of the international community to help.
Canada would like again to congratulate all those
whose efforts and sacrifices have brought us to this
historic moment. We are hopeful that the will for peace
will prevail. We are hopeful that armed conflict in the
former Yugoslavia has finally ended and that the building
of civil societies, truly just and democratic, can at last
begin.
The President (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Ukraine. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) (interpretation from Russian):
On behalf of the delegation of Ukraine, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council at this extremely
important time in its work, when its decisions will
directly determine whether war will end in Europe. Over
the past few days, we have witnessed the way in which
your diplomatic skills, tact and patience promoted the
adoption of constructive decisions on very important
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
I should also like to express the gratitude of my
delegation to the Permanent Representative of the
Sultanate of Oman, Mr. Al-Khussaiby, for his successful
presidency of the Council in November.
(spoke in English)
Only five months ago nobody could have foreseen
or even imagined that the peoples of war-torn Bosnia and
Herzegovina would enter the Christmas holidays in peace.
Yesterday in Paris the parties to the conflicts on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia made this peace more
real by signing the Peace Agreement. Fear and mistrust in
the future have yielded to hopes and concrete plans.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
We would like to stress that the ultimate responsibility
for the implementation of the Peace Agreement rests with
the conflicting parties. In this context, the delegation of
Ukraine fully supports paragraph 10 of resolution
1031 (1995), by which the Security Council underlines the
relationship between the fulfilment by the parties of their
commitments in the Peace Agreement and the readiness of
the international community to commit financial resources
for reconstruction and development. The parties should
realize that the international community can only assist in
securing peace in the region. Whether or not it becomes a
lasting peace completely depends on the political will of the
leaders of the former Yugoslav republics.
Ukraine supports the authorization by the Security
Council of the multinational implementation force (IFOR),
which will provide monthly reports to the Council on its
activities. This will serve as an appropriate means of
political monitoring by the Security Council of the IFOR
operation. By authorizing the establishment of a
multinational implementation force, the Security Council is
taking a decisive step towards a comprehensive settlement
of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. IFOR will be
deployed as a neutral and impartial force capable of
ensuring implementation of the provisions of the Peace
Agreement, and capable of protecting itself.
In our opinion, this provides proper guarantees that the
parties will live up to their commitments. At the same time,
the delegation of Ukraine hopes that the IFOR commanders
will interpret paragraph 17 of the draft resolution in a
restrictive manner. The right given to IFOR to take all
necessary measures to defend itself from threat of attack
should not be abused.
Ukraine, as one of the major troop contributors to the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), was invited
by the North Atlantic Council to participate in IFOR. We
see this as a great honour, and at the same time as
recognition of the constructive role played by Ukraine in
the efforts of the international community to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Balkans. We are
confident that the experience and authority of Ukrainian
peace-keepers, shown during their participation in the
United Nations operation, will constitute a reliable
guarantee of our effective contribution to IFOR.
Several days ago in London, Ukraine voiced its
support for the process of post-conflict peace-building in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and expressed its willingness to
actively join in that process. The establishment of the post
of High Representative under the civilian implementation

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Annex to the Peace Agreement will contribute to the
enhancement of international efforts in providing
humanitarian aid, in the rehabilitation of infrastructure and
economic reconstruction, in the establishment of political
and constitutional institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in the promotion of respect for human rights, in the return
of displaced persons and refugees, and in the holding of
free and fair elections. The delegation of Ukraine shares
the satisfaction expressed by other delegations at the fact
that the Security Council has agreed the designation of
Mr. Carl Bildt as High Representative.
My delegation would like to reaffirm its readiness to
place at the High Representative’s disposal experts in the
field of the establishment of democratic institutions, and
in the organization and monitoring of elections.
The success of the peace process in Bosnia will
depend on the restoration of confidence among the
peoples of the country. In our opinion, the States
members of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council recently formed at London
should take early action in Sarajevo to create an
atmosphere of confidence between the communities and
extend the guarantees of respect for their rights. In this
context, Ukraine supports the Security Council’s request
to the Secretary-General to ensure early redeployment of
elements of United Nations civilian police from the
Republic of Croatia to Sarajevo.
In our opinion, the restoration of the war-torn and
exhausted economy of the region should be a prerequisite
for lasting peace in the Balkans. Ukraine has already
declared its interest in and readiness to participate directly
in the economic reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The delegation of Ukraine believes that the
establishment of a special regime of participation in the
rehabilitation and development of Bosnia for the States
economically most affected by their strict observance of
the regime of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia would be fair and timely. This could be
regarded as partial compensation for the billion dollars in
losses suffered by the States neighbouring the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
Equitable distribution of international assistance
among all regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is of
extreme importance. A sound economy should become a
unifying factor and a reliable basis for preserving the
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which would guarantee the
prosperity of all peoples living in its territory.

29

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Bearing in mind the unique, extraordinary and
complex character of the present situation in Bosnia, which
requires an exceptional response, I cannot but recall the
words of the famous British writer Somerset Maugham:
“You can do anything in this world if you are
prepared to take the consequences”.
I hope that by adopting this resolution the Security Council
has shown the readiness of the international community to
shoulder such a responsibility.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Ukraine for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): Allow me first to say that
it is a particular pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this
very important meeting. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman for the excellent
manner in which he carried out his duties as President in
November.
Norway welcomes today’s resolution authorizing the
deployment of the multinational implementation force
(IFOR). It authorizes a multinational force led by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), with important
contributions also from several non-NATO States, including
the Russian Federation. In the European context, this stands
out as a hallmark event.
For its part, Norway will participate in IFOR with
approximately 1,000 troops. We are satisfied that today’s
resolution contains the elements necessary for IFOR to
carry out its task efficiently. A heavy responsibility now
rests with the parties to show a spirit of reconciliation and
a genuine will to avail themselves of the presence of IFOR
to build the foundations for peace and stability.
The contribution of IFOR to preventing a resumption
of the war must be supplemented by concentrated efforts
aimed at peace-building, nation-building and economic
reconstruction. We believe that the Peace Implementation
Conference in London last week created a good framework
for the coordination of these efforts. The success of
implementing peace in Bosnia will also depend upon
developments in the rest of former Yugoslavia, and in

30

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
particular, we feel, on the follow-up of the Basic
Agreement for Eastern Slavonia.
The Norwegian Government is fully committed to a
continued policy of active involvement through our
contribution to IFOR and through our extensive
participation in the humanitarian efforts and the process
of reconstruction. We are looking forward to working
together with the High Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt, and
relevant organizations in this crucial endeavour. The High
Representative will need the support of all organizations
and countries involved in order to ensure the rational
utilization of the resources available. We would also like
to emphasize, as does the resolution, the relationship
between the fulfilment by the parties of their
commitments in the Peace Agreement and the willingness
of the international community to provide funds for
reconstruction. It must be clear that international patience
can have its limits.
For the initial phase of the peace-building in 1996,
Norway is prepared to commit close to $50 million. Half
of that amount will be earmarked for reconstruction and
rehabilitation purposes. The remainder will cover areas of
a more short-term humanitarian nature such as health and
programmes for children and youth, as well as human
rights monitoring.
The return of refugees and displaced persons is a
key element in the comprehensive peace settlement.
Norway fully supports the role of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as
the lead agency responsible for promoting the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced persons. The Norwegian
Government also attaches great importance to the
principles and recommendations concerning the
repatriation of refugees advocated by the UNHCR. We
urge other States acting as hosts to refugees from the
former Yugoslavia to cooperate with the UNHCR with a
view to integrating repatriation into the overall peace
process.
Justice must be an integral part of a comprehensive
and lasting peace. The parties have an obligation to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia as one of the entities involved in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. All competent
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina should cooperate
fully and provide unrestricted access for the Tribunal’s
investigators to any person and to any site they may want
to visit.

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3607th meeting
15 December 1995

We expect a decision by the Council next week to
establish the United Nations civilian International Police
Task Force (IPTF), to be financed through assessed
contributions. Its task should consist mainly of monitoring,
observing and inspecting law-enforcement activities and
facilities throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
effectiveness of the IPTF will depend to a major extent on
the willingness of the parties to cooperate, and its
operational guidelines should be formulated accordingly.
Norway has been a major contributor to the United Nations
civilian police force in the former Yugoslavia up to now,
and we are prepared to continue our cooperation with the
United Nations in this field.

wish you every success in your work in guiding the work
of the Council this month.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) will be put to its greatest challenge up to
now. It will be instrumental in establishing a democratic
constitutional structure in Bosnia and Herzegovina and will
contribute to the humanitarian and reconstruction efforts, in
cooperation with the United Nations and other international
organizations. Norway will actively support the OSCE with
respect to the very difficult tasks it has been given in the
field of democratic elections and human rights monitoring.
The successful conclusion of an arms-control agreement for
the Balkans is an indispensable part of the broader peace
process. The ambitious task is to remove the use of military
forces as an instrument of policy in this war-tormented
region, and we are honoured that Ambassador Vigleik Eide
of Norway has been designated for this important task. In
order to succeed, he will need full support from all of us.

The European Union has always called for a
peaceful solution to this painful conflict. Today, we want
to reaffirm our determination to make a substantial
contribution to assisting all the parties concerned in
implementing the provisions of the Peace Agreement.

Today is an occasion to pay tribute to all those who
have served in the United Nations peace-keeping and
humanitarian operations in former Yugoslavia, including
those who lost their lives, and to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representatives and Mediators. All of them have in
a very substantial way helped prepare the ground for peace
and deserve proper recognition for their role.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Norway for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Spain. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to tell you
how pleased my delegation is to see you presiding over this
especially important meeting of the Security Council. We

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland and
Romania and Slovakia have also associated themselves
with this statement.
The European Union warmly welcomes the signing
on 14 December 1995 at the Paris Peace Conference of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The resolution unanimously adopted today by the
Security Council authorizes the establishment of a
multinational force to implement the Peace Agreement.
The member States of the European Union have in
the past been the major contributors of United Nations
peace-keeping troops on the ground and will continue to
play a major part not only in the multinational force,
where thousands of our troops stand ready for
deployment, but also in the civil and humanitarian tasks
involved in implementing the Peace Agreement.
The Peace Agreement needs the full cooperation of
the parties. We call upon them to fulfil in good faith the
commitments they have entered into, bearing in mind that
they have the primary responsibility for the consolidation
of the peace and the prevention of the resurgence of
conflicts.
We expect that a process of stability will be initiated
in the entire region. In this context, we call upon the
parties to mutually recognize those States which have
emerged in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Such
recognition will lead to the normalization of relations
among them as well as with the international community.
We warmly welcome the acts of mutual recognition that
have already taken place.
In order to create a stable peace in the region, the
promotion of regional stability and arms control are
essential. The conference to be held in Bonn next week
provides an early opportunity to initiate such a process.

31

Security Council
Fiftieth year
We remain deeply concerned at the precarious
situation in Eastern Slavonia. Any failure to implement the
Basic Agreement could have very serious consequences for
stability in the whole region. We urge the parties to
cooperate fully in the implementation of the Agreement.
We hope that in the near future the Security Council will
address this issue on the basis of the report of the
Secretary-General.
We are confident that the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will at last be able to live in peace.
Reconciliation is one of the vital ingredients in any process
of building a society. The holding of free, fair and
democratic elections throughout the territory is crucial in
this respect. The European Union will fully support the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
carrying out the functions entrusted to it by the parties
under the Peace Agreement.
Absolute priority must be given to respect for human
rights. Without genuine improvements in the human rights
situation, no peace agreement can have a solid foundation.
The serious human rights violations and breaches of
international humanitarian law in various parts of the
former Yugoslavia must come to an end once and for all.
The European Union strongly supports the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The
parties must cooperate with it and fully comply with its
decisions. There must be no impunity for the guilty.
We welcome the parties’ agreement to ensure all
persons under their jurisdiction the highest level of
internationally recognized human rights and fundamental
freedoms, among them the right of all refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes. The behaviour
of all parties in this regard will be closely monitored by the
European Union.
The time has come for reconstruction. Our main task
will be to help restore hope and provide decent living
conditions, particularly in the areas most affected by the
conflict.
The European Union, which was among the first to
provide relief for the terrible suffering of the civilian
population, reaffirms its decision to continue its
humanitarian contribution in the former Yugoslavia and to
participate, along with non-European Union countries, in
the enormous task of reconstruction, in response to specific,
identified needs.

32

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
All these efforts must, in accordance with the newly
created structures, come together around the High
Representative. We support his key role as coordinator
and guide of the many organizations and agencies
involved in the process. We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Carl Bildt, who will have the full support of the
European Union.
Some important aspects still remain to be resolved.
We hope that next week the Security Council will
approve the establishment of an International Police Task
Force and of a United Nations civilian mission, to be
financed through assessed contributions.
Thousands of men and women from the member
States of the European Union and from other countries
have served in Bosnia over the last three years as
peace-keepers, as humanitarian aid workers, as monitors
and as searchers for peace. Some have made the ultimate
sacrifice: their lives. We pay tribute to them, to all those
who have joined them in the work for peace and to those
hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians who have
perished in the conflict. Now the time has come to build
a just and lasting peace.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Spain for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you on your
election to the presidency of the Security Council. We are
all aware of your sagacity and of your great leadership
skills which are the best guarantee that the Council’s
activities will be successful under your presidency. We
also extend our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador
Salim Al-Khussaiby, the Permanent Representative of
Oman, on his constructive efforts during his presidency of
the Council.
Today we witness the beginnings of a turning point
in the direction of events in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
throughout the region of the former Yugoslavia. This
takes place after a four-year armed conflict that ravaged
the region and brought suffering to the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is high time that people enjoyed a life
of safety in a climate of peace, stability and sound
democracy.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
In this context, we welcome the Dayton Agreement
and the results of the Peace Conference that was held in
Paris yesterday and in which the parties signed the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. By the same token, we welcome the
resolution just adopted unanimously by the Security
Council.
The agreements reached thus far constitute a major
historic achievement. The delegation of Egypt is pleased to
express great appreciation for the sustained efforts that led
to this achievement, and in particular applauds the efforts
of the Contact Group and of the United States of America.
At the same time, we must stress the fact that the efficacy
of the agreements and the credibility of the international
Contact Group, under whose auspices the Agreement was
reached, will depend entirely on the effective
implementation, in good faith, on the ground, by all parties,
of all the provisions and the measures embodied in the
General Framework Agreement. It goes without saying that
only if all sides scrupulously abide by those agreements in
good faith can the desired stability be restored to the
region.
In this respect, Egypt affirms its support for the
diplomatic efforts deployed in the framework of the London
Conference on the former Yugoslavia. We hope that a
negotiated settlement will be reached by all the parties
concerned with the issues relating to the succession of
States within the former Yugoslavia so that the successor
States may resume the international role that the Federated
Republic of Yugoslavia played in the past. We hope also
that all the peoples of those successor States will be able to
live in safety, security and dignity in the context of mutual
friendly relations amongst all the successor States with
which, without exception, we have ties of profound
friendship that, we hope, will grow warmer and stronger
and develop further in the future.
It is time for the international community to focus its
efforts on dealing with the disastrous consequences of the
armed conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We should like
here and now to recall the need for us to come to grips
with urgent questions, including the following:
First, to guarantee the voluntary return, in secure
conditions, of all refugees and displaced persons forcibly
expelled, and in particular the victims of the hateful policy
of “ethnic cleansing”, while providing the necessary
international protection for their reintegration and their
reinstallation in the homes they were expelled from.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
Secondly, the international Tribunal responsible for
bringing to justice war criminals, as well as those
responsible for flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, must be supported. The necessary
human and material resources must be provided to the
Tribunal in order for it to be able to pursue its efforts; the
fact being that the Tribunal is at present the only
international competent body entrusted with the task of
restoring the credibility of international law and of
deterring those who would violate it. All States must
cooperate in enforcing the Tribunal’s judgments.
The multinational implementation force (IFOR) led
by NATO, which will be deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will, in actual fact, act in the context of a
Security Council resolution. This is a point we wish to
stress: this is a force that acts on behalf of the
international community. Proceeding from this, it is
important that all geographical regions and all the groups
concerned should be represented in the composition of the
force.
In this regard, I wish to point out that Egypt, which
actually participates in the UNPROFOR, has offered,
officially, to participate in IFOR with a contingent of
700 troops.
In conclusion, I must state that the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina look up with hope to the international
community and expect generous support from the
international parties as proof of international credibility in
caring for this people. This is expected in the form of
resources that would be provided and efforts that would
be deployed towards the comprehensive reconstruction
that would restore to Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in
particular, to the city of Sarajevo, its historic status as a
symbol of peaceful coexistence amongst cultures,
religions and ethnicities in Central Europe.
In this context, Egypt will pursue its efforts in
participation with the States of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, striving one and all to rebuild Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

33

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Mr. Owada (Japan): Allow me to begin my statement
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. The thanks of my delegation go as well to your
predecessor, the representative of Oman, for the excellent
manner in which he carried out his responsibilities in
November.
I should like to express the gratitude of my
Government for the opportunity given to me to address the
Security Council on this historic occasion. The Government
of Japan applauds wholeheartedly the signing of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina effected in Paris on 14 December 1995 as a
truly monumental achievement. This epoch-making
development signifies that the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia, which have caused unspeakable human and
material loss, have, after four years, finally come to an end.
I wish to take this opportunity to express the most
sincere appreciation of the Government and the people of
Japan to all those whose tireless toil and labour, protracted
over the years, have resulted in this breakthrough. For this
achievement, thanks are in order to the Secretary-General
and his Special Representatives, the Force Commanders, as
well as to the members of the Contact Group and other
countries which have contributed so much to this process,
in particular the United States.
Remarkable as the achievement is, we must remain
keenly aware that the peace that has come to prevail in the
former Yugoslavia is still a fragile peace. In order to ensure
that there be durable peace, it is essential that all parties
strictly abide by the terms of the agreement. They must
exercise maximum restraint so that this fragile peace may
not be broken. They must demonstrate an unfailing
determination to scrupulously honour the rights and duties
they have respectively accepted so that a genuine spirit of
reconciliation and cooperation may come to prevail in the
region.
While the conclusion of this peace agreement is a
monumental achievement, it is nevertheless but a first step
on a long and arduous road to reconstruction and
rehabilitation. For the purpose of realizing true and lasting
peace and stability throughout the region, the international
community will have to offer its full-fledged cooperation
for the full implementation of the agreement.
The Government of Japan, as a member of the
Steering Board, will be prepared to extend its utmost
cooperation for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the

34

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
former Yugoslavia. Conscious of its responsibility in the
global context, Japan is determined to be an integral part
of this historic process on the basis of the agreement in
ways that are consistent with the basic stance of Japan as
a peace-loving nation. To carry out this responsibility,
Japan intends to dispatch a government mission to analyse
the local situation. In addition, in view of the importance
of promoting a transition to a market economy, Japan is
considering assistance in this area as well.
It should be emphasized in this connection that
assistance for humanitarian relief and for the complete
and safe return of all refugees and displaced persons will
have to be extended not only with respect to Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also with respect to the whole region,
including Serbia and Montenegro and Croatia. Extending
assistance to all the parties that play key roles in the
lasting peace of the region will be crucial to the durable
peace and stability within the region as a whole.
In this spirit, I wish to reaffirm the commitment of
Japan to providing humanitarian assistance for the
stability of the region. In fact, my Government has
already provided approximately $180 million since the
outbreak of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia to
assist refugees and persons affected by war in the region.
Japan has now decided to make an additional contribution
of about $20 million to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant
international organizations for the purpose of easing the
suffering during the severe winter months and in response
to the United Nations consolidated appeal. It will consider
further contributions to those organizations in accordance
with their needs.
I should like to conclude my brief intervention today
by urging the leaders of the parties concerned to continue
to strengthen the peace that has been wrought with such
difficulty. The efforts in this direction on their part will
have the full support and assistance of the entire
international community, including my own country.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Japan for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Yoogalingam (Malaysia): I am happy to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council for the

Security Council
Fiftieth year
month of December, especially at a time when the Council
has taken another important decision regarding the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Your country played an
important role in advancing the peace process. I also wish
to extend my appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Oman, who presided over the
Council during the month of November.
My delegation participated at the Security Council
meeting of 22 November, when the Council took two
significant decisions — namely, those regarding the arms
embargo and the lifting of economic sanctions following the
initialling of the Dayton Agreement. Today, we meet again
following the formal signing of the Bosnian Peace
Agreement in Paris yesterday.
The Agreement is just the beginning in the search for
permanent peace, justice and development in the region.
While not wishing to downplay the many potential pitfalls,
we recognize that the Agreement offers real hope of
bringing an end to the cataclysmic conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. If the Agreement is to work, it requires the
full and genuine cooperation of the parties to the conflict,
as well as the strong support of the international
community.
The resolution before the Council endorses the
agreements among the warring parties, while upholding
fundamental principles, including those dealing with the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
crimes against humanity.
One of the centrepieces of the Dayton/Paris Agreement
pertains to the establishment of the Implementation Force
(IFOR) under the command of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). As a country which has agreed to
participate in IFOR, we fervently hope that it will be able
to discharge its mandate effectively and fully. The role of
IFOR is critical to the successful implementation of the
Agreement.
At this critical juncture, every effort must be made to
ensure the success of the mission to be undertaken by
IFOR. Any attempt to undermine the Peace Agreement
should be resolutely resisted. The credibility of the
multinational force will be judged by its actions to fully and
effectively implement the Agreement. Its failure to achieve
strict and immediate implementation would have
catastrophic implications for the region and for the rest of
the world.

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
While we take these tenuous but necessary steps
towards peace, the atrocities and horrors carried out in the
name of “ethnic cleansing” for the past four years remain
fresh in our minds. “Ethnic cleansing”, which constitutes
a crime against humanity, should not be brushed aside for
political expediency. Those responsible for such acts
should not be allowed to go unpunished, nor the victims
denied justice. The work of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia deserves the continued and full
support of the international community.
In this regard, the Council’s decision, as contained
in the resolution adopted today, which calls on all
Member States to cooperate and comply with the orders
issued by the Tribunal regarding the arrest or detention of
persons accused of committing violations of international
humanitarian law, is indeed commendable.
As part of the international endeavours to nurture
peace and to restore normality, efforts towards
infrastructure rehabilitation and economic reconstruction
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina must be given
immediate, priority attention. In this connection, my
delegation welcomes the decision of the London
Conference held on 8 and 9 December that the World
Bank and the European Commission should take the lead
in the efforts for the reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We also share the view of the Secretary-General,
expressed in his report (S/1995/1031), that the United
Nations too has a role to play in such endeavours.
Malaysia has on various occasions expressed its readiness
to contribute to the country’s reconstruction and
humanitarian projects. We are willing to offer our
expertise in different areas to help rebuild the country. As
a member of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council established at the London
Conference, Malaysia will continue to play an active role
and to contribute to the process to ensure that peace
endures.
Given the immensity of the humanitarian and
reconstruction tasks, there is an obvious need for effective
coordination and cooperation between those aid agencies
to avoid competition, duplication and wastage of
resources.
Another issue that demands our immediate attention
pertains to the plight of 2.1 million refugees and displaced
persons. The safe and early return of refugees and
displaced person is essential to the holding of fair

35

Security Council
Fiftieth year
elections, and the provision of shelter for them is crucial.
In this regard, we share the views expressed by the High
Commissioner for Refugees on the need for organized and
phased movement. Arrangements should also be made for
voluntary return. In this regard, we hope that IFOR will
provide the logistic and other necessary support to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.
Finally, we fully endorse the observation made by the
Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina earlier today
regarding safeguards to ensure
“the holding of democratic, fair, just, free and secure
elections throughout the country, without fear or
intimidation”.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Malaysia for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Çelem (Turkey): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December. We are
confident that under your skilful guidance the Council will
be able to fulfil its responsibilities successfully. I should
also like to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Al-Khussaiby of Oman, for the outstanding manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council in November.
For almost four years, unspeakable horror prevailed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina resisted with determination the evil forces of
ethnic and xenophobic nationalism. They struggled for
survival and democracy. Their aim was to maintain the
spirit and tradition of living and working together in
Bosnia, to preserve the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
unity of their multicultural, multi-ethnic and multi-religious
country. The tragedy unfolded before our eyes. Yesterday,
the signing, in Paris, of the Dayton Agreement marked, we
hope, the beginning of a new era in Bosnia. We welcome
the prospect and promise of peace embodied in this
Agreement.
The resolution just adopted starts the implementation
process. For a just and viable peace, the commitments
undertaken through this Agreement should be honoured in
good faith. Here, I should like to underline once again that

36

3607th meeting
15 December 1995
preservation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, within
its internationally recognized borders, is and will remain
vital for a lasting peace and for stability in the region.
Turkey will actively participate in all the military
and civilian aspects of peace implementation. We will
contribute troops to the Implementation Force (IFOR).
The Turkish civilian police have already assumed
responsibility as part of a joint police force which is
overseeing the return of refugees from Croatia to Bihać.
We will also shoulder our share of the responsibility for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction work ahead within
the Steering Board established for this purpose.
The conflict in the former Yugoslavia has illustrated
that ethnic nationalism, racism and intolerance are the
biggest threats to freedom and democracy, peace and
prosperity. Therefore, we should never forget the terrible
suffering of the Bosnian people, the mass executions, the
concentration camps, the “ethnic cleansing”, the
campaigns of rape and terror. The Agreement signed
yesterday promises that those who have committed
crimes, that is, genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes which threaten international peace and
security, will be brought to justice. As was stated by the
President and the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal, justice is an indispensable ingredient of the
process of national reconciliation and peace. If peace is to
take hold, justice must prevail. Turkey will continue to
stand by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their
march on the long and difficult road to reconciliation.
The President (interpretation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Turkey for his kind words addressed
to me.

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3607th meeting
15 December 1995

There are no further speakers on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of this matter.
The meeting rose at 9.25 p.m.

37
