S/2017/507

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 August 2017
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
In efforts to enhance the efficiency and transparency of the Council’s work, as
well as interaction and dialogue with non-Council members, the members of the
Security Council are committed to implementing the measures described in the
annex to the present note.
2.
The annex is intended to be a concise and user-friendly list of the recent
practices and newly agreed measures, which will serve as guidance for the Council’s
work. In this regard, some existing measures are recollected herein for the
convenience of users.
3.
The present note incorporates and further develops the not es by the President
of the Security Council of 26 July 2010 (S/2010/507), 5 June 2012 (S/2012/402),
12 December 2012 (S/2012/922), 17 December 2012 (S/2012/937), 28 August 2013
(S/2013/515), 28 October 2013 (S/2013/630), 14 April 2014 (S/2014/268), 5 June
2014 (S/2014/393), 4 August 2014 (S/2014/565), 15 October 2014 (S/2014/739 and
Corr.1), 18 December 2014 (S/2014/922), 10 December 2015 (S/2015/944),
22 February 2016 (S/2016/170) and 15 July 2016 (S/2016/619), by superseding
those notes.
4.
For issues not mentioned in the present note, working methods regarding
sanctions committees will continue to be governed by the working methods as
adopted by individual sanctions committees and the notes and statements by the
President of the Security Council listed in the note by the President of the Security
Council of 7 February 2006 (S/2006/78). For issues not mentioned in the present
note, working methods regarding interaction with troop - and police-contributing
countries will continue to be governed by Security Council resolution 1353 (2001)
and the statement by the President of the Security Council of 31 December 2015
(S/PRST/2015/26), as well as other relevant documents of the Council.
5.
The members of the Security Council will continue their consideration of the
Council’s documentation and other procedural questions in the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and other subsidiary
bodies of the Council. In this connection, the members of the Security Coun cil will,
through the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, continue reviewing and updating relevant notes by the President of the
Security Council, in particular the present note, including with a focus on
implementation, in accordance with the statement by the President of the Security
Council of 30 October 2015 (S/PRST/2015/19). The present note covers only the
work done by the above-mentioned Working Group.

17-13324 (E)

010917

*1713324*

S/2017/507

Annex
Contents
Page

I.

Programme of work and monthly forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

Meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

A.

Agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

B.

Matters of which the Council is seized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

C.

Format of meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

1.

Public meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2.

Private meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Delivery of statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

1.

Speaking order of Council members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

2.

Statements by non-Council members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

3.

Distribution of statements and meeting records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Conduct of open debates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

III.

Informal consultations of the whole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

IV.

Briefings in meetings and informal consultations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

V.

Reports of the Secretary-General and other communication with the Secretariat . . . . . . . . . . .

11

VI.

Intra-Council cooperation and consultation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

VII.

Outcome documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

VIII.

Consultations with troop- and police-contributing countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

IX.

Dialogue with non-Council members and bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

X.

Subsidiary bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

A.

Conduct of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

B.

Selection of Chairs of subsidiary bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

C.

Preparation of Chairs of subsidiary bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

XI.

Security Council missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

XII.

Annual report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

XIII.

Incoming elected members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

D.

E.

2/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

I. Programme of work and monthly forecast
Programme of work
1.
While ensuring the capacity to hold Council meetings at any time and at short
notice, in accordance with rules 1, 2 or 3 of its provisional rules of procedure, the
members of the Security Council, during their respective presidencies, should
ordinarily plan, with the support of the Secretariat, not more than four days per
week of Council business, with Fridays normally being reallocated to facilitate the
work of the Council’s subsidiary bodies.
2.
The members of the Security Council encourage the incoming presidencies to
discuss the provisional monthly programme of work with other members of the
Council well in advance of their respective presidencies.
3.
In order to increase the transparency of its work, the Security Council
reaffirms its commitment to increase recourse to open meetings, particularly at the
early stage in its consideration of a matter.
4.
The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Security
Council to hold an informal briefing on the programme of work open to all Member
States, after its adoption by the Council.
5.
The members of the Security Council agree that the President of the Security
Council should update the provisional monthly programme of work (calendar) and
make it available to the public through the Council website each time it is revised
and distributed to Council members, with appropriate indication of the revised
items.
6.
The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to notify Member
States of unscheduled or emergency meetings not only by email but also through the
Council website and by telephone as necessary.
7.
The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Security
Council to hold an informal briefing session with the wider membership on the
work of the Council at the end of its presidency, as appropriate. A formal wrap -up
session may also continue to be organized by the President of the Council when
appropriate and with the consent of all members of the Security Council.

Monthly forecast
8.
The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to publish a streamlined tentative monthly forecast of the programme of work on the
Council website as soon as it has been distributed to Council members.
9.
The forecast should be made available in all official languages “for
information only/not an official document”, and there should be a cover note which
reads:
This tentative forecast of the programme of work of the Security Council
has been prepared by the Secretariat for the President of the Council. The
forecast covers in particular those matters that may be taken up during the
month pursuant to earlier decisions of the Council. The fact that a matter is or
is not included in the forecast carries no implication that it will or will not be
taken up during the month: the actual programme of work will be determined
by developments and the views of members of the Council.

17-13324

3/23

S/2017/507

10. The members of the Security Council have agreed that the following reminder
should be placed in the Journal of the United Nations each month:
The monthly tentative forecast has been made available at the website of
the Security Council, in accordance with the note by the President of the
Security Council dated 30 August 2017 (S/2017/507). Copies of the tentative
forecast have also been placed in the delegations’ boxes and may be collected
at the delegations’ pick-up areas as of [date].

II. Meetings
A.

Agenda
11. The provisional agenda for formal meetings of the Council should be included
in the Journal of the United Nations provided that it has been approved in informal
consultations.
12. The members of the Council recall the desirability, whenever possible, of
using descriptive formulations of agenda items at the time of their initial adoption to
avoid having a number of separate agenda items on the same subject. When such a
descriptive formulation exists, consideration may be given to subsuming earlier
agenda items on the same subject under the descriptive formulation.

B.

Matters of which the Council is seized
13. Rule 11 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council provides
that the Secretary-General shall communicate each week to the representatives on
the Security Council a summary statement of matters of which the Security Council
is seized and of the stage reached in their consideration.
14. The practice of including an agenda item in the summary statement once it has
been adopted at a formal meeting of the Security Council will remain unchanged.
15. At the beginning of each year, the Security Council will review the summary
statement in order to determine if the Council has concluded its consideration of any
of the listed items, in particular those items that were considered for the first time
during the preceding year, and whether, consequently, such items should be deleted
from the statement. Further, except as herein provided, any item which has not been
considered by the Security Council at a formal meeting during the preceding three
calendar years will also be deleted.
16. The preliminary annual summary statement issued in January of each year by
the Secretary-General of matters of which the Council is seized will identify the
items to be deleted from the list. The first summary statement issued in March of
each year will reflect the deletion of those items, unless a State Member of the
United Nations notifies the President of the Security Council by the end of February
of that year that it requests an item to remain on the summary statement, in which
case such item will remain on the statement for one year, unless the Security
Council decides otherwise.
17. The deletion of an item does not imply that such an item cannot be taken up by
the Security Council as and when it deems necessary in the future.
18. The summary statement will be presented in the format of two sections, as
follows: one section comprising items which have been considered by the Security
Council at a formal meeting during the preceding three-year period, and another
section comprising items which have not been considered at a formal meeting

4/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

during the preceding three-year period but which the Security Council has decided
to retain at the request of a Member State.
19. The Security Council reconfirms that the first summary statement of each
month will contain a full, updated list of items of which the Security Council is
seized. For intervening weeks, a weekly addendum to the summary statement will
be issued listing only those items on which further action has been taken by the
Council during the previous week or indicating that there has been no c hange during
that period.
20. The Security Council reconfirms that references given for each item listed in
the summary statement will be the dates when the item was first taken up by the
Council at a formal meeting and the most recent formal meeting of the Council held
on that item.

C.

Format of meetings
21. In an effort further to advance the resolution of a matter under consideration,
the members of the Security Council agree to use a range of meeting options from
which they can select the one best suited to facilitate specific discussions.
Recognizing that the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council and
their own practice provide them with considerable flexibility in choosing how best
to structure their meetings, members of the Council agree that meetings of the
Council could be structured according to, but not limited to, the following formats:
1.

Public meetings

(a)

Functions
To take action and/or hold, inter alia, briefings and debates.

(b)

Presence and participation
The presence and participation of non-Council members in public
meetings should be in accordance with the provisional r ules of procedure. The
Council’s practice, as described below, is understood as being in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure, although it should not under any
circumstances be understood as replacing or substituting for the provisional
rules of procedure.
(i) Any Member of the United Nations that is not a member of the
Security Council may be present at its delegation’s designated seats in the
Council Chamber;
(ii) On a case-by-case basis, any Member of the United Nations that is
not a member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and other
persons may be invited to participate in the discussion, including for the
purpose of giving briefings to the Council, in accordance with rule 37 or 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

(c)

Descriptions in the provisional monthly programme of work
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to include the
following formats for public meetings in the provisional monthly programme
of work (calendar) when they plan to adopt, in general, the corresponding
procedures:

17-13324

5/23

S/2017/507

(i) “Open debate”: briefings may or may not be conducted, and
Council members may deliver statements; non-Council members may also be
invited to participate in the discussion upon their request;
(ii) “Debate”: briefings may be conducted, and Council members may
deliver statements; non-Council members that are directly concerned or
affected or have a special interest in the matter under consideration may be
invited to participate in the discussion upon their request;
(iii) “Briefing”: briefings are conducted, and Council members may
deliver statements following briefings;
(iv) “Adoption”: Council members may or may not deliver statements
before and/or after adopting, inter alia, resolutions a nd presidential statements;
non-Council members may or may not be invited to participate in the
discussion upon their request.
2.

Private meetings

(a)

Functions
To conduct discussion and/or take actions, for example, recommendation
regarding the appointment of the Secretary-General, without the attendance of
the public or the press.

(b)

Presence and participation
The presence and participation of non-Council members in private
meetings should be in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure. The
Council’s practice, as described below, is understood as being in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure, although it should not under any
circumstances be understood as replacing or substituting for the provisional
rules of procedure:
On a case-by-case basis, any Member of the United Nations which
is not a member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and
other persons may be invited to be present or to participate in the
discussion, including for the purpose of giving briefings to the Council,
in accordance with rule 37 or 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

(c)

Descriptions in the provisional monthly programme of work
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to include the
following formats for private meetings in the provisional monthly programme
of work (calendar) when they plan to adopt, in general, the corresponding
procedures:
(i) “Private meeting”: briefings or debates may be conducted, and
Council members may deliver statements; any Memb er of the United Nations
which is not a member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and
other persons may be invited to be present or to participate in the discussion,
upon their request, in accordance with rule 37 or 39 of the provisional r ules of
procedure;
(ii) “TCC meeting”: briefings may be conducted, and Council members
may deliver statements; parties described in resolution 1353 (2001) are invited
to participate in the discussion, in accordance with the resolution.

6/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

D.

Delivery of statements
22. The Security Council recalls its commitment to making more effective use, as
appropriate, of open meetings, and to this end encourages, as a general rule, all
participants, both members and non-members of the Council, in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less.
23. The Security Council encourages participants in Council meetings to express
agreement without repeating the same content, if they agree, in part or in whole,
with the content of a previous statement.

1.

Speaking order of Council members
24. The speaking order for meetings of the Security Council as a general practice
is established by a draw. In certain cases, the speaking order is established by the
use of a sign-up sheet.
25. The President of the Security Council as a general practice makes his or her
national statement last of all Council members. In certain cases, he or she may make
a single statement comprising introductory remarks and his or her national statement
before the other members take the floor. The President is encouraged to inform the
other members in advance of his or her wish to do so in order to ensure that there
are no objections.
26. In certain cases, the President of the Security Council may adjust the list of
speakers and inscribe first the delegation(s) responsible for the drafting process in
order to allow it or them to make an introductory or explanatory presentation. In
cases when an unscheduled or emergency meeting is convened, the President may
also adjust the list so that the delegation having requested the meeting can speak
before the other Council members in order to present the reasons for convening the
meeting.
27. The President of the Security Council may inscribe first the Chairs of the
subsidiary bodies of the Council when presenting to the Council their work or
reporting on outstanding issues within their mandate.
28. The members of the Security Council can trade slots in the list of speakers. It
is recommended that delegations involved inform the Secretariat as to what was
agreed. The members of the Security Council are encouraged to inform the
Secretariat of such changes as soon as possible, especially if the meeting has
already started, in order to allow the interpreters to be ready to interpret from the
language which will be used.
29. When high-level officials are representing Security Council members at a
meeting, the list of speakers will be entitled “The list of speakers, after the draw and
adjusted for protocol”. For each category of high-level officials, the speakers will be
listed within that category according to the order of the draw. The speakers within
each category will speak after those in a category of higher -level officials and
before those in a category of lower-level officials. If, after the list of speakers has
been circulated, there is a change in the level of a delegation’s representative, that
representative’s speaking order will be readjusted according to protocol and his or
her place within categories of same-level officials will be determined according to
the order of the original draw.
30. The permanent representative of a Security Council member who also holds a
post at the Cabinet or ministerial level within his or her Government will speak by
order of the draw, without adjustment for protocol.

17-13324

7/23

S/2017/507

31. For meetings announced as high-level in advance, where higher-level officials
are representing other Security Council members, a permanent representative
serving at the Cabinet or ministerial level may request an adjustment by protocol of
his or her place on the list of speakers. The delegation concerned is encouraged to
inform the Secretariat and the other Council members in advance of its request to
have that representative’s speaking order adjusted by protocol. After being informed
of such a request, the Secretariat will add, beside the name of the representative on
the list of speakers, that he or she is speaking as a member of his or her Cabinet.
When a permanent representative at the Cabinet or ministerial level has spoken in
that capacity at a formal meeting, it will be noted in appendix II to the annual report
of the Council.
32. For meetings not announced as high-level in advance, visiting higher-level
officials may be accorded a speaking slot before permanent representatives as a
matter of courtesy where there is no objection by members of the Security Council.
2.

Statements by non-Council members
33. The Security Council agrees that, when non-members are invited to speak to
the Security Council, those who have a direct interest in the outcome of the matter
under consideration may speak prior to Council members, if appropriate.
34. When non-members of the Security Council are invited to speak at its
meetings, they will be seated at the Council table on alternate sides of the President,
the first speaker being seated on the President’s right.

3.

Distribution of statements and meeting records
35. Texts of statements made at the meetings of the Security Council will, at the
request of the delegation making the statement, be distributed by the Secretariat
inside the Council Chamber to Council members and other Member States and
permanent observers to the United Nations present at the meeting. A delegation
requesting the distribution of its statement is encouraged to provide a sufficient
number of copies (200) to the Secretariat in advance of the statement. When a
delegation does not provide to the Secretariat a sufficient number of copies of its
statement, those copies will be placed outside the Council Chamber at the end of the
meeting. Delegations are requested not to make statements otherwise available
during the meeting.
36. The members of the Security Council recognize that the texts of the statements
made at the meetings of the Council can be a useful additional tool for the
preparation of the verbatim records of the Council and therefore encourage
members and non-members of the Council to provide those texts to the Secretariat
when delegations are not able, or choose not, to provide the number of copies
referred to in paragraph 35 above.
37. The members of the Security Council encourage members and non-members
of the Council to contact the Verbatim Reporting Service of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management (verbatimrecords@un.org) in cases
where, with a view to ensuring the accuracy of the official records of the Council,
corrections or adjustments in the verbatim records reflecting their own statements
are needed either in the official language used by each delegation or in any other of
the official languages of the United Nations.

8/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

E.

Conduct of open debates
38. It is the understanding of the members of the Security Council that open
debates can benefit from the contributions of both Council members and the wider
membership.
39. With this in mind, the date of the open debate should be announced with
sufficient time to allow for adequate preparation by all participants.
40. The members of the Security Council acknowledge the usefulness of concept
notes to help focus discussion during an open debate, and encourage the early
elaboration of such notes.
41. All participants speaking in an open debate, including members of the Security
Council, are encouraged to be succinct and focused in their interventions, which,
whenever possible, should not exceed five minutes, or any other time suggested by
the President at the start of the debate. If necessary, the text of a more detailed
statement may be circulated to Council members and participants.
42. The members of the Security Council may agree, by consensus on a case -bycase basis and when they consider it appropriate for certain open debates, to inv ite
non-members to alternate their interventions with those of Council members. In
such situations, those Council members who wish to do so will give up their slot on
the speakers’ list to non-members.
43. The Security Council expresses its commitment to continue to take steps to
improve the focus and interactivity of its open debates. In this regard, the Security
Council welcomes joint statements by both Security Council members and other
Member States.
44. Where appropriate for certain open debates, the adoption of an outcome might
occur at a date subsequent to that of the open debate in order to allow it to more
fully reflect, if the Security Council considers it appropriate, matters raised during
the debate.

III. Informal consultations of the whole
45. The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council,
with the assistance of the Secretariat, to actively promote additional appropriate
measures to increase interactivity and a more efficient use of time during informal
consultations of the whole.
46. The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to suggest, through consultations with interested members and/or the Secretariat, as
appropriate, a few areas for Council members and the Secretariat to focus on at the
Council’s next informal consultations, without the intention of prescribing the scope
of discussion, at least one day before the consultations are to be held.
47. The members of the Security Council plan to minimize, to the extent possible ,
the reading out of lengthy pre-prepared statements in informal consultations of the
whole. The members of the Security Council intend, where they agree with a
previous speaker, in part or in whole, to express that agreement without repeating
the same content.
48. The members of the Security Council agree that, as a general rule, the
President of the Council should adhere to the prescribed speakers’ list. The members
of the Security Council encourage the President to facilitate interaction by inviting

17-13324

9/23

S/2017/507

any participant in the consultations to speak at any time, irrespective of the order of
the prescribed speakers’ list, when the discussion requires it.
49. The members of the Security Council encourage speakers to direct their
questions not only to the Secretariat, but also to other members.
50. The members of the Security Council do not discourage each other from
taking the floor more than once, in the interest of making consultations more
interactive.
51. The members of the Security Council agree that when briefings are being
provided to the Council members by senior Secretariat officials, the number of staff
members accompanying those officials in the consultations should be kept to a strict
minimum. Unless otherwise decided, the Secretariat staff fro m offices other than
those of the designated briefer or from United Nations agencies will normally not be
invited to attend consultations. Unless otherwise decided, the Security Council
Affairs Division of the Department of Political Affairs will be respon sible for
keeping the Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General informed of
matters which may require its action.
52. The members of the Security Council encourage the use of practical measures
such as those mentioned in the present note, which would make it feasible,
whenever possible, to hold informal consultations on two issues at a three -hour
Council meeting, notably with regard to situations routinely on its agenda, thereby
promoting planning accuracy and overall efficiency in the Council’s work.
53. The members of the Security Council and the Secretariat should continue to
use the “Other matters” agenda item during informal consultations to raise issues of
concern. The members of the Security Council encourage each other to signal
intention to raise an issue under “Other matters”, along with the intended aim, to the
President of the Security Council and all Council members, at least one day before
the consultations, whenever possible.
54. In order to make consultations result-oriented as well as to increase the
transparency of the work of the Security Council while securing confidentiality, the
members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council to make
efforts, whenever appropriate, to suggest, at the end of consultation s, general lines
or elements to be used when providing briefings to the press.
55. The members of the Security Council agree that the President of the Council
or his or her designate should provide substantive and detailed briefings to Member
States in a timely manner. Such briefings should take place shortly after informal
consultations of the whole. The members of the Security Council encourage the
President of the Council to provide the attending Member States with copies of
statements that he or she makes to the media following the informal consultations, if
appropriate.

IV. Briefings in meetings and informal consultations
56. The members of the Security Council encourage briefers to be succinct and to
focus on key issues rather than reading out lengthy pre-prepared statements. At
public meetings and private meetings, they encourage each briefer to limit initial
remarks to 15 minutes, unless otherwise decided by the Council. In informal
consultations, they encourage each briefer who is not a member of the Council to
limit initial remarks to 10 minutes or, when informal consultations are preceded by
open briefings, to 5 minutes, unless otherwise decided by the Council.

10/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

57. As a general rule, the purpose of initial remarks or ad hoc briefings deliv ered
by members of the Secretariat is to supplement and update written reports of the
Secretary-General or to provide members of the Security Council with more specific
on-the-ground information on the most recent developments, which may not be
covered in the written report. The members of the Security Council encourage
members of the Secretariat to provide the latest information, as necessary, without
repeating the content of written reports already available to members of the Council.
58. The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to continue its
practice of circulating the briefing texts at briefings and, in particular, where their
statements contain extensive or complicated factual information, encourage briefers
to circulate written summaries of that information, whenever possible in advance, to
allow for a more focused discussion during informal consultations. The members of
the Security Council invite the Secretariat, as a general rule, to provide a printed
fact sheet, presentation materials and/or any other relevant reference materials,
whenever possible, to Council members on the day prior to the informal
consultations, when briefings in the Security Council consultations room are not
given on the basis of a written report.
59. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretariat to make the
briefings in informal consultations as efficient and user -friendly as possible,
including by using visual aids on the screen, as appropriate. The members of the
Security Council also encourage briefers to be succinct and direct in their response
to questions and/or comments by Council members. In cases where information or
clarification requested by Council members is not readily available during the
briefings in informal consultations, briefers may provide it at a later time.
60. The members of the Security Council intend to resort more often to the use of
video teleconferencing for briefing the Council, where appropriate, while preserving
a balanced approach between video teleconferencing and briefings in person,
including during open meetings in the open chamber.
61. The members of the Security Council intend to continue to consider requesting
the Secretariat to give an ad hoc briefing at Security Council meetings in cases in
which an emergent situation which justifies a briefing arises. The members of the
Security Council also intend to request the Secretariat to give ad hoc briefings at
informal consultations on a daily basis, if necessary, when a situation justifies such
briefings.

V. Reports of the Secretary-General and other communication
with the Secretariat
62. The members of the Security Council agree to consider setting a six -month
interval as the standard reporting period, unless the situation provides reason for
shorter or longer intervals. The members of the Security Council also agree to
define reporting intervals as clearly as possible when adopting resolutions. The
members of the Security Council further agree to request oral reporting, which does
not require submission of a written report, if the members of the Council consider
that it would serve the purpose satisfactorily, and to indicate that request as clearly
as possible.
63. The Security Council agrees to cooperate with other organs of the United
Nations in synchronizing reporting obligations of the Secretariat on the same
subject, if appropriate, while giving priority to the effective work of the Council.
64. The members of the Security Council agree that reports of the Secretary General should be circulated to Council members and made available in all official
17-13324

11/23

S/2017/507

languages of the United Nations at least four working days before the Council is
scheduled to consider them. The members of the Security Council also agree that
the same rule should apply to making such reports available to relevant participants
in Council meetings at which those reports are discussed, including the distribution
of the reports on peacekeeping missions to all participants in meetings of troop - and
police-contributing countries.
65. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretary-General to
make reports as concise as possible and give an ample cut-off time in order for the
reports to be issued in a timely manner.
66. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretary-General to
include a section in his or her reports where all recommendations are listed, whe n
presenting recommendations to the Council regarding the mandate of a United
Nations mission. They also encourage the Secretary-General to include, where
appropriate and possible, fact sheets, maps, statistics and charts in his or her reports
in order to make the reports as user-friendly as possible.
67. The members of the Security Council intend to request the Secretary -General
to include policy recommendations on long-term strategy in his or her reports, if
appropriate.
68. Reports of the Secretary-General will specify the date on which the document
is physically and electronically distributed in addition to the date of signature by the
Secretary-General.
69. The members of the Security Council request the Secretariat to update the
Council towards the end of each month on the progress in the preparation of the
reports of the Secretary-General to be issued the following month. The members of
the Security Council also request the Secretariat to communicate with the Council
immediately if it expects reports to be delayed beyond their deadlines or if reports
that have not been requested by the Council are expected to be issued.
70. The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to continue its
practice of circulating all press statements issued b y the Secretary-General or by the
Secretary-General’s spokesperson in connection with matters of concern to the
Security Council.
71. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretariat to ensure that
all information provided to Council members is transmitted electronically, including
by fax.
72. The members of the Security Council intend to make the best use of all
mechanisms available, as appropriate, to convey policy guidance to the Secretary General, including dialogue, letters from the President, adoption of resolutions or
presidential statements, or any other means deemed appropriate. The members of
the Security Council express general support for continuing the practice of holding
monthly “luncheons with the Secretary-General” in an informal setting to allow
interactive action-oriented exchanges.
73. The members of the Security Council, through the Secretary-General, invite
new Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to engage in dialogue with
members of the Council before assuming their duties under new mandates,
including in the field, in order to obtain Council members’ views on the objectives
and the mandates.

12/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

VI. Intra-Council cooperation and consultation
74. The members of the Security Council reaffirm that the work o f the Council is a
collective endeavour and responsibility, and that enhanced cooperation and
consultation among all Council members is vital for the efficient and transparent
functioning of the Council.
75. The members of the Security Council also reaffirm the importance of
continuing to improve intra-Council dialogue, communication and exchange of
information, especially in crisis or fast-evolving situations.
76. The members of the Security Council therefore agree to continue to enhance
dialogue among all Council members, in particular in crisis or fast-evolving
situations, so that the Council may respond more efficiently and therefore better
fulfil its responsibility of maintaining international peace and security.
77. The members of the Security Council, in this context, recognize the important
role of the President of the Security Council, including in facilitating communication
and exchange of information.

VII. Outcome documents
78. Without prejudice to the rights accorded by the Charter of the United Nations
and the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, the members of the
Security Council support, where appropriate, the informal arrangement whereby one
or more Council members (as “penholder(s)”) initiate and chair the informal
drafting process. This informal arrangement, where appropriate, aims to facilitate
timely initiatives to ensure Council action while preserving an element of
continuity, with a view to enhancing the efficiency of the Council’s work.
79. Any member of the Security Council may be a penholder. Members of the
Council are encouraged to act as the penholder(s) in the drafting of documents,
including resolutions, presidential statements and press statements of the Council.
More than one Council member may act as co-penholders, when it is deemed to add
value, taking into account as appropriate the expertise and/or contributions of
Council members on the subjects.
80. The members of the Security Council reaffirm that all members of the Security
Council should be allowed to participate fully in the preparation of, inter alia, the
resolutions, presidential statements and press statements of the Council. The
members of the Security Council also reaffirm that the drafting of all documents
such as resolutions and presidential statements as well as press statements should be
carried out in an inclusive manner that will allow participation of all members of the
Council.
81. To that end, the members of the Security Council encourage the penholder or
co-penholders, as early as possible in the drafting exercise, to ensure the exchange
of information among all Security Council members and to engage in timely
consultations with all Council members with openness and flexibility. For each draft
resolution which is not a technical rollover or for each presidential statement, the
members of the Security Council encourage the penholder or co -penholders to
present and discuss the draft with all members of the Security Council in at least
one round of informal consultations or informal -informals.
82. The members of the Security Council also encourage the penholder or
co-penholders, depending on the subject as well as the urgency of the situation on
the ground, to provide a reasonably sufficient time for consideration by all Council
17-13324

13/23

S/2017/507

members when draft resolutions, presidential statements and press statements of the
Council are placed under a silence procedure, recognizing that any Council member
may request extension of and/or break silence if further consideration is required.
83. The members of the Security Council intend to continue to informally consult
in an early manner with the broader United Nations membership, in particular
interested Member States, including countries directly involved or specifically
affected, neighbouring States and countries with particular contributions to make, as
well as with regional organizations and Groups of Friends, when drafting, inter alia,
resolutions, presidential statements and press statements, as appropriate.
84. The members of the Security Council agree to consider making draft
resolutions and presidential statements as well as other draft documents available as
appropriate to non-members of the Council as soon as such documents are
introduced within informal consultations of the whole, or earlie r, if so authorized by
the authors of the draft document.
85. The members of the Security Council agree that documents, including
resolutions, presidential statements and press statements of the Council, should be
focused, succinct and action-oriented, in principle. In this connection, each member
of the Council, including and in particular the penholder or co -penholders,
whenever possible, should make every effort in this direction.
86. Where appropriate, the members of the Council should ordinarily see k to
avoid the need for draft resolutions or other documents to be translated over the
weekend.
87. The President of the Security Council should, when so requested by the
Council members, and without prejudice to his or her responsibilities as President,
draw the attention of the representative(s) of the Member State(s), regional
organizations and arrangements concerned to relevant statements to the press made
by the President on behalf of Council members or decisions of the Council. The
Secretariat should also continue to bring to the knowledge of those concerned,
including non-State actors, through the relevant Special Representatives,
Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General and United Nations Resident
Coordinators, resolutions and presidential statements of the Security Council as well
as statements to the press made by the President of the Council on behalf of the
Council members, and ensure their promptest communication and widest possible
dissemination. The Secretariat should further issue, as United Nations press
releases, all written statements to the press made by the President of the Security
Council on behalf of Council members, upon clearance by the President.
88. The members of the Security Council intend to intensify their efforts to
publicize decisions and other relevant information of the Council to the Member
States and other organizations through correspondence, websites, outreach activities
and other means, when appropriate. The members of the Security Council intend to
continue to examine ways to enhance its activities in this regard.

VIII. Consultations with troop- and police-contributing countries
89. The members of the Security Council recall that consultations between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing countries should
enhance the ability of the Council to make appropriate, effective and timely
decisions in fulfilling its responsibilities.
90. The members of the Security Council reaffirm their commitment to making
full use of and improving existing consultation with troop- and police-contributing

14/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

countries with a view to ensuring the full consideration of the views and concerns of
troop- and police-contributing countries by the Council.
91. The members of the Security Council agree that the following measures,
which are complementary to those contained in its resolutions 1353 (2001) and 2086
(2013) as well as the statement by the President of the Security Council of
31 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/26), contribute to the aim of enhancing interaction
and consultation with troop- and police-contributing countries:
(a) Prior to the constitution of a peacekeeping operation, the Secretariat is
encouraged to make the broadest possible call for contributions to that operation.
Once potential contributors have been identified, the Secretariat will provide them
with all necessary information in order to facilitate their decision-making regarding
participation in the operation.
(b) The members of the Security Council underscore the importance of
consultations with relevant troop- and police-contributing countries, including at
their request, on urgent situations that affect their operations, particularly regarding
the safety and security of their personnel on the ground.
(c) The members of the Security Council also underscore the importance of
consultation with troop- and police-contributing countries in cases of transition
from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding operation, and on major changes in an
operation, such as withdrawal, scaling down of the size or termination, as well as in
cases of operational challenges or developments requiring mand ate adjustments.
(d) The members of the Security Council emphasize the importance of
consulting with troop- and police-contributing countries, including holding
meetings, preferably, one week before the Security Council considers mandate
renewals or modifications. The Secretariat will, pursuant to paragraph 64 above,
provide the relevant troop- and police-contributing countries with a copy of the
report of the Secretary-General with, as far as practicable, enough anticipation in
order to allow the preparation for and the timely holding of meetings with troopand police-contributing countries before discussion among Council members.
(e) In order to further encourage substantive discussions with troop - and
police-contributing countries, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1353
(2001), the members of the Security Council encourage the attendance of
appropriate military and political officers from each participating mission at
meetings with troop-contributing countries.
(f) The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the
Council to provide sufficient time for the meetings with troop - and policecontributing countries.
(g) The President of the Security Council will report to the Council on
consultations with troop- and police-contributing countries with a summary of the
meetings.
(h) The Security Council encourages its members to continue to hold and
further develop informal meetings in order to encourage more interactive and
focused consultations between Council members, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries, pursuant to the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 31 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/26).
(i) Recalling the functions of the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations in accordance with the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2002/56), the members of the Security Council welcome the
participation in the meetings of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations of
the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries and other major
17-13324

15/23

S/2017/507

stakeholders, including discussions on the proposed yearly workplan of the Working
Group, and encourage this practice in order to foster closer cooperation between the
Council and those actors. The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations will
continue to hold regular meetings with troop-contributing countries and policecontributing countries on relevant issues.

IX. Dialogue with non-Council members and bodies
92. The members of the Security Council intend to seek the views of Member
States that are parties to a conflict and/or other interested and affected parties. For
that purpose, the Security Council may, inter alia, utilize private meetings when
public meetings are not appropriate, in which case invitations are also to be
extended in accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure. The Security Council, when it deems appropriate, may also utilize
informal dialogues.
93. The Security Council underscores the importance of increased coordination,
cooperation and interaction among the principal organs of the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Econ omic and Social
Council and the Secretariat, as well as with other relevant bodies including the
Peacebuilding Commission, and regional organizations, including the African
Union, and reaffirms that the relationship between the principal organs of the Unit ed
Nations is mutually reinforcing and complementary, in accordance with and with
full respect for their respective functions, authority, powers and competencies as
enshrined in the Charter.
94. The members of the Security Council intend to continue to mai ntain regular
communication with the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
for better coordination among the principal organs of the United Nations. To that
end, the members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council to
continue holding meetings with the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council on a regular basis.
95. The members of the Security Council also acknowledge the importance of
maintaining communication with the Peacebuilding Commission as an
intergovernmental advisory body and express their intention to regularly request,
deliberate and draw upon its specific, strategic and targeted advice, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 1645 (2005) and 2282 (2016). The Chair of the
Commission and the Chairs of country-specific configurations of the Commission
will be invited, as appropriate, to participate in public Council meeting s. The
members of the Council encourage, in addition, informal exchanges with the Chair
of the Commission and the Chairs of the country-specific configurations, as
appropriate, through informal interactive dialogues.
96. In line with paragraph 170 (a) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) and Security Council resolution 1631 (2005), as well as
subsequent relevant documents, the me mbers of the Security Council agree to
continue to expand consultation and cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, including by inviting relevant organizations to participate in the
Council’s public and private meetings, when appropriate.
97. In this regard, the members of the Security Council acknowledge the
importance of annual joint consultative meetings and informal dialogues with the
members of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, to exchange
views on ways to strengthen cooperation and partnership, building on the progress

16/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

made. The dates, venues, agendas, modalities and outcomes will be determined
through consultations between the two Councils.
98. The members of the Security Council intend to utilize “Arria -formula”
meetings as a flexible and informal forum for enhancing their deliberations. To that
end, members of the Security Council may invite on an informal basis any Member
State, relevant organization or individual to participate in “Arria -formula” informal
meetings. The members of the Security Council agree to consider using such
meetings to enhance their contact with civil society and non -governmental
organizations, including local non-governmental organizations suggested by United
Nations field offices. The members of the Security Council encourage the
introduction of such measures as lengthening lead times, defining topics that
participants might address and permitting their participation by video
teleconference.
99. The members of the Security Council will consider ways and means of further
enhancing interaction with and seeking the views of non-Council members and
bodies, particularly the interested or concerned States, on issues on its agenda,
including by making more effective use, as appropriate, of public meetings,
informal interactive dialogues and “Arria-formula” meetings.
100. The members of the Security Council are committed to continuing to provide
opportunities to hear the views of the broader membership on the working methods
of the Council, including in any open debate on the implementation of the present
note, and to welcoming the continued participation by the broader membership in
such debates. The Security Council expresses its intent to continue to hold an annual
open debate on its working methods and affirms its commitment to continue to keep
its working methods under consideration in the regular work of the Council, with a
view to ensuring their effective and consistent implementation, in accordance with
the statement by the President of the Security Council of 30 October 2015
(S/PRST/2015/19).

X. Subsidiary bodies
A.

Conduct of work
101. The members of the Security Council encourage the Chairs of all subsidiary
bodies to continue to report to the Council on any outstanding issues, when
necessary and in any event on a regular basis, in order to receive strategic guidance
from the Council. The members of the Security Council also encourage all the
Chairs to continue to brief the Council, including on relevant reports, at open
meetings of the Council, as appropriate.
102. The Security Council encourages its members to promote greater coordina tion
between the Council as a whole and its subsidiary bodies, when considering
thematic or country-specific situations.
103. The members of the Security Council request the Secretariat to make the
schedules of all meetings and provisional agendas of the subsidiary bodies of the
Council available to the public, through their websites and the Journal of the United
Nations.
104. The members of the Security Council encourage Chairs of all subsidiary
bodies of the Council, as appropriate, to provide an agreed brief summary of
relevant meetings of the subsidiary bodies of the Council to non -members of the
Council, including through press releases.

17-13324

17/23

S/2017/507

105. The members of the Security Council encourage Chairs of all subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council or their designates to give, on a regular basis,
informal substantive interactive briefings, when appropriate, on their activities to
non-Council members, recognizing that doing so can add value to the work of those
bodies. The members of the Security Council agree that the time and place of such
briefings should be published in the Journal of the United Nations. The members of
the Security Council encourage Chairs of all subsidiary bodies to consider any other
opportunities for non-Council members to provide input to their work.
106. The members of the Security Council encourage subsidiary bodies of the
Council to seek the views of Member States with strong interest in their areas of
work. The members of the Security Council in particular encourage sanctions
committees to seek the views of Member States that are particularly affected or
concerned by the sanctions and to foster early and periodic engagement and
dialogue between them and relevant sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels
throughout the course of their mandate.
107. The members of the Security Council encourage Chairs of all subsidiary
bodies to continue to travel periodically to regions applicable to their work to seek
the views of and engage with affected or concerned States and explain and promot e
the objectives of the subsidiary body’s mandate.
108. The members of the Security Council encourage all Chairs, including those
chairing subsidiary bodies with similar themes and geographical scope, to meet
regularly to discuss common concerns, best practices and ways to improve mutual
cooperation, and request the Secretariat to provide support for such meetings.
109. The members of the Security Council intend to intensify their efforts to
publicize decisions and other relevant information of the subsidiary bodies of the
Council to the Member States and other organizations through correspondence,
websites, outreach activities and other means, when appropriate. The members of
the Security Council intend to continue to examine ways to enhance its activities in
this regard. The members of the Security Council encourage subsidiary bodies of
the Council to continue to review periodically policies concerning access to their
documents, as appropriate.
110. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretar iat to provide
administrative and substantive support to the subsidiary bodies of the Council. The
members of the Security Council encourage the Secretariat to maintain the
translation of all United Nations sanctions lists into all official languages of th e
United Nations. The members of the Security Council also encourage the Secretariat
to continue to ensure that the information on the websites of the subsidiary bodies
of the Council is accurate and updated in all official languages of the United
Nations, including the reports of sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels.

B.

Selection of Chairs of subsidiary bodies
111. The members of the Security Council should make every effort to agree
provisionally on the appointment of the Chairs of the subsi diary bodies for the
following year no later than 1 October.
112. To that end, the members of the Security Council will start an informal process
of consultations, with the participation of all Council members, on the appointment
of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies from among the members of the Council for
the following year as soon as possible after each election of members of the
Council. The members of the Council should also consult informally with the newly
elected members in the process.

18/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

113. This informal process of consultations will be undertaken in a balanced,
transparent, efficient and inclusive way so as to facilitate an exchange of
information related to the work of the subsidiary bodies involved and will be
facilitated jointly by two members of the Security Council working in full
cooperation.
114. All members and newly elected members of the Security Council should be
informed of the outcome of the informal process of consultations on the
appointment of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies in a transparent and substantive
way prior to the provisional agreement on the appointment.

C.

Preparation of Chairs of subsidiary bodies
115. The Chairs of the subsidiary bodies are encouraged, with the assistance of the
Secretariat as required, to provide those members of the Council that will take over
the chairmanships with written and oral briefings about the work done during the
outgoing chairmanship and to maintain informal meetings with the incoming Chairs,
as necessary, including with the assistance of the Secretariat.
116. The briefings will be accompanied by documents adopted during the outgoing
chairmanship and all informal documents and background information the outgoing
Chair deems pertinent for enlightening the incoming Chair, including draft
documents being discussed by the subsidiary body. Taking into account that such
documents and information might not have been made public, they will be provided
to the members that will take over the chairmanships as soon as possible after the
chairmanships have been provisionally decided.
117. The members of the Security Council acknowledge the support given to
incoming Chairs by the Secretariat and request the Secretariat to consider further
measures to provide incoming Chairs and their staffs with additional substantive and
methodological briefings on the work of relevant subsidiary bodies.
118. The members of the Security Council encourage early consultations between
sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels and incoming Chairs of the sanctio ns
committees.

XI. Security Council missions
119. The members of the Security Council underline the value of Security Council
missions for understanding, assessing and preventing escalation of particular
conflicts or situations on the agenda of the Council. Security Council missions
should be planned as early as practicable with the members of the Security Council
that will be participating in the mission in a transparent, efficient and inclusive
manner. Members of the Security Council will designate a member or members to
coordinate a particular Security Council mission.
120. As soon as the members of the Security Council agree to conduct a particular
mission, the President of the Security Council will continue to inform the Secretary General of that decision with the intended destinations and dates, in order to request
the support of the Secretariat in making all the necessary arrangements to facilitate
the mission.
121. The designated member or members will draft terms of reference for the
mission as early as possible in consultation with Security Council members and the
Secretariat. The terms of reference should outline the dates of the mission, its

17-13324

19/23

S/2017/507

purpose, the proposed agenda and the composition of the mission. The terms of
reference should be issued as a Security Council document.
122. With a view to enhancing synergy and maximizing impact, the members of the
Security Council agree to consider joint missions of the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union to conflict situations in Africa. The
modalities of joint missions will be discussed and agreed on a case -by-case basis by
the two Councils.
123. The members of the Security Council encourage Security Council missions to
have a focused itinerary with a schedule of meetings which would allow meaningful
exchanges at each meeting. The members of the Security Council encourage
Security Council missions to continue to avoid restricting their meetings to those
with governmental interlocutors and interlocutors of conflict par ties and to hold, as
appropriate, meetings with local civil society leaders, non -governmental
organizations and other interested parties.
124. The members of the Security Council agree that Security Council missions
should be followed up as appropriate. Upon the return of the mission, the designated
member or members should brief the Security Council on the mission, as early as
possible and preferably within one month after the return of the mission, orally
and/or with a written report which should be issued as a document of the Security
Council.

XII. Annual report
125. The Security Council will take the necessary action to ensure the timely
submission of its report to the General Assembly in accordance with Article 24,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations.
126. The Security Council will continue with the existing practice whereby the
annual report is submitted to the General Assembly in a single volume. The period
of coverage for the reports shall be from 1 January to 31 December for all reports to
be presented to the General Assembly at and after its sevent y-second session.
127. The report shall consist of an introduction, containing an agreed concise
summary prepared on behalf of the Council under the coordination of the President
of the Council for the month of July. In the case of the presidency for the m onth of
July ending its tenure on the Council that year, the task of coordinating the
introduction of the report shall then devolve on the member of the Council next in
English alphabetical order and who will not be leaving the Security Council that
calendar year.
128. The introduction, which should not exceed 10,000 words, may contain, inter
alia, a brief description of the key activities and trends, and the nature of decisions
taken by the Security Council during the period covered by the report.
129. While drafting the introduction to the report, the member of the Council
preparing the introduction is encouraged to consult for reference the monthly
assessments described in paragraph 136 below, and may, when necessary, seek
advice from other members of the Council. It may also consider organizing, where
appropriate, interactive informal exchanges of views with the wider membership.
130. The introduction to the report should continue to be approved by all members
of the Council who served on the Council during the reporting period. The
introduction shall be completed no later than 31 January so as to allow the
Secretariat enough time for translation.

20/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

131. The remainder of the report shall be prepared by the Secretariat and shall be
approved by all current members of the Council and the immediate past elected
members who served on the Council during the reporting period covered, and shall
contain the following parts:
(a) Part I shall contain a brief statistical description of the key activities
relating to all questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security during the period covered by
the report, including a list of each of the following, with document symbols, as
appropriate:
(i) All decisions, resolutions, presidential
communiqués adopted by the Security Council;

statements

and

official

(ii) Meetings of the Security Council, including with troop - and policecontributing countries;
(iii) Meetings of subsidiary bodies, including counter-terrorism committees,
sanctions committees and working groups;
(iv) Reports of panels and monitoring mechanisms;
(v)

Reports of Security Council missions undertaken;

(vi) Peacekeeping operations established, functioning or terminated;
(vii) Assistance missions and offices established, functioning or terminated;
(viii) Reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council;
(ix) References to the summary statements by the Secretary-General of
matters of which the Security Council was seized for the period covered by the
report;
(x) Notes by the President of the Security Council and other documents
issued by the Security Council for the further improvement of the work of the
Council;
(xi) Assessment reports issued by the individual monthly presidencies of the
Council on its work;
(b) Part II shall contain information relating to each question considered by
the Security Council during the reporting period, in at least one formal meeting,
under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security:
(i)

Factual data on the number of meetings and informal consultations;

(ii) A notice of all decisions, resolutions, presidential statements, and draft
resolutions considered by the Council at its meetings but not a dopted;
(iii) A list of the peacekeeping operations and assistance missions and offices
established, functioning or terminated, as appropriate;
(iv) A list of the relevant panels and monitoring mechanisms and their
reports, as appropriate;
(v) A list of the reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the Security
Council;
(vi) A list of the Security Council missions undertaken and their reports, as
appropriate;
(vii) All communications issued by the Council or transmitted to the Council
in connection with each agenda item considered;

17-13324

21/23

S/2017/507

(c) Part III shall contain an account of the other matters considered by the
Security Council;
(d) Part IV shall contain an account of the work of the Military Staff
Committee;
(e) Part V shall cover matters that were brought to the attention of the
Council but not discussed at the meetings of the Council during the reporting
period;
(f) The members of the Security Council acknowledge that the work of the
Security Council subsidiary bodies is an inseparable part of th e Council’s work.
Part VI of the report shall therefore contain information pertaining to the work of
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, including counter -terrorism committees,
sanctions committees, working groups, and international tribunals estab lished by the
Security Council, as appropriate. This information shall be presented by means of
references and hyperlinks to the separate annual reports of the subsidiary bodies of
the Council.
132. The Secretariat should submit the draft report to the members of the Council
no later than 15 March, immediately following the period covered by the report, so
that it may be discussed and thereafter adopted by the Council in time for
consideration by the General Assembly in the spring of that calendar year.
133. The Secretariat should, subject to regular review, in a timely manner and in all
the official United Nations languages, prepare and post on the United Nations
website information related to the Security Council activities that could have been
contained in annexes to the annual report, including:
(a) Activities and items relating to each question considered by the Security
Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security;
(b) Information about the work of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
including counter-terrorism committees, sanctions committees, working groups and
international tribunals established by the Security Council, as appropriate;
(c) Other information on activities relating to all questions considered by the
Security Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
134. The report will continue to be adopted at a public meeting of the Security
Council, at which members of the Council who wish to do so may comment on the
work of the Council for the period covered by the report. The President of the
Council for the month in which the report is presented to the General Assembly will
also make reference to the verbatim record of the Council’s discussion pri or to its
adoption of the annual report.
135. The Secretariat should post the current annual report of the Security Council
on the United Nations website. The relevant web page should be updated to provide
the information as necessitated under future notes issued by the President of the
Security Council with respect to the annual report.
136. The members of the Security Council recognize the value of a monthly
assessment of each presidency in providing as much information as possible on the
main aspects of the work of the Council during that month, which can be useful in
the preparation of the annual report. Each presidency is encouraged to prepare its
monthly assessment soon after the end of the presidency in a timely manner and to
include a concise summary in its monthly assessment.

22/23

17-13324

S/2017/507

137. If appropriate, the President of the Security Council will continue the practice
of not scheduling meetings or informal consultations of the Council on the first day
of the debate on the report in the General Assembly.
138. The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Security
Council in charge of the presentation of the report to the General Assembly to report
to Council members on relevant suggestions and observations raised during the
General Assembly debate on the annual report.
139. The members of the Security Council encourage continuing efforts to ensure
the inclusion in the annual report of more substantive information on the Council’s
work. The Secretariat is encouraged to advise, at least onc e a year, the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions on the
preparation of the draft annual report, including ways to improve its structure in a
cost-efficient way and to take into account the publication of relevant informa tion
on the United Nations website. The members of the Security Council will continue
their consideration of other suggestions concerning improvements to the annual
report and related activities.

XIII. Incoming elected members
140. The Security Council invites the newly elected members of the Council to
observe all meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies and the informal
consultations of the whole for a period of three months, as from 1 October
immediately preceding their term of membership. The Council also invites the
Secretariat to provide all relevant communications of the Council to the newly
elected members during the above-mentioned period.
141. Notwithstanding the foregoing measure, the Security Council will not invite
the newly elected members to a specific private meeting of the Council or to
specific informal consultations of the whole if a request to that effect is made by a
member of the Council where exceptional circumstances exist. The newly elected
members will not be invited to the meetings of the Council or the informal
consultations of the whole related to the selection and appointment of the Secretary General. The newly elected members may be invited to the monthly luncheon with
the Secretary-General held in December immediately preceding their term of
membership, at the discretion of the President of the Council for that month.
142. The Security Council invites the Secretariat to continue to take appropriate
measures to familiarize the newly elected members with the work of the Council
and its subsidiary bodies, including by providing briefing materials and holding
seminars before they begin to attend Council meetings.

17-13324

23/23
