A /71/PV.65

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

65th plenary meeting

Monday, 19 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 26, 27, 60, 63 to 68, 106, 107, 121 and 135.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Ms. Cécile Mballa Eyenga of Cameroon, to introduce in
one intervention the reports of the Committee.
Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon), Rapporteur of
the Third Committee (spoke in French): It is a great
privilege for me to introduce to the General Assembly
the reports of the Third Committee, submitted under
agenda items allocated to it by the General Assembly,
namely, items 26, 27, 60, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 106, 107,
121 and 135.
The reports, contained in documents A/71/476 to
A/71/488, include the texts of draft resolutions and
decisions recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption. For the convenience of delegations, the
Secretariat has issued document A/C.3/71/INF/1,
which contains a checklist of actions taken on the draft
proposals contained in the reports before the Assembly.
Under agenda item 26, including sub-items (a) and
(b), entitled “Social development”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 27 of document A/71/476,
the adoption of five draft resolutions, and, in paragraph
28, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 27, entitled “Advancement
of women”, the Third Committee recommends, in

paragraph 34 of document A/71/477, the adoption of four
draft resolutions, and, in paragraph 35, the adoption of
one draft decision.
Under agenda item 60, entitled “Report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions
relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
and humanitarian questions”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 14 of document A/71/478,
the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 63, entitled “Report of the Human
Rights Council”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 17 of document A/71/479, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 64, entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 29 of document
A/71/480, the adoption of three draft resolutions, and,
in paragraph 30, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 65, entitled “Rights of indigenous
peoples”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 12 of document A/71/481, the adoption of
one draft resolution, and, in paragraph 13, the adoption
of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 66, entitled “Elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 24 of document A/71/482, the adoption
of three draft resolutions, and, in paragraph 25, the
adoption of one draft decision.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44795 (E)

*1644795*

A/71/PV.65

19/12/2016

Under agenda item 67, entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 22 of document A/71/483, the adoption of
three draft resolutions.

Finally, under agenda item 135, entitled “Programme
planning”, the Third Committee wishes to advise the
Assembly, in document A/71/488, that no action was
required under the item.

Under agenda item 68, entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 5 of document A/71/484, the
adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 68 (a), entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights: Implementation of human
rights instruments”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 14 of document A/71/484/Add.1, the
adoption of one draft resolution.

I would like to thank my fellow Bureau members: the
Chair of the Committee and Permanent Representative
of Colombia Her Excellency Ms. María Mejía Vélez, and
Vice-Chairs Mr. Masni Eriza of Indonesia, Ms. Karina
Wegrzynowska of Poland and Mr. Andreas Glossner of
Germany, as well as the Secretary of the Committee,
Mr. Moncef Khane, and his very able team, whose
unwavering support and sound advice allowed for the
efficient management of the proceedings of the Third
Committee.

Under agenda item 68 (b), entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights: Human rights questions,
including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 137 of document A/71/484/Add.2, the
adoption of 16 draft resolutions.

Finally, I am grateful to all Third Committee
experts for their support to the Bureau and for their
friendship. I must also thank the Ambassadors and
Permanent Representatives, who, in spite of their many
duties, found the time to assist us in clearly articulating
delegations’ positions. Their presence helped our
deliberations to take shape.

Under agenda item 68 (c), entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights: Human rights situations
and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives”,
the Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 34
of document A/71/484/Add.3, the adoption of four
draft resolutions.

In conclusion, I would like to respectfully commend
the reports of the Third Committee before the plenary
of the General Assembly for its consideration.

Under agenda item 68 (d), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: Comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action”, the Third
Committee wishes to advise the Assembly that no
action was required under the item.

If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Third Committee
which are before the Assembly today.

Under agenda item 106, entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 24 of document A/71/485,
the adoption of four draft resolutions, and, in paragraph
25, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 107, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 11 of document A/71/486, the adoption of
two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 121, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 5 of document
A/71/487, the adoption of one draft decision.
2/47

The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the
Third Committee.

It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Third
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee”.
16-44795

19/12/2016

May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified to the contrary in advance. This
means that where recorded votes were taken, we will
do the same. I should also hope that we will proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat,
entitled “List of proposals contained in the reports
of the Third Committee”, which has been circulated,
in English only, as document A/C.3/71/INF/1. This
note has been distributed desk-to-desk as a reference
guide for action on draft resolutions and decisions
recommended by the Committee in its reports.
In this connection, members will find in column
four of the note the symbols of the draft resolutions or
decisions of the Committee, with the corresponding
symbols of the reports for action in the plenary in
column two of the same note. For reports containing
multiple recommendations, the draft resolution or
decision number is contained in column three of
the note.
Furthermore, members are reminded that additional
sponsors are no longer accepted now that draft
resolutions and decisions have been adopted by the
Committee. Any clarification about sponsorship should
be addressed to the Secretary of the Committee. I
would also like to remind members that any corrections
to the voting intention of delegations after the voting
has concluded on a proposal should be made directly to
the Secretariat at the end of the meeting. I would seek
members’ cooperation in avoiding any interruptions to
our proceedings in this regard.
Agenda item 26
Social development
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/476)
The President: The Assembly now has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Third

A/71/PV.65

Committee in paragraph 27 of its report and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
28 of the same report.
We shall now take decisions on draft resolutions I
to V and on the draft decision, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Implementation of the
outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly.” The Third Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/162).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Follow-up to the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family and beyond”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/163).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
71/164).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Inclusive development for persons with disabilities”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 71/165).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Literacy for life: shaping future agendas”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 71/166).
The President: We shall now turn to paragraph 28
of the report to take action on the draft decision entitled
“Document considered by the General Assembly in
connection with the question of social development”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/530).

16-447953/47

A/71/PV.65

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 26?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 27
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/477)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 34 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 35 of the
same report.
I shall now call on those delegations wishing
to speak in explanation of vote before the voting on
the draft resolutions and draft decision under this
agenda item.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): My delegation takes
the floor, as it did in the Third Committee, on draft
resolution I, entitled “Trafficking in women and girls”,
contained in the report of the Third Committee under
agenda item 27. My delegation’s amendment is contained
in draft resolution A/71/L.30. It is a request to delete
the fifteenth preambular paragraph. We introduced the
draft amendment before the Third Committee, and we
would like to continue the process, in line with our firm
position and belief as concerns the following points.
First of all, singling out the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in the fifteenth preambular paragraph
portrays the International Criminal Court as the only
instrument that handles gender-related crimes, thus
ignoring the fact that there are other instruments
to dispense justice at the national, regional and
international levels. We firmly believe that portrayal
to be a far-fetched and untrue characterization. In fact,
the ICC has failed the cause of achieving international
criminal justice due to delays, inefficiency, corruption,
politicization and selectivity. It exercises its authority
exclusively over nationals of poor, underdeveloped and
developing nations, at the exclusion of others, and it
will continue to do so. That is a serious flaw inherent
in the Statute of the Court and, consequently, in its
applications thus far. That is why all those who have
been indicted by the Prosecutor of the ICC and all those
who have been tried by the Court so far are Africans,
without exception. That will continue to be the case as
long as this mockery of justice persists.
4/47

19/12/2016

Secondly, we feel that there are attempts to
globalize the International Criminal Court as an idea
under the Rome Statute and to consider the Court as a
legal reference to be imposed on everyone, even those
that are not party to the Rome Statute.
Thirdly, it is also worth mentioning that in the
14 years since its entry into force in July 2002, the
International Criminal Court has adjudicated only four
cases, each costing an astronomical sum of billions of
euros. How can such a body be singled out and claimed to
be the only means to achieving justice internationally?
Worse, as the ICC is politically manipulated, it has
no option but to exercise its jurisdiction over certain
categories of people — those belonging to developing
nations, as evidenced by the four cases it has adjudicated
thus far. All of them without exception involve cases
from Africa.
Fourthly, my delegation has a firm and clear position
towards the International Criminal Court that will not
change, and we will do all we can to not allow attempts
to politicize the nature of the Third Committee draft
resolution, or to complicate or undermine its objectives
and basic principles. We believe that attempts to
impose the Court as a legal reference are aimed only
at promoting and propagating the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, a controversial issue
even among its membership — which is, at the very
least, misplaced.
Finally, despite the importance and centrality of
the subject at hand, such a selective approach has left us
with no option other than to request the deletion of that
preambular paragraph from the draft resolution. We call
on Member States to vote in favour of the amendment
of deletion that we submitted.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I take the floor on
behalf of the European Union. As we made clear in
the Third Committee, we deeply regret that the Sudan
has submitted an amendment to remove the fifteenth
preambular paragraph, which has been included in the
text of this resolution since the fifty-ninth session. The
fifteenth preambular paragraph is a simple, factual
statement that merely acknowledges the inclusion
of gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
Nothing in the language of the fifteenth preambular
paragraph asks, suggests that or compels States to
interact or cooperate with the ICC. Numerous other
international legal instruments that do not enjoy
16-44795

19/12/2016

universal membership are referenced in the text. It is
therefore completely wrong to suggest that the ICC
is given special attention in the draft resolution. The
simple reference to the fact that gender-related crimes
are included in the Rome Statute is as relevant now
as it was during its initial adoption at the fifty-ninth
session. Indeed, earlier this year the ICC issued the first
judgment on sexual violence as a war crime and a crime
against humanity.
The European Union and its member States believe
that the fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes is critical to ensuring a fair and just society by
holding the perpetrators accountable and rendering
justice to the victims of such crimes. We also consider
peace and justice to be complementary rather than
mutually exclusive. We are strong supporters of the
International Criminal Court, which is a key institution
for assisting victims in achieving justice in the face of
the most serious crimes when it is not possible to do so
at the national level. All perpetrators of such crimes
must be held accountable for their actions.
A key element of the Rome Statute is its equal
application. In that respect, the creation of the ICC has
given millions of victims of atrocities new hope that
justice will be done. States from all over the world
have joined efforts to make that possible. It is for those
reasons that the 28 States members of the European
Union will vote against the amendment, and we call
on all other States — particularly States party to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court — to
do the same.
Ms. Nescher-Stuetzel (Liechtenstein): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of Australia, Canada, Iceland,
New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland and Liechtenstein.
The paragraph for which an amendment has been
submitted has been an element of the consensual
resolutions that the Committee has adopted on the topic
of human trafficking for a number of years now.
It simply acknowledges the fact that the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
negotiated by the entire membership at the diplomatic
conference in Rome in 1998, includes references to
gender-related crimes — an aspect of the Rome Statute
that was generally hailed as one of the most important
advances in the field of international criminal justice.
Given that the paragraph does not deal with the
practical work of the ICC or make any claims about its
performance, it is obvious that the vote is an attempt to

A/71/PV.65

undermine the established consensus in the Committee
on a topic of obvious high importance. We will therefore
vote against the amendment and hope that others will
join us in rejecting this destructive proposal.
Ms. Cantada (Philippines): My delegation will vote
against the amendment to draft resolution I, entitled
“Trafficking in women and girls”. The inclusion of
gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute emphasizes
the seriousness of such crimes, which disproportionately
target women and girls. Those crimes include rape,
sexual slavery and forced prostitution, forced pregnancy
and forced sterilization, or any other form of sexual
violence of comparable gravity.
Several of such gender-related crimes are viewed as
trafficking in persons by the Palermo Protocol, which
defines trafficking in persons, including the element of
exploitation, which states that exploitation shall include,
at the minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of
others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced
labour or services, slavery or practices similar to
slavery, servitude or the removal of organs.
In June, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
convicted and sentenced to 18 years in prison a military
commander, together with soldiers under his command,
who had committed mass murder, rape and pillaging.
It sends a strong message to the world that sexual and
gender-based crimes must not go unpunished. That
judgment reinforces our collective desire to eradicate
gender-related crimes committed against women
and girls.
The fifteenth preambular paragraph of the resolution
has remained unchanged since the fifty-seventh session,
in 2002. Its inclusion in the draft resolution is now more
important than ever. We are aware that membership
of the ICC is fluid, with some States parties to Rome
Statute withdrawing from it and other States acceding
to it. However, this paragraph does not require action
on the part of member States, whether State parties
to the Rome Statute or not. What we have before us
is a factual statement that simply acknowledges the
inclusion of gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. In that regard, my
delegation will vote against the amendment.
The President: We shall now proceed to take
decisions on draft resolutions I to IV and on the draft
decision, one by one.

16-447955/47

A/71/PV.65

We first turn to draft resolution I entitled
“Trafficking in women and girls”. In connection with
draft resolution I, the General Assembly has before it a
draft amendment circulated in document A/71/L.30. In
accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the
Assembly shall first take a decision on the proposed
draft amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, China,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Iraq, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Saudi Arabia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
6/47

19/12/2016

Abstaining:
Angola, Bahrain, Belize, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Ethiopia, Guyana, India, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kenya, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Sao Tome and Principe, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Swaziland, Togo,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia
The amendment contained in document A/71/L.30
was rejected by 23 votes to 115, with 29 abstentions.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General assembly to adopt draft resolution I?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/167).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female
genital mutilation”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/168).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Intensification of efforts to end obstetric fistula”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
71/169).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate all
forms of violence against women and girls: domestic
violence”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 71/170).
The President: We shall now turn to paragraph 35
of the report to take action on the draft decision entitled
“Documents considered by the General Assembly in
connection with the advancement of women”. May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/531).
16-44795

19/12/2016

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 27?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 60
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/478)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 14 of its report. We shall now take a
decision on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programmes of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/171).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”. The Third Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/172).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 71/173).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 60?
It was so decided.

A/71/PV.65

Agenda item 63 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council.
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/479)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 17 of its report.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Burkina Faso.
Mr. Tiare (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the Group
of African States to introduce a draft amendment
contained in document A/71/L.45.
The amendment submitted by the African Group
aims to defer consideration of resolution 32/2 of the
Human Rights Council of 30 June, entitled “Protection
against violence and discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity”, until the seventysecond session in order to to allow time for additional
consultations to take place to determine the basis
on which the mandate for special procedures will
be defined.
As the Assembly knows, this is not the first time
that the Group has proposed to defer consideration of a
resolution. Unfortunately, the African Group’s request
for more time for consultation and mutual understanding
of the concept was deliberately misinterpreted and
distorted in order to be presented as an infringement
of the mandate and authority of the Human Rights
Council. Far from it, the African Group had no such
idea in mind in proposing this amendment; rather, it
fully affirms that it is the duty of the Human Rights
Council to establish special procedures.
While the African Group affirms the authority
accorded to the Human Rights Council pursuant to its
founding resolution 60/251, it is equally important to
underscore the rights of the General Assembly enshrined
in the same resolution, which established the Council.
The resolution clearly established the Human Rights
Council as a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly;
hence the need for the Council to be held accountable
on an annual basis to the universal membership of the
General Assembly. This designation of the status of the
Council as a subsidiary body of General Assembly was
subsequently reaffirmed in paragraph 3 of resolution
65/281.

16-447957/47

A/71/PV.65

19/12/2016

Furthermore, Article 10 of the Charter of the United
Nations states that

that cultivate hostility among the Member States and
create acrimony within the United Nations system.

“the General Assembly may discuss any questions
or any matters within the scope of the present
Charter or relating to the powers and functions of
any organs provided for in the present Charter”.

The African Group’s amendment is limited to
proposing that Member States undertake further
consultations on this issue with a view to reaching
a common understanding on the concept of sexual
orientation and gender identity, given that international
law says nothing about this issue. Such an understanding
would eliminate all ambiguities concerning this mandate.
The African Group recalls that if the international
community wishes to achieve the necessary solidarity
and respect for all human rights, it must prevent double
standards. Let us respect the sovereign right of each
State Member of the Organization to take the decisions
that it considers relevant to its society.

Thus, it cannot be argued that the decision of the General
Assembly to consider the decision of a subsidiary body
is an attempt to question its mandate and authority.
The African Group therefore reiterates its decision to
submit this amendment on the basis of the principles of
international law, the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, and universally
recognized principles of respect for the independence
and sovereignty of Member States.
We have been told that the General Assembly has
never challenged a Human Rights Council resolution of
this nature and that the decision to do so now would set
a dangerous precedent. In response, we would say that
this perception clouds the real issue at stake, since the
facts do not support this affirmation. Indeed, in 2006,
the General Assembly, in resolution 61/178, decided to
defer consideration of the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples adopted by the
Human Rights Council in its resolution of 29 June
2006 in order to allow for further consultations. In
2013, the General Assembly adopted resolution 68/144,
postponing consideration of Human Rights Council
resolution 24/24, and took steps to establish a focal point
on reprisals. These decisions reflect the fact that the
General Assembly has exercised its authority to guide
the overall work of the Organization, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
The African Group is troubled by the fact that
the Independent Expert on Sexual Orientation and
Gender Identity, Mr. Vitit Muntarbhorn, has already
begun his work even before the General Assembly
could consider the establishment of his mandate
by defining a completely different mandate. At the
recent International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and
Intersex Association, held in Bangkok on 30 November,
he laid out his mandate with key objectives, such
as decriminalization, depathologization, cultural
inclusion and empathization. This clearly shows that
the mandate has already been violated without legal
basis by the Independent Expert to promote new rights
that are not internationally recognized, through actions
8/47

The United Nations is today respected throughout
the world because it has always believed in and
supported the principle of unity in diversity. Let us
not make decisions at this stage which will only divide
the Organization, since in truth these concepts are not
enshrined in an international human rights instrument.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that the members of
the African Group do not support any form of violence
or discrimination against any group of persons. We
support the universality of all human rights enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. In that respect, the
Group will vote in favour of this amendment and urges
all other delegations to do so to maintain respect for
the principles of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and universally recognized principles
of respect for the independence and sovereignty of all
Member States. What is at stake here is at the heart of
the foundation, the principles and the credibility of the
United Nations.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
delegations wishing to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting on the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I would like to make an
explanation of vote before the voting. It is my honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
The European Union and its member States are
deeply concerned by the fresh attempt of some States
Members of the United Nations to reopen the decision
of the Human Rights Council. Resolution 32/2, which
mandated an Independent Expert on Sexual Orientation
16-44795

19/12/2016

and Gender Identity, was adopted by a majority vote in
Geneva. All 47 members of the Human Rights Council
had the opportunity to put their views on record that
the creation of a special procedure lies firmly within
the competence of the Human Rights Council. Many
other mandate-holders have already been appointed on
the basis of voted resolutions.
We recognize that sexual orientation and gender
identity are a sensitive issue for a number of United
Nations Member States, but the European Union once
again would like to highlight that the Independent
Expert’s mandate is solely about equal protection from
violence and discrimination, which is a core principle
of the United Nations. We all accept the universality
of human rights. It is clearly set out in article 2 of the
United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, which
states that everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set out in the Declaration without any kind
of distinction. So why do we find ourselves once again
in a position in which some Member States are calling
into question the ability of the Human Rights Council
to take steps to uphold this fundamental principle?
Only last month, the Third Committee voted in
favour of an amendment submitted by a number of
Latin American countries to protect the mandate of
the Independent Expert. All Member States then had
the chance to set out their views and to exercise their
right to vote. In supporting this amendment, the Third
Committee voted to uphold the integrity of the United
Nations and the authority of the Human Rights Council
to appoint mandate-holders. The European Union and
its member States believe that if the General Assembly
votes to take a selective approach to considering which
Human Rights Council resolutions to support, to
block or to defer indefinitely, it would fundamentally
undermine the authority granted to the Council by the
General Assembly and have far-reaching implications
well beyond the mandate of the United Nations
Independent Expert on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity. This can only have negative implications for
the work of the Council and the United Nations as
a whole.
We therefore once again urge Member States to
respect the authority of the Human Rights Council and
to vote against the current amendment (A/71/L.45). It
is vital that the integrity of the Human Rights Council
remain intact and not be undermined by the General
Assembly in this way.

A/71/PV.65

Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States will vote against the draft amendment contained
in document A/71/L.45, introduced by the African
Group, to delay part of the report of the Human Rights
Council, and we strongly encourage other countries to
join us in rejecting the amendment. Representatives
have heard, and may hear more, so-called procedural
arguments made by other countries for adopting this
amendment. These arguments are unsubstantiated,
unjustified and unprecedented.
The Human Rights Council currently has 57
mandate-holders under special procedures — 43 on
thematic issues and 14 on countries or territories — yet
never before has the General Assembly sought to challenge
a special procedures mandate-holder after it has been
appointed and is fully functioning. The supporters
of the amendment say that they have concerns about
what they call the legal basis for the mandate for the
Independent Expert on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity. On the surface, raising concerns about one out
of the more than 100 resolutions adopted this year by
the Human Rights Council may not seem like such a
big deal, but for the General Assembly to seek to open
the Human Rights Council’s report over the contents of
a single resolution — a resolution creating a mandate
that is squarely within the Council’s authority — would
set a hugely problematic precedent.
In previous years, the purpose of this resolution has
been simply to take note of the Human Rights Council’s
annual report. Were the amendment to be adopted, it
would, going forward, be fair game for the General
Assembly to open up and relitigate resolutions that have
a long history of going into effect immediately. That
would undermine the authority, the independence and
the efficiency of the Human Rights Council.
In addition to setting this dangerous procedural
precedent, this amendment is deeply flawed on its
merits. The proponents of the amendment argue in their
explanatory note that their reason for seeking a delay
was that “there is no international agreement on the
definition of the concept of sexual orientation and gender
identity.” That is patently false. The issue of violence or
discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender
identity is well established and well understood. It has
been referred to in resolutions and statements adopted
by the Human Rights Council, the Security Council and
the General Assembly. It has been the focus of nearly
1,300 recommendations under the Universal Periodic
Review, leading to recommendations that have been

16-447959/47

A/71/PV.65

accepted by more than 100 Member States, including
several of the countries that proposed this amendment,
and it has been addressed repeatedly by various regional
bodies, including the Organization of American States,
the European Court of Human Rights and the African
Commission on Human Rights and Peoples’ Rights.
In reality, this amendment has little to do with
questions around the definition of sexual orientation
and gender identity. Instead, this amendment is rooted
in a real disagreement over whether people of a certain
sexual orientation and gender identity are, in fact,
entitled to equal rights, and it is being driven by a group
of Member States that believe it is acceptable to treat
people differently because of who they are or whom
they love.
For our part, the United States believes that
discriminating against people on the basis of their
sexual orientation and gender identity is no different
from discriminating against people for the colour of
their skin, their sex or their nationality. It is wrong.
Such discrimination goes against the very essence of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. This is not an issue of
the North trying to impose its values on the South; it is
an issue of respecting the dignity and human rights of
all people, everywhere. That is what we mean when we
say that lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
persons (LGBTI) rights are universal human rights.
The United States also believes that the resolution
creating the Independent Expert to address violence and
discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender
identity is well merited by the facts on the ground. Who
here today would argue that LGBTI people are treated
equally around the world or that they are not subject
to violence and discrimination? Nobody can argue
that on the basis of the facts. This is a world we live in
in which, according to a report issued in 2015 by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
“the overall picture remains one of continuing,
pervasive, violent abuse, harassment and
discrimination affecting LGBT and intersex
persons in all regions… often perpetrated with
impunity” (A/HRC/29/23, para. 76).
It is a world in which it is still considered acceptable
in certain places to throw people off of the rooftops
of buildings, or to prevent them from forming a local
organization, or to deny them a seat in a classroom
simply because of who they are or whom they love. In
10/47

19/12/2016

that world — in our world, the world of today — we have
every reason to want an independent expert to monitor
and seek to prevent violence and discrimination based
on sexual orientation and gender identity.
That includes addressing the issue right here in
the United States. For while LGBTI people no longer
have to hide whom they love in order to serve in our
nation’s military or our Foreign Service, people in
the United States can still be fired from a job because
of their sexual orientation, and an estimated four
in every 10 transgender people in America attempt
suicide — approximately 30 times the national average.
We, too, have seen our share of horrific violence against
LGBT people. As many here will remember, on 12 June
a gunman attacked innocent civilians at a nightclub in
Orlando, Florida, killing 49 innocent people. These
individuals were targeted simply because they were
LGBT people.
Let me close. One of the victims in that attack
was 32-year-old Christopher Leinonen, who, as a
teenager, was brave enough to have been the only
student to come out of the closet in his high school of
2,500 people. Christopher endured taunts, harassment
and even threats for telling people who he was and for
founding his school’s first gay-straight alliance. Tell
me, why would any Member State stand in the way
of trying to prevent violence like the attack at that
Orlando nightclub?
I would ask those who believe that people should
not be discriminated against or harassed or attacked or
killed for who they are and for who they love to please
join the United States in voting against this amendment.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): My delegation is delivering
this statement on behalf of Argentina, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Mexico, Uruguay and my own
country, Brazil.
On 21 November, the Third Committee adopted
an amendment introduced by our group of countries to
delete paragraph 2 of the draft resolution on the Human
Rights Council report, now contained in document
A/71/479. The amendment was formally submitted
immediately after the issuance of the draft resolution
and enjoyed broad cross-regional support through the
sponsorship of 59 countries and received 84 votes
in favour.
Through this vote, the Committee agreed that
defering the consideration of inaction on Human Rights
16-44795

19/12/2016

Council resolution 32/2 would severely jeopardize
the Human Rights Council’s ability to function and
undermine the authority granted to the Council by the
General Assembly. The establishment of the mandate of
the Independent Expert on Protection Against Violence
and Discrimination based on sexual orientation
and gender identity was fully within the mandate
and authority of the Human Rights Council and in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the Council,
as determined by General Assembly resolution 60/251
and Human Rights Council resolution 5/1.
The mandate seeks not to create new rights
or standards, but simply to address violence and
discrimination within the existing framework provided
by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
relevant rules of international human rights law. As
we have stated in the Third Committee, the General
Assembly should not reopen the Council’s annual report
on a selective basis with the purpose of deciding which
mandates should be confirmed or deferred. In effect,
this would open all Council resolutions to renegotiation
and has far-reaching implications well beyond the
specific resolution currently under consideration.
We believe that it is in the common interest of all
States to protect the integrity and effectiveness of the
human rights system, and for this reason our group
of countries has called for a vote on draft amendment
A/71/L.45, which was just introduced, and asks
delegations to vote against it.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): I would like to address
the action expected to be taken on the whole report
(A/71/53) of the Human Rights Council.
Last June marked two anniversaries, namely, the
tenth anniversary of the Human Rights Council and,
unfortunately, the tenth anniversary of the Council’s
bias against Israel. Although the Human Rights
Council is mandated to be guided by the principles
of impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity, and to
work in a constructive, unbiased and non-politicized
manner, unfortunately, when it comes to Israel, all of
those important principles suddenly disappear. There
is a special agenda item dedicated solely to Israel,
almost a third of all special sessions are devoted to the
topic of Israel and more than a third of all geographical
resolutions are about us. A Special Rapporteur, with a
biased indefinite mandate, as well as endless reports
all targeting Israel reflect the Council’s real attitude

A/71/PV.65

towards my country. It would seem that there were no
other challenges in the world.
That one-sided, biased approach reached new
heights during the Council’s thirty-first session, as
the Council adopted resolution 36/31, which de facto
calls for the boycott of Israel and the creation of a
database of companies and enterprises by the High
Commissioner — acts that remind us of dark times
in history. The request to create such a database, as
appears in resolution 36/31, falls outside of the purview
of the Human Rights Council and blatantly exceeds the
mandate of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
It is nothing other than an attempt by the Human
Rights Council to continue its one-sided policy against
Israel — this time by making efforts to implement
a boycott.
Israel condemns those efforts, and many Member
States share our concerns with regard to the creation of
such a database by the High Commissioner, and they
expressed their objection during the Council’s thirtyfirst session. Even the Secretary-General admitted,
last Friday, that there is a bias against Israel at the
United Nations:
“Decades of political manoeuvrings have created a
disproportionate volume of resolutions, reports and
conferences criticizing Israel.” (S/PV.7839, p. 4)
The Human Rights Council is one example of a
United Nations body displaying prejudice towards one
Member State, which severely damages the credibility
of the Council.
In conclusion, Israel will vote against the
amendment and against the adoption of the Human
Rights Council report.
Ms. Sage (New Zealand): I make this explanation of
vote before the voting on draft amendment A/71/L.45,
on behalf of Australia, Canada, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Norway, Switzerland and my own country, New
Zealand. Those seven Member States are strong
supporters of the Human Rights Council and actively
contribute to its work.
The draft amendment introduced today undermines
the mandate that we gave the Human Rights Council in
resolution 60/251 and reaffirmed in resolution 65/281.
According to those decisions, it is within the Council’s
competence to appoint and renew special procedures.
By interfering with that competence, by trying to undo
not only the creation of such a mandate but also the

16-4479511/47

A/71/PV.65

appointment of a mandate-holder, we not only question
the authority of the Council, we also jeopardize the
institutional balance of the entire human rights system
of the United Nations.
There is no basis for questioning the legal validity
of the mandate referred to in the draft amendment. The
validly adopted Human Rights Council resolution 32/2
was in full conformity with the mandate and procedure
of the Human Rights Council. The content of the mandate
is clear and unambiguous. An explicit, treaty-based
definition is not a requirement for a valid mandate and,
indeed, an independent expert or a Special Rapporteur
can help generate an understanding and international
agreement where there may be ambiguities. There are
over a dozen current mandates of the Human Rights
Council that may be considered to fall under such a
category, some of which were adopted by vote. The
adoption of those mandates was not reopened, and they
were not challenged on the basis that more time was
needed to fully elaborate the international legal basis.
We regret that the draft amendment has been
brought forward. It is inconsistent with and undermines
the Council’s mandates and the understanding reached
in the review reflected in resolution 65/281. We strongly
urge all delegations to vote against the draft amendment
before us so as to preserve the independence of the
Human Rights Council and the credibility of the human
rights system of the United Nations.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I align myself
with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
European Union. We will vote against draft amendment
A/71/L.45 because we have two grave concerns.
The first concern is of an institutional nature. In
the history of the United Nations, there is no precedent:
never before has there been an attempt to question
the appointment of a special mandate-holder who had
already assumed office, after a fully legitimate and
procedurally sound appointment by the Human Rights
Council. If the General Assembly allows for a selective
picking and choosing of decisions by the Human Rights
Council, we will effectively undercut the functioning,
the authority and the effectiveness of the Council, and
it will undermine the credibility of the United Nations
as a whole. That is in the interest of none of us.
Our second concern has to do with the topic of
the mandate. We understand the discomfort about the
terms “sexual orientation” and “gender identity” for
some of us, and we understand that it is a sensitive
12/47

19/12/2016

topic. Indeed, the topic used to be controversial in my
own country and, to some extent, it still is for some.
We therefore welcome all attempts at dialogue on the
issue in order to, at the very least, better understand
each other. However, no matter the comfort level, the
reality is that people around the world are being bullied,
jailed, beaten or killed for no other reason than which
gender they identify with the most or for whom they
happen to love. And that is what the mandate of the
independent expert is all about. That type of violence
and discrimination is an infringement of the rights
and freedoms that all people are entitled to pursuant
to article 2 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which prescribes them to everyone “without
distinction of any kind”. Those are the human rights
standards that we are all bound to uphold, as set forth
in the Declaration.
Let me also refer to the impressive statement of our
South African colleague during the voting in the Third
Committee on that issue. We strongly feel that there
are no valid legal objections to the appointment of an
independent expert, and that view was shared by the
Human Rights Council when it agreed on a mandate of
the independent expert. It was further confirmed by the
Third Committee last month.
In conclusion, in order to protect people from
discrimination and violence, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports the appointment of an independent
expert on protection against violence and discrimination
based on sexual orientation and gender identity.
Human rights apply to each and every individual. In
order for the United Nations to effectively protect all
human rights globally, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
strongly objects to challenging any legitimate decision
taken by the Human Rights Council in Geneva.
Mr. Thoms
the Chair.

(Germany),

Vice-President,

took

It is for those reasons that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands will vote against the draft amendment
before us, and we strongly encourage other States to
do the same.
Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): I take the floor
in explanation of vote before the voting in order to
reaffirm Thailand’s principled position as stated in the
Third Committee on the draft resolution on the report
of the Human Rights Council (HRC) in support of the
mandate of the independent expert on sexual orientation
and gender identity and a procedure for establishment,
16-44795

19/12/2016

which was conducted in accordance with the rules and
practices of the Human Rights Council.
Once again, while Thailand fully respects the
rights of Member States to exercise their prerogative
at the General Assembly on human rights issues, we do
not agree with deferring consideration of that mandate
to a later date, noting that the independent expert has
already been formally endorsed and has commenced
his work. We will therefore vote against the proposed
amendment and express our wish that the membership
will continue to engage in a constructive dialogue on the
issue, regardless of the outcome of the voting. Thailand
is confident that Mr. Vitit Muntarbhorn will carry out
his mandate in an objective and non-confrontational
manner, in line with the relevant HRC resolution.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland takes the floor
in order to explain why it will vote against draft
amendment A/71/L.45.
We align ourselves with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
Finland is deeply concerned about the renewed
attempt to reopen the decision of the Human Rights
Council to appoint an independent expert on protection
against violence and discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity. Council resolution 32/2,
which mandated the independent expert, was adopted
by a majority vote in Geneva. All 47 members of the
Human Rights Council had an opportunity to express
their views then, and the establishment of a special
procedure lies firmly within the competence of the
Council. Other mandate-holders have been appointed
on the basis of voted resolutions.
The reason that the mandate has been the
subject of such opposition is solely due to the
subject matter — protection against violence and
discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation
or gender identity. We would like to highlight that the
independent expert’s mandate is about equal protection
from violence and discrimination. The universality of
human rights is clearly set out in article 2 of the United
Nations Declaration of Human Rights, which states:
“Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms
set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of
any kind”.
Still, some States Members of the United Nations
are questioning the ability of the Human Rights
Council to take steps to uphold that fundamental

A/71/PV.65

principle. All Member States had a chance to express
their views and to exercise their right to vote during
the Third Committee voting last month, when the Third
Committee voted to uphold the integrity of the United
Nations and the authority of the Human Rights Council
to appoint mandate-holders.
The President returned to the Chair.
Finland believes that, if the General Assembly votes
selectively on which Human Rights Council resolutions
to support, to block or to defer indefinitely, it would
fundamentally undermine the authority granted to
the Council by the General Assembly and have farreaching implications, well beyond the mandate of the
independent expert on protection against violence and
discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender
identity. That can have only negative implications for
the work of the Council and the United Nations as a
whole. We therefore urge Member States to respect
the authority of the Human Rights Council and to
vote against the draft amendment. The integrity of the
Human Rights Council cannot be undermined by the
General Assembly in that way.
Ms. Charrier (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement made on behalf of
the European Union and would like, in its own capacity,
to emphasize once again the importance of maintaining
the institutional balance between the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council. That balance could be
jeopardized if the resolutions adopted by the Human
Rights Council could then in practice be contested
at the General Assembly. Council resolution 32/2
precisely defines the mandate of the independent expert
on protection against violence and discrimination based
on sexual orientation and gender identity.
The mandate of the independent expert, which
draft amendment A/71/L.45 seeks to reconsider, is
legally sound, as it is established in major human rights
documents. It is also procedurally sound. The Human
Rights Council must implement special procedures in
order to protect human rights. It is therefore essential
to preserve the authority and the very effectiveness of
the Human Rights Council — established to promote
and safeguard the human rights of all individuals,
without discrimination of any kind. Adopting the draft
amendment would upset the balance and weaken the
system set up to safeguard human rights for all.

16-4479513/47

A/71/PV.65

For those reasons, France will vote against draft
amendment A/71/L.45 and urges other Member States
to do the same.
The President: We will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. In connection with the draft resolution,
the General Assembly has before it a draft amendment
circulated in document A/71/L.45.
I now call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): The present statement, made
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, has been distributed desk-todesk and made available on the PaperSmart portal.
Under the terms of the paragraph of draft
amendment A/71/L.45, the General Assembly would
decide to defer consideration of, and action on, Human
Rights Council resolution 32/2, of 30 June 2016, on
protection against violence and discrimination based on
sexual orientation and gender identity, in order to allow
time for further consultations to determine the legal
basis upon which the mandate of the special procedure
established therein will be defined.
All financial implications emanating from the
resolutions and decisions contained in the annual report
of the Council are brought to the attention of the General
Assembly in the context of the annual report of the
Secretary-General on the revised estimates resulting
from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human
Rights Council, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 65/281.
The revised estimates report is currently under
consideration by the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly, which includes the resource requirements
arising from Human Rights Council resolution 32/2.
Should the draft resolution recommended by the
Committee be amended and then adopted, the resource
requirements arising from Human Rights Council
resolution 32/2 would be removed from the overall
resource requirements of the revised estimates report.
The President: In connection with the draft
resolution, the General Assembly has before it a draft
amendment circulated in document A/71/L.45. In
accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the
Assembly shall first take a decision on the proposed
draft amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
14/47

19/12/2016

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Namibia, Nauru, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Togo, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Armenia, Barbados, Bhutan, Dominica, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, India, Kazakhstan, Liberia,
Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Rwanda, Trinidad and Tobago
16-44795

19/12/2016

Draft amendment A/71/L.45 was rejected by 77
votes to 84, with 16 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Belize informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against;
the delegation of Honduras informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: We will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

A/71/PV.65

of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Myanmar,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Niger, Norway, Palau, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 106 votes to 2,
with 74 abstentions (resolution 71/174).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Belize informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against;
the delegation of Honduras informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
delegations that wish to speak in explanation of vote
after the voting.
Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I should like to make the
following general statement following the voting.

Against:
Belarus, Israel

As a sponsor, my delegation voted in favour
of resolution 71/174 as a whole, entitled “Report
of the Human Rights Council”, and its support is
unquestionable. However, my delegation would like
to draw the attention of delegations to the fact that
Eritrea has serious concerns about parts of the report,
particularly regarding country-specific resolutions
on Eritrea. The targeting of countries for extraneous
objectives under the guise of human rights protection
is unacceptable and, in that regard, my delegation
dissociates itself with the part of the report that
targets Eritrea.

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Iran (Islamic Republic

The Human Rights Council should exercise the
utmost caution and vigilance so as to not allow its
noble mandate to be abused at will. The practice of
double standards must be rejected, and we should
all abide by the principles of non-selectivity and the
non-politicization of human rights. Eritrea shall remain
committed to cooperation and constructive dialogue in
the promotion and protection of human rights.

16-4479515/47

A/71/PV.65

Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland has been a
staunch supporter of the Human Rights Council (HRC)
since its establishment. After a decade of activity, the
Council has clearly proved its crucial role as the United
Nations body exclusively devoted to the promotion and
protection of human rights. Apart from many important
areas of the Council’s mandated responsibilities, one
of its major tasks is to bring a wide array of pressing
issues in the field of human rights to the attention of the
international community.
Poland was seriously concerned about the deferral
of Human Rights Council resolution 24/24, decided
by General Assembly resolution 68/144, on the 2013
report (A/68/53) of the Human Rights Council. We
express even stronger regret that new steps in that
respect were initiated once again this year. In our
opinion, that practice is harmful to the human rights
protection system, as well as to the position of the
Human Rights Council.
At the same time, with regard to the independent
expert on protection against violence and discrimination
based on sexual orientation and gender identity, Poland
would like to stress the fact that it did not support
the establishment of that mandate, as our delegation
in Geneva did not join the list of sponsors of HRC
resolution 32/2. It is clear that Poland rejects any
attempt to discriminate against any person on any
grounds, including sexual orientation.
It is also clear that Poland staunchly opposes any
attempt to use violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual
or transgender persons. Moreover, we believe that the
creation of the mandate of the independent expert,
a decision that was not taken by consensus, will not
serve the cause of fighting discrimination, but rather
lead to the further polarization of positions within the
Human Rights Council. We believe that a mandate on
a topic that many delegations view as highly sensitive
should have been approached in a manner conducive
to the elaboration of a consensual outcome — which,
unfortunately, was not the case.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): In accordance with the
common position of the European Union, Croatia
stresses the importance of preserving the autonomy of
the Human Rights Council. Our vote should therefore
be viewed, first and foremost, as a matter of principle
on the institutional relationship between the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council — and not of
16/47

19/12/2016

substance, with regard to the arguments raised by the
African Group.
As a country that will start serving its term as a
member of the Human Rights Council in no less than
two weeks, Croatia will pay due attention to all of the
issues within the Council’s mandate, including the
work of the independent expert. In that sense, Croatia
firmly believes that sexual orientation should not be a
subject for criminal prosecution.
At the same time, Croatia firmly defends the right
of every State Member of the United Nations to define
marriage as a union between a man and a woman. As
a member of the Human Rights Council, Croatia will
insist that the scope of activities carried out by the
independent expert be based on international law and
internationally recognized human rights.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary strongly supports
the autonomy of the Human Rights Council and deems
it crucial to preserve the institutional balance between
it and the General Assembly. In line with all European
Union member States, Hungary voted against draft
amendment A/71/L.45, presented by the African
Group, on the basis of that principled approach. As a
future member of the Human Rights Council, starting
1 January 2017, Hungary will follow closely and deal
with all issues within the Council’s mandate and
competence, including the work of human rights special
procedures and mandate-holders.
Hungary strongly rejects all forms of discrimination
and violence based on any grounds or status, including
sexual orientation and gender identity. At the same
time, Hungary reserves its sovereign right to define
the personal scope and content of family relations and
marriage in accordance with its national legislation. In
that context, Hungary will be mindful in the Human
Rights Council that the mandate and activities carried
out by the independent expert observe international law
and internationally recognized human rights standards.
Mrs. Duncan Villalobos (Costa Rica) (spoke
in Spanish): Costa Rica would like to express its full
support for the work of the Human Rights Council,
its resolutions and its recommendations. As a country
committed to human rights and to the Organization’s
mechanisms to promote and safeguard them, we believe
it is crucial to safeguard the work and decisions of the
Council pursuant to the decisions of its membership, as
elected by the Assembly.
16-44795

19/12/2016

My country’s traditional position is that the report
of the Council, a central body of the Organization on
the issue of human rights, should be considered in the
plenary of the General Assembly, rather than in the
Third Committee. That position is in keeping with
paragraph 5 (j) of resolution 60/251, which established
the Human Rights Council and expressly established
that the Council shall submit an annual report to the
General Assembly.
That decision was reaffirmed by the agreements
reached at the sixty-fifth session during the Council’s
review process, per paragraph 6 of resolution 65/281,
which stipulates that the report, as such, shall be
considered in the General Assembly plenary, and that
only the recommendations shall be considered by the
Third Committee.
Therefore, there is no legal basis for the Third
Committee to recommend the adoption of a draft
resolution on the matter to the General Assembly
plenary. Additionally, given the discussions we
had on the contents of the resolution, it is both
institutionally and politically inappropriate for the
Third Committee —
­ or even the plenary — to question
the validity of the Human Rights Council’s work.
For those reasons, we believe that a draft resolution
such as the one submitted to the plenary is unnecessary
and may be problematic. Nevertheless, given that there
was a vote in the plenary, and in hope of sending a strong
message of support and conveying the importance my
delegation attaches to all the work of the Human Rights
Council, we decided to vote in favour of resolution
71/174 in the plenary.
Ms. Marteles Gutiérrez del Alamo (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): Spain aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union and would also like to
reiterate its vote against draft amendment A/71/L.45,
submitted by the Group of African States.
Spain
rejects
all
attempts
to
question
mandate-holders of special procedures or independent
experts designated by the Human Rights Council,
particularly when such individuals have already
been appointed and are carrying out their functions.
Although the mandate is purportedly being challenged
on procedural grounds, it is the substance of the
mandate that is being called into question. Moreover, the
argument claiming that there is no definition for sexual
orientation or gender identity is, in our view, an excuse,
given that it is an issue with which the international

A/71/PV.65

community is abundantly familiar, especially in the
area of human rights. We are not proposing the creation
of new rights, nor are we considering sexual behaviour.
It is simply a matter of not condoning discrimination or
violence against any human being, for any reason — and
of acting without delay.
Mrs. Sandoval Espínola (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Paraguay would like to
explain its vote on draft amendment A/71/L.45.
Paraguay abstained in the voting because it
interpreted the draft amendment as seeking more time
to define the necessary legal framework to ensure the
implementation of the work of the independent expert,
a position created by Human Rights Council resolution
32/2, without ignoring the mandate or undermining the
competence of the Human Rights Council. Paraguay
expresses its full support for the work of the Human
Rights Council and, consequently, its resolutions and
recommendations.
Mr. Tiare (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I take
the floor after the voting to thank the delegations that
voted in favour of draft amendment A/71/L.45 to the
draft resolution contained in the report (A/71/479) of
the Third Committee. In doing so, they have affirmed
the principles that guide the work of the Organization
and have respected international law.
While respecting the result of the vote — 77 in
favour and 84 against — we regret the approval of the
decision of the Human Rights Council to designate an
independent expert on protection against violence and
discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender
identity. In any case, it is a resolution that, in our view,
does not yet have a legal basis in international law, even
if others would have us believe otherwise.
Such a decision may further polarize Member
States, as it does not enjoy the consensus of all States.
The Group of African States believes that it is premature
to appoint a mandate-holder on a concept that does not
enjoy consensus among Member States. That is why,
during the discussion, the African Group called for a
report in order to give the Member States enough time
to discuss the concept in order to reach an agreement on
the basis of the mandate.
Without such understanding among States, how
will the independent expert’s mandate be carried out?
How can a fair evaluation be conducted in all States
if there are no clearly established frameworks among

16-4479517/47

A/71/PV.65

States on that concept? Those are some concerns that
have yet to be answered.
For all those reasons, the Member States of the
African Group dissociate themselves from the mandate
of the independent expert on protection against violence
and discrimination based on sexual orientation and
gender identity, as established by resolution 32/2 of the
Human Rights Council.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 64
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/480)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 29 of its report (A/71/480) and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
30 of the same report.
I now call on the representative of the Sudan to
introduce draft amendment A/71/L.29.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): My delegation takes the
floor today for the second time to introduce draft
amendment A/71/L.29 to draft resolution III, entitled
“Rights of the child”, as recommended in the report
(A/71/480) of the Third Committee, under sub-item (a)
of agenda item 64.
Our proposal is to replace the last part of operative
paragraph 36, resulting in a paragraph that would read,
in its entirety, as follows:
“Calls upon States to protect children affected
by armed conflict, in particular from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law, and to ensure that they receive timely, effective
humanitarian assistance, noting the efforts taken
to end impunity by ensuring accountability
and punishing perpetrators, and calls upon the
international community to hold those responsible
18/47

19/12/2016

for violations accountable, and to ensure that the
perpetrators of such acts are promptly brought
to justice, as provided for by national laws and
obligations under international law”.
That would replace the reference to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
My delegation previously introduced the draft
amendment in the Third Committee and we are doing
the same now, given the fact that my delegation worked
constructively during the informal consultations
process with the objective of reaching consensus on
that specific paragraph.
The draft amendment seeks to maintain balance
in operative paragraph 36, which addresses the issue
of impunity of perpetrators who commit crimes
and violations against children in areas of conflict,
especially as we felt that there were attempts to impose
the idea of the International Criminal Court and the
Rome Statute, and to consider them to be the only legal
reference to adjudicate crimes against humanity, hence
ignoring other instruments that dispense justice in
national, regional and international forums.
Compared to the previous reference concerning
“trafficking in women and children”, the present draft
resolution is worse, bearing in mind that a pretext for
the previous one was that it was a mere statement of
fact. Nobody can say the same regarding the present
draft resolution, which calls for submission to the
authority and jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court.
From our point of view, the only purpose to
including a reference to the ICC in the draft resolution
is to impose it by any means on Member States — even
those that are not party to the Rome Statute. It has
a promotional purpose that we and others strongly
oppose. Despite the centrality of the draft resolution,
to which we subscribe, we believe that following such a
selective approach has a negative impact on its balance
and objectivity. That is why we reiterate our rejection of
the politicization of Third Committee draft resolutions
or any attempt to complicate or undermine the goals,
objectives, basic guidelines and principles that inform
its work.
I assure you, Mr. President, that the fight against
perpetrators of crimes against humanity remains one
of my Government’s highest priorities within the
framework of international law — which guarantees
16-44795

19/12/2016

justice and the sovereign equality of States. Nevertheless,
we remain concerned about attempts to promote and
propagate the International Criminal Court, which,
in our view, is a political tool used against a specific
group of countries in order to achieve certain goals and
objectives.
Based on that, we have reintroduced the draft
amendment on operative paragraph 36. We appeal to
Member States to vote in favour of the draft amendment,
submitted for the sake of true justice and fairness in
international relations based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
delegations that wish to speak in explanation of vote or
position.
Mr. Rusicka (Slovakia): I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States.
The main sponsors worked hard to build consensus
on draft resolution III, entitled “Rights of the child”.
We note with great disappointment draft amendment
A/71/L.29, introduced by the Sudan, with respect to
operative paragraph 36 of the draft resolution. A similar
effort was made in the Third Committee and was
rejected by a wide margin. The paragraph referenced is
a long-standing paragraph in the text and has formerly
received strong general regional support.
The existing language on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is well balanced and carefully phrased.
The EU remains a staunch supporter of the ICC and
is committed to cooperating fully to prevent serious
crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the Court — a
key institution to assist citizens achieve justice when
confronted with the most serious crimes, when that is
not possible at the national level. We therefore cannot
accept the draft amendment and urge others to vote
against it.
Ms. Simenstad (Norway): I have the honour of
delivering an explanation of vote before the voting on
behalf of Australia, Canada, Iceland, New Zealand,
Switzerland, Liechtenstein and my own country,
Norway. All of our delegations are sponsors of the draft
resolutions on the rights of the child.
The draft amendment introduced in the General
Assembly today is very unfortunate, as it attempts to
change a paragraph that has used agreed language for
more than 10 years. Operative paragraph 36 deals with
the protection of children affected by armed conflict.

A/71/PV.65

In that respect, it recognizes the efforts taken to end
impunity by ensuring accountability and punishing
perpetrators.
The relevance of the reference to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has been a key part of our
common approach to that issue. A number of Security
Council resolutions on children and armed conflict
note the relevant provisions of the ICC and confirm the
importance of the subject matter at hand. As recognized
by the Security Council in its most recent resolution
on children and armed conflict (Security Council
resolution 2250 (2015)), the fight against impunity for
the most serious crimes of international concern has
been strengthened through the ICC’s work on, and
prosecution of, crimes committed against children.
Since the Rome Statute entered into force, crimes
committed against children during armed conflict
have figured prominently in the statements issued by
the ICC regarding several cases. Those cases have sent
out the necessary warning signals and served as useful
deterrents. Therefore, we find it deeply disturbing
that the established consensus is now being attacked
for reasons that have nothing to do with the topic dealt
with in those resolutions and are to the detriment of
our common cause. We will therefore vote against the
draft amendment and hope that others will join us in
rejecting it.
Ms. Silvera Flores (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
As a sponsor of draft resolution III, on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States,
Uruguay associates itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
We would like to draw the attention of Member
States to the fact that the paragraph in question that
makes reference to the International Criminal Court
has been included in resolutions on children’s rights
for many years and, as such, does not give rise to any
obligations or changes to the commitments of States
parties to the Rome Statute. Consequently, we call for
a vote on the draft amendment and urge all delegations
to vote against it.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to III and on the draft decision, one
by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Child,
early and forced marriage”. The Third Committee

16-4479519/47

A/71/PV.65

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/175).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution II,
entitled “Protecting children from bullying”. The Third
Commission adopted it without a vote. May I consider
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/176).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Rights of the child”. In connection with draft
resolution III, the General Assembly has before it a
draft amendment circulated in document A/71/L.29.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly shall first take a decision on the proposed
draft amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, China,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Guyana, Iraq, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Morocco, Oman,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, South Sudan,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Republic of
Tanzania, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
20/47

19/12/2016

Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Angola, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lesotho, Mauritius, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Somalia,
Swaziland, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft amendment A/71/L.29 was rejected by 111
votes to 22, with 29 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania informed the Secretariat that
it had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution III?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
71/177).
The President: We shall now turn to paragraph 30
of the report to take action on the draft decision entitled
“Documents considered by the General Assembly in
connection with the promotion and protection of the
rights of children”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/532).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 64 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
16-44795

19/12/2016

A/71/PV.65

Agenda item 65

Agenda item 66

Rights of indigenous peoples

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance

(a) Rights of indigenous peoples
(b) Follow-up to the outcome document of the highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly
known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/481)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 13 of the
same report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
and on the draft decision, one by one.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/178).
The President: We now turn to paragraph 13 of
the report to take action on the draft decision, entitled
“Document considered by the General Assembly in
connection with the rights of indigenous peoples”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
adopt the draft decision as recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/532).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 65?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
65 and its sub-item (a).

(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/482)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 24 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 25 of the
same report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to III and on the draft decision, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and
other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,

16-4479521/47

A/71/PV.65

Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Ukraine, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 136 votes to 2,
with 49 abstentions (resolution 71/179).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution II,
entitled “International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/180).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “A global call for concrete action for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”.
22/47

19/12/2016

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Germany,
Israel, Marshall Islands, Palau, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
16-44795

19/12/2016

Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine
Draft resolution III was adopted by 133 votes to 9,
with 45 abstentions (resolution 71/181).
The President: We shall now turn to paragraph 25
of the report to take action on the draft decision entitled
“Documents considered by the General Assembly
in connection with the elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to adopt the draft decision, as recommended by the
Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/534).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item 66?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 66.
Agenda item 67
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/483)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 22 of its report. We will now take decisions
on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational

A/71/PV.65

State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Colombia, Mexico, Switzerland, Tonga

16-4479523/47

A/71/PV.65

Draft resolution I was adopted by 132 votes to 53,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 71/182) .
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/183).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “The right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
24/47

19/12/2016

Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, South Sudan, Tonga
Draft resolution III was adopted by 177 votes to 7,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 71/184).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Honduras informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 67?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 68
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/484)
The President: We shall now take action on the
draft decision entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question
of the promotion and protection of human rights”,
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 5
of its report. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to adopt the draft decision, as recommended by the
Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/535).
16-44795

19/12/2016

(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/484/
Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 14 of its report. We shall now take a decision
on the draft resolution, entitled “Human rights treaty
body system”. I have been informed that the delegation
that requested a vote on the draft resolution in the
Committee is not requesting a vote in the plenary.
We shall now consider the draft resolution. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
resolution without a vote?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/185).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/484/
Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it 16 draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 137 of its report.
We shall now take decisions on draft resolutions I
to XVI, one by one. After all the decisions have been
taken, representatives will again have the opportunity
to explain their vote.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Human
rights and extreme poverty”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/182).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/71/PV.65

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, China, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Grenada, Guyana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, United States of
America, Yemen
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Belarus, Cameroon, Comoros, Cuba,
Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Indonesia,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria, Philippines, Republic

16-4479525/47

A/71/PV.65

of Korea, Seychelles, Thailand, Tonga, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution I was adopted by 117 votes to 40,
with 31 abstentions (resolution 71/187).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Human rights in the administration of justice”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
71/188).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Declaration on the Right to Peace”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
26/47

19/12/2016

Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Cyprus, Georgia,
Greece, Iceland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Serbia, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 131 votes to 34,
with 19 abstentions (resolution 71/189).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
16-44795

19/12/2016

Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Mexico, Peru
Draft resolution V was adopted by 130 votes to 53,
with 6 abstentions (resolution 71/190).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled “The
right to food”. The Third Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 71/191).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“The right to development”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/71/PV.65

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Italy,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,

16-4479527/47

A/71/PV.65

Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 146 votes to 3,
with 39 abstentions (resolution 71/192).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Human rights and unilateral coercive measures”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
28/47

19/12/2016

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 133 votes to
54 (resolution 71/193).
The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled
“Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution 71/194).
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or
belief”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution 71/195).
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Freedom of religion or belief”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution
71/196).
The President: Draft resolution XII is entitled
“Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of
all human rights”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
16-44795

19/12/2016

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United

A/71/PV.65

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Greece
Draft resolution XII was adopted by 135 votes to
53, with 1 abstention (resolution 71/197).
The President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled
“Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Angola, Chad

16-4479529/47

A/71/PV.65

Abstaining:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, China, Comoros,
Congo, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Guyana, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Libya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tonga, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution XIII was adopted by 125 votes to
2, with 56 abstentions (resolution 71/198).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Chad informed
the Secretariat it had intended to vote in favour;
the delegations of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and Pakistan informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to abstain; and the delegation of
Angola informed the Secretariat that it had intended
to not participate.]

19/12/2016

Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution
71/201).
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): My delegation takes
the floor to make an explanation of vote after the voting
on amended resolution 71/187 just adopted, on the
moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
We note once again in this Hall that the resolution
on the moratorium on the use of the death penalty
continues to be a highly sensitive and deeply divisive
issue for the United Nations, as there is no international
consensus on it. The persistent calls of the proponents
of an international moratorium on the use of the death
penalty, with a view to ultimately abolishing it, is
highly insensitive and ignores existing realities.
This year’s debate has been no different from past
ones, except for the welcome exception of the amended
resolution carrying in the Third Committee and also in
the Assembly, which my delegation strongly welcomes.
Papua New Guinea encourages the ongoing constructive
dialogue on this important issue; however, this is not a
licence to impose the will of the opponents of the death
penalty on others.

Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution
71/200).

My delegation recognizes that the core issue
addressed in the resolution is the right to life. However,
other highly important elements, including issues of
sovereignty and national criminal justice systems,
are also associated and require careful and proper
consideration. Papua New Guinea’s Constitution
enshrines the right to life, including other human rights
and liberties, as fundamental principles. The right
to life is also recognized under our international law
obligations. Papua New Guinea’s Constitution also
validates the death penalty under its penal code, and
it remains in force today. The death penalty forms an
integral part of the range of penalties in Papua New
Guinea’s criminal code available to the independent
judicial system, which can decide to impose them or
otherwise. It is applicable only to the most heinous of
crimes as a recourse that is available to the courts with
competent jurisdiction.

The President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled
“Missing persons”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to do likewise?

The death penalty is also not applied arbitrarily in
my country, as appears to be suggested by the tenor of
certain provisions of the resolution; rather, due process
is followed in its application. Papua New Guinea has

The President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled
“The right to privacy in the digital age”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution
70/199).
The President: Draft resolution XV is entitled
“The role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other
national human rights institutions in the promotion
and protection of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to do the same?

30/47

16-44795

19/12/2016

not carried out any execution of convicted offenders
of heinous crimes in nearly four decades. The most
recent death penalty sentence imposed by our justice
system on a convicted prisoner was commuted to life
imprisonment. The last convicted criminal executed for
a heinous crime under the death penalty in my country
was in 1954, under colonial occupation.
The resolution also continues to suffer from several
serious flaws, not least the deliberate omission of the
fundamental fact that, under international law, the
death penalty is not illegal. While the right to life is
protected under the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) and its Second Optional
Protocol, capital punishment is not outlawed. In fact,
article 6.2 of the ICCPR states that the death penalty can
be imposed only in countries that have not abolished it,
against adults and only for the most heinous crimes.
The ICCPR, its Second Optional Protocol and other
relevant conventions leave this question to be decided
through the domestic democratic processes of each
individual Member State. Although my country fully
respects its international obligations arising from being
party to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the ICCPR, it is, however, not a party to the ICCPR
Second Optional Protocol.
Let me also remind the Assembly that the death
penalty is an issue of the criminal justice system of
sovereign independent States. A fundamental principle
of a functioning sovereign State is the independence
and impartiality of the judiciary. For the rule of law
to be upheld, the judiciary is duty bound to apply the
prevailing laws, including the death penalty, without
fear or favour.
The resolution also sadly continues to blatantly and
completely disrespect the right to life and liberty of
the death row convict’s victims and their families, who
have suffered from the inhumane acts of those facing
the death penalty. It solely promotes the protection of
the human rights of the convicted criminals facing the
death penalty. There needs to be proper balance and
fairness. It must therefore be viewed from a much
broader perspective and weighed against the rights
of the victims and the right of the community to live
in peace and security. Many opponents of the death
penalty have a tendency to undermine the human right
to life of the victims of heinous crimes, which must also
be equally considered before the law.

A/71/PV.65

Another fundamental element touched on by
the resolution is the sovereignty of States. This
fundamental principle has never been contested by the
membership of the Assembly. Let me recall that the
bedrock upon which the United Nations was founded
is the unequivocal recognition that the international
legal framework, within which Member States operate,
is premised on the hallowed tenets of sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of any State,
under any pretext and/or any circumstances, and also
in accordance with their international law obligations.
Those principles have been enshrined in several
international instruments, foremost among them, the
Charter of the United Nations, specifically in Article 2,
paragraph 7, as well as reaffirmed in numerous United
Nations resolutions.
The question of whether to retain or abolish the
death penalty and the types of crimes for which the
death penalty is applied should be determined by each
State, taking into account the sentiments of its own
people, the nature of the crime and criminal policy and
legislation. The amendment to the resolution, which
was proposed by its sponsors, including my delegation,
was specifically intended to not only balance and
fill that glaring void, but also to ensure that this
fundamental issue is not trivialized. Additionally, the
amendment also urges Member States to implement
their obligations under international human rights
instruments and international law.
It is for these reasons that my delegation co-sponsored
and supported the amendment to the resolution on the
moratorium on the use of the death penalty. We are
pleased that this amendment has been well recognized
by Member States and thank the respective delegations
for supporting its fundamental importance.
For Papua New Guinea, unless and until the death
penalty is repealed by our national Parliament, it
continues to remain a valid law on our statutes. It is
for this fact and the other justifications just highlighted
that Papua New Guinea voted against resolution 71/187
and further disassociates itself from it, but voted in
support of the amendment.
Finally, we thank the delegations of Argentina and
Mongolia for their commendable efforts in coordinating
this resolution in the Third Committee. We also pay
tribute to Her Excellency Ambassador María Emma
Mejía Vélez of Colombia for her strong leadership of
the Third Committee as its Chair, and also appreciate

16-4479531/47

A/71/PV.65

the efforts of Bureau members that enabled the meeting
to conclude on schedule. Last but not least, we also
thank the Secretariat for its excellent support.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I have the honour to
speak in explanation of vote on resolution 71/187,
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”,
on behalf of Australia, Iceland, Liechtenstein, New
Zealand and my own country, Switzerland.
Our countries voted in favour of the Third
Committee resolution, which calls for a universal
moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the
death penalty. As traditional and active supporters of
this resolution, we are once again encouraged by the
increasing number of States that have supported this
call. To date, 80 per cent of States have either abolished
the death penalty or are observing a moratorium on its
use — a development we welcome.
There is one element in the new resolution our
countries do not favour. We regret that in the Third
Committee paragraph 1 was included by vote against the
will of most sponsors, and we have disassociated from
this paragraph. We recognize that States develop their
own legal systems, including determining appropriate
legal penalties. However, in our view, paragraph 1 as it
stands does not correspond to the spirit and purpose of
the resolution, mainly for two reasons.
First, the paragraph shifts the focus of the resolution
away from human rights to criminal justice. True to the
mandate of the Third Committee, this resolution has
always considered the death penalty through a human
rights lens. There are other resolutions and forums
dealing with criminal justice, but that is not the main
purpose here. We therefore regret that the paragraph
dilutes the human rights focus of the resolution.
Secondly, paragraph 1 does not in our view reflect
the fact that international law evolves as humankind
progresses. Paragraph 1 suggests a static view of
international law and does not seem to allow for
progress. This is unfortunate, as the United Nations
itself is rooted in the promise of progress — progress
towards the realization of peace, development and
human rights.
Based on these considerations, our countries
encourage States to interpret paragraph 1 of the newly
adopted resolution as follows.
Given the context of the resolution and its origin in
the Third Committee, international law obligations as
32/47

19/12/2016

referred to in paragraph 1 relate to international human
rights law in particular. In this context, we recall the
inherent abolitionist spirit of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. International obligations
also arise from customary international law. In this
context, our countries welcome the increasing number
of States that view the death penalty as violating the
prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. We look forward
to further consideration of this issue.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Singapore would like
to speak in explanation of vote on resolution 71/187,
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”.
At the outset, I wish to express my appreciation
to the Chair of the Third Committee, the Permanent
Representative of Colombia, Ambassador María Emma
Mejía Vélez, for her hard work and excellent leadership
of the Committee.
My delegation notes that the moratorium resolution
was amended in the Third Committee to include
a reference to the sovereign right of countries to
determine their own legal systems in accordance with
their international law obligations. In Singapore’s
view, the amended resolution that we have just adopted
today is an improvement on resolution 69/186, which
was adopted two years ago. I take this opportunity to
thank those delegations that supported the Singapore
amendment in the Third Committee.
In this regard, I would also like to welcome the
decision of the sponsors to accept the resolution as
adopted in the Third Committee. In particular, I
appreciate the decision of the sponsors to not reopen
the amendment contained in paragraph 1 of the
resolution. I know that this was not an easy decision for
the sponsors, and I thank them for adopting an openminded approach. In particular, I thank the Permanent
Representatives and delegations of Argentina,
Mongolia, Italy and the Slovak Republic for engaging
in a constructive dialogue with my delegation. I find
their constructive approach to be promising for the
future, as it shows that we can engage in dialogue even
when we have diametrically opposing views.
The issue of a moratorium on the death penalty is a
long-standing one that has been debated in the General
Assembly since 1994. The reality is that is that there is
no international consensus against capital punishment.
There is no international treaty explicitly prohibiting
the use of capital punishment. Ultimately, this is a
16-44795

19/12/2016

sovereign matter to be decided by States in the context
of their legal and judicial systems and in accordance
with their international law obligations. In our view,
the death penalty is an issue of criminal justice, not
a question of human rights. We would disagree with
those who take the view otherwise.
I accept the fact that a large number of countries
are parties to the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. I
accept that, but at the same time we have to accept the
fact that a majority of United Nations Members have
chosen to not become parties to the Second Optional
Protocol. A large number of Member States have not
formally abolished capital punishment. Many of them
continue to use capital punishment as part of their
legal system of penalties. The reality is that this issue
is historically rooted, politically sensitive and legally
complicated for many countries in the world. There are
deep-seated differences, and this will make it difficult,
if not impossible, to find an international consensus.
In such an environment, what we need is mutual
respect, mutual tolerance and mutual understanding.
Given our deep differences on the issue of capital
punishment, we have to find a new equilibrium point
where we can all agree to disagree in a respectful
way. We can of course continue to have discussions
and dialogue. However, the aim of dialogue must be
to increase mutual understanding. The aim of any
dialogue cannot be to impose the views of one group
of countries on another group of countries. If we
start from the premise that the view of one group of
countries is superior to all other views, then a dialogue
will be difficult, if not impossible. In that regard, let me
add that my delegation is ready to engage in dialogue
based on mutual respect and mutual understanding and
taking into account the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Although I welcome the adoption of paragraph 1 on
sovereign rights, my delegation continues to have many
other serious concerns regarding the resolution.
First, as a general comment, I would say that
the resolution needs to be completely reviewed and
significantly simplified. It seems to us that over the
years the focus of the resolution has shifted from a
moratorium to a push for abolition and to advocacy for
many other extraneous issues. Accordingly, we find
that the resolution is far from being balanced.

A/71/PV.65

Secondly, the resolution does not acknowledge
that many countries retain the death penalty for the
most serious crimes, as set out in article 6.2 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The resolution does not recognize that many countries
apply capital punishment in accordance with due
process of law, domestically and in accordance with
their own legislation and constitution.
Thirdly, the resolution addresses the issue of
capital punishment from the narrow perspective of the
rights of the person receiving the sentence. However,
the rights of the offenders must always be weighed
against the rights of their victims and their families and
the broader rights of the community and society to live
in peace and security. Ultimately, every Government
has the obligation to protect the safety and security
of its citizens and to take into account the views of its
own population regarding crime and security. Again,
these points are not covered in the resolution. For
this and other reasons, my delegation voted against
the resolution.
Mrs. Karabaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
My delegation would like to speak in explanation
of vote on resolution 71/192, entitled “The right to
development”, and in explanation of position on
resolution 71/191, entitled “The right to food”.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution on
the right to development. Our country believes that
in this day and age, focus must be placed on the right
of States to their own development. It is very clear
that the more stable a State is, the better it functions.
Therefore, the more developed its economy, the greater
the opportunity that State has to create prosperous
conditions for its own population, particularly in the
sphere of social protection. We believe that all States in
the world should define their own priorities, needs and
development opportunities without external pressure
or restrictions. That should also apply to developing
countries and their right to use their natural resources
for their sustainable socioeconomic development. In
a civilized world, one group of States should not be
allowed to impose on other States. Any cooperation
must be based on mutually beneficial interests and
respect for one another.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Kyrgyzstan also supported the consensus on
the resolution on the right to food. With regard to

16-4479533/47

A/71/PV.65

paragraph 42, we think it necessary to note that, in
terms of providing for the equal interests of all States, it
is extremely important that the provision of sustainable
access to water resources for human consumption
and agriculture also be restricted to territories. In
other words, access to water resources should not be
considered an obligation of one State to another. I ask
that this intervention be reflected in the official record
of this meeting.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 68.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/484/
Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 34 of its report.
I now give the floor to those delegations that wish
to speak in explanation of vote or position before
the voting.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to express
my sincere gratitude to all those delegations that lent
their support to draft resolution IV, entitled “Situation
of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol (Ukraine)” a month ago in
the Third Committee. The draft resolution put to the
vote today in the General Assembly truly shows that,
as Thomas Paine wrote in the work that appeared 240
years ago today, these are the times that try men’s souls.
The evil of gross human rights violations, war crimes,
military aggressions and intrusions have undermined
the very fundamentals of the global system of peace and
security of which the United Nations and the Security
Council are meant to be the centrepiece.
Since the occupation of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, the
human rights situation on the peninsula has deteriorated
sharply. Numerous reports have been made of serious
violations and abuses committed against residents of
Crimea. The latest report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, released
on 8 December, describes the situation in Crimea as a
climate of repression against dissenting voices. This
gruesome picture of the state of affairs was reflected in
all statements, except the Russian one, delivered during
34/47

19/12/2016

the interactive dialogue at the Human Rights Council in
Geneva on 12 December.
The Human Rights Council is and will remain the
point of reference to address human rights violations.
However, the voice of the General Assembly sends a
powerful message to perpetrators and the instruction to
act to all bodies and the agencies of the United Nations
sytem, wherever they are. We are immensely grateful
to everyone who will amplify the powerful voice of the
Assembly today.
Silence, however, as history proves, could be even
more powerful and damaging. It goes hand in hand with
complacency and makes those who are silent complicit.
That sort of silence has led to crimes such as genocide.
It happened in Ukraine in 1932 and 1933, when the
great famine designed by Moscow, the Holodomor,
killed millions. It has happened in Africa and in other
parts of the world. Silence should not be what we hear in
the General Assembly. Here, the power of the voice of
every nation is strong, whatever its size or geography.
Here I cannot fail to take the opportunity to cite one
of the greatest ever African-American champions of
human rights, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.: “In the end,
we will remember not the words of our enemies but the
silence of our friends”.
Those suffering at the hands of the occupying
regime in Crimea are frightened and helpless. They
are living with no chance of defending their rights,
protesting or being heard. Ukraine will spare no
effort to urge the Russian Federation to ensure its full
compliance with its obligations as an occupying Power
in accordance with international law, and to ensure that
international human rights mechanisms have safe and
unfettered access to the temporarily occupied peninsula
so that they can monitor and report on the situation in
accordance with their mandate.
I would also like to call on the delegations in
this Hall to take every available opportunity to bring
up human rights issues in Crimea with the Russian
Federation and insist on full respect for those rights
and for Russia’s obligation to protect them under
international law. A former Deputy Chairman of the
Mejlis of the Crimean Tartars, Mr. Akhtem Chiygoz,
who has been illegally imprisoned by the occupying
Power for almost two years, has said that the world is
on the threshold of a choice between democratic values
and economic benefits. They have made their choice, he
said, and what have they chosen?
16-44795

19/12/2016

However, rather than cursing the forces of darkness,
let us light the candle of hope. Every vote cast today in
favour of this draft resolution is such a candle, and I
would like to thank everyone here on behalf of all the
people of Ukraine, who are striving to lead a life of
peace and freedom alongside every nation of the world.
Mr. Grant (Canada): Canada has the honour of
introducing today draft resolution III, on the situation
of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, on
behalf of its 42 sponsors.
It is troubling that the General Assembly must
consider this issue once again. Although there have been
some improvements over the past year — and in that
regard we welcome the statement made earlier today by
the President of Iran — the facts speak for themselves.
The situation of human rights in Iran remains
very serious. The reports of the Secretary-General
(A/71/374) and the Special Rapporteur (A/71/418) reveal
the scope and gravity of Iran’s persistent human rights
violations, which include an appallingly high number
of executions, including of minors; a lack of fair trial
standards; systemic discrimination against women
and ethnic and religious minorities; and restrictions
on freedom of expression and peaceful assembly and
association.
Canada is not alone in expressing concern about
this situation. This year’s draft resolution is a product
of weeks of open and inclusive consultations. We
invited all Member States to provide their views and
recommendations, and engaged in open discussions
with all delegations that expressed an interest. The
result is a draft that reflects the concerns of Member
States from every region of the world.
We look forward to the day when the human
rights situation in Iran no longer warrants the General
Assembly’s scrutiny, but that day will come only
when that situation improves. It will come only when
Iran fully respects its human rights obligations and
commitments in law and in practice. We encourage all
Member States to join us in voting in favour of the draft
resolution before us today.
Mr. Ri Song Chol (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea categorically rejects draft resolution
I, on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, submitted to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session by the European
Union (EU) and Japan. The draft resolution is an

A/71/PV.65

extreme manifestation of politicization, selectivity and
double standards on human rights. It is nothing less than
a document designed to interfere in the internal affairs
of a sovereign State, as it contains unprecedentedly
fraudulent allegations.
The draft resolution — which is based solely on
the report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human
Rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(A/HRC/25/63), full of lies, fabrications, plots and
frauds — speaks of crimes against humanity in a way
that reminds us of a time, 13 years ago, when the United
States was telling lies in the United Nations about the
existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq as a
pretext for invading that country. It even touches on the
non-existent issue of the so-called forced labour and
exploitation of our workers sent abroad, and on nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles, which have no relevance
to human rights. It is therefore quite clear to everyone
that the draft resolution is pursuing the political purpose
of isolating and stifling the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in conjunction with the sanctions
racket of the United States against our country.
The slanderous content of the draft resolution is
nothing but sheer lies, fabricated by the authorities in
South Korea, who are obsessed with their female First
Chair and President, who has said that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will collapse within two
years. Its heinous political purpose is to bring down the
system of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
by following the hostile United States policies directed
against it. In order to eliminate our State and social
systems, the United States has harassed the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea over the nuclear and human
rights issues simultaneously. It has continued to
introduce large quantities of its strategic nuclear assets
into the Korean peninsula and to stage various kinds of
aggressive joint military exercises with South Korea,
even openly conducting drills aimed at overthrowing
the leadership of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and occupying Pyongyang.
After realizing that it could not succeed by using
the nuclear issue, the United States is now focused
on eliminating the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea under the cover of the human rights issue.
Joining with the United States manoeuvres, this year
the EU and Japan have once again introduced a draft
resolution against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in the General Assembly. They are not
qualified to deliberate on the human rights issues of

16-4479535/47

A/71/PV.65

others. The world has clearly witnessed crimes against
humanity — committed by the United States and other
Western countries — such as the military invasions
and brutal massacres of innocent civilians in several
countries in the Middle East, particularly Iraq and
Afghanistan, which have turned those countries into
wildernesses for human rights.
But the EU and Japan ignore the crimes against
humanity committed by the United States. The EU
should rather turn its attention to cleaning its own
house — first, by considering and bringing to justice
those responsible for crimes against humanity, which
include the xenophobia, Islamophobia, defamation of
religion and neo-Nazism that are rampant in its own
countries, as well as the worst-ever refugee crisis, which
has been caused by the United States and other Western
countries themselves. Moreover, Japan has refused to
apologize or compensate for the extraordinary crimes
against humanity it committed in the past against
the Korean people and many other nations of the
world, such as the abduction and forcible drafting of
8.4 million people, the massacre of 1 million more and
the imposition of sexual slavery on 200,000 women and
girls. Japan should mind its own business.
It is the consistent policy of the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take full
responsibility for protecting and promoting the human
rights of the popular masses. Despite the persistent
sanctions and pressure imposed by the United States
and other hostile forces, the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is concentrating
all its efforts on improving its people’s livelihood and
securing a better future for them. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continues to hope for
sincere dialogue and cooperation in the international
human rights arena, but it will fight to the end against
confrontations and pressure aimed at stifling its system,
and will take all appropriate measures to counter the
acts against it that are becoming increasingly aggressive
under the pretext of concerns about human rights.
My delegation condemns and rejects today’s draft
resolution as an illegal and flawed document unworthy
of consideration. In that regard, we do not even feel the
need to call for a vote. Even if it is railroaded through,
it will be clear to the world that the vote can never be
considered a consensus, since there are States Members
of the United Nations that will dissociate themselves
from consensus on the subject. My delegation once
again calls on Member States to oppose the adoption
36/47

19/12/2016

of this draft resolution by continuing to dissociate
themselves from the consensus.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): I speak in explanation of vote before action
is taken on draft resolution III, entitled “Situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran”.
The draft resolution that the General Assembly
is about to act on today only reveals once again the
insincerity of those self-proclaimed champions of
human rights who submitted it. Iran is certainly not a
country that deserves such a biased resolution. Canada,
with a dismal record on the human rights of its own
indigenous peoples and black citizens, knows that fact
very well. Nonetheless, it has been foolhardy enough to
include in its sponsors some that have not only grossly
violated human rights but have committed atrocities
against civilians and continue to commit them with
impunity. It is disgusting that the greatest violator of
human rights in the world is one of the sponsors of this
absurd draft resolution. That says a great deal.
It would be extremely difficult to argue with the
fact that Iran has been singled out only because it
refuses to succumb to the political pressures of the main
sponsors of the draft resolution. The notion of human
rights is once again being abused in order to serve as
a tool for putting unfair pressure on a nation that has
chosen independence over yielding to interference. The
notion of human rights is once again being abused in
the pursuit of unjust interests by those who traditionally
and historically have supported colonialism, slavery,
racism and apartheid. Indeed, apart from political
considerations, there are no credible grounds for
this draft resolution. Few would accept this absurd
politicization of human rights as a genuine attempt to
protect and promote those rights.
Iran believes earnestly in the imperative of
respecting and protecting human rights. A clear
indicator of that is the fact that over the past four
decades, numerous democratic elections have been held
to decide our country’s direction in both internal and
foreign affairs. That level of reliance on the people’s
voice and vote is an extraordinary development in our
region. My country’s sustained reliance on the ballot
box has encouraged peaceful and democratic processes
in our society and contributed to transparency,
accountability and stability at every level of the State.
However, for certain Powers, the people’s choices
can be respected as long as they are in line with their
16-44795

19/12/2016

interests. But those who dare to choose otherwise
deserve to be punished, whether by military coup,
aggression, sanctions, occupation or recriminations
through the United Nations human rights machinery.
For those Powers’ allies and clients, however,
democracy and respect for human rights are optional.
They conveniently protect their allies, no matter how
bad their records are, by fiercely censuring unfriendly
States no matter how democratically they behave.
Where the content and intentions of this draft resolution
are concerned, we can clearly see that the exact same
cynical pattern directed against Iran and Iranians is in
play.
Only a few hours ago in Tehran, President Rouhani
signed and unveiled a landmark charter of citizens’
rights. Its implementation will represent a leap forward
in the progress of human rights in the Islamic Republic
of Iran. During the ceremony, President Rouhani
reaffirmed and reiterated his promises to Iranian young
people, women and ethnic and religious minorities
on advancing their rights even further. He will also
appoint a special official to supervise implementation
of the charter’s provisions. That is nothing less than a
reflection of Iran’s genuine willingness and intention to
promote and protect the human rights of all its citizens,
and an inherent characteristic of our political system.
What some unscrupulous Members of the United
Nations are doing in return by pushing for this
politicized draft resolution only shows how irrelevant
our decisions can sometimes be to the realities on the
ground. The level of complacency shown by the main
sponsor and some of the draft resolution’s other sponsors
with dark human rights records is striking, especially at
a time when they continue to be largely heedless of the
alarming growth of marginalization, social exclusion,
disenfranchisement, cultural chauvinism, unabated
xenophobic tendencies, racial hatred and racism as
breeding grounds for atrocities and terrorism in their
own societies. It is to be expected, and it is legitimate,
that world public opinion should continue to question
their integrity and veracity.
The claim made just a few minutes ago by the
representative of Canada that this year’s draft resolution
is the result of open consultation with Member States
could not be further from the truth. Rejecting and
voting against this absurd resolution, which has time
and again proved to be a futile exercise, will be seen as
a step towards enhancing the credibility of our human
rights discourse, and will serve as proof that we are

A/71/PV.65

serious, and mean it, when we ask that politicization,
selectivity and double standards on human rights issues
be avoided.
Ms. AlAteibi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The United Arab Emirates has continued to
sponsor the draft resolution on the situation of human
rights in Syria based on its belief in the paramount
importance of putting an end to the suffering of the
Syrian people, who have been enduring the most
atrocious violations of human rights through their
displacement, through the intentional targeting of
civilians, hospitals and vital infrastructure, through
sexual violence and the use of internationally banned
weapons against civilians.
Despite international resolutions that have urged
that an end be put to such violations and that their
perpetrators be held accountable, the parties to the
conflict continue committing violations of human
rights that blatantly flout international humanitarian
law —
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As you know, Sir, according to the Assembly’s
rules of procedure, any country that is a sponsor of a
draft resolution may not explain its position or vote on
it.
The Acting President: I draw the attention of
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
fact that in this particular case, the General Assembly
is considering the recommendations of the Third
Committee and that therefore this explanation of vote
is permitted.
Ms. AlAteibi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I regret being interrupted in this manner and
shall continue with my statement.
The fact that draft resolution II has some 60
sponsors reflects the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Syria, and we urge all Member States to
vote in favour of the draft resolution and affirm the
international community’s rejection of these violations
and its determination to protect the human rights of our
Syrian brothers and sisters.
Mrs. Mozolina (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to reiterate once again our

16-4479537/47

A/71/PV.65

principled objection to the practice of introducing
draft resolutions on the situation of human rights in
specific countries. As years of experience have shown,
such initiatives not only do not encourage constructive
dialogue on the countries involved but actively increase
confrontations between States, undermining the
foundations of international cooperation in the area of
human rights.
In that regard, the delegation of the Russian
Federation dissociates itself from the consensus on
draft resolution I, “Situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” and requests
that our position be placed on the record for this
meeting. We also intend to vote against all the other
draft resolutions on specific countries.
We would like to touch separately on draft
resolution IV, on the human rights situation in Crimea.
We have already presented our arguments during the
discussion of the draft in the Third Committee, and we
did not intend to speak about them again in this Hall.
However, the statement delivered by the Ukrainian
representative, who would like to portray his country
as a model of democracy and human rights, compels us
to respond today.
At a time when the intra-Ukrainian conflict
continues to take human lives, bringing death and
destruction to formerly peaceful and flourishing cities
and neighbourhoods, and when repeated, systematic,
large-scale violations of fundamental freedoms are
being committed throughout Ukraine and increasing
numbers of cases of torture and violence are being
carried out by Ukrainian Government authorities, here
we have a draft resolution being adopted on human
rights in Crimea. It is clear that for Kyiv, settling
the situation in south-eastern Ukraine is politically
inconvenient, and in order to distract the international
community’s attention from their unwillingness to fulfil
the political requirements of the Minsk agreements, the
Kyiv authorities continue time and again to exploit the
image of a foreign enemy and aggressor. They need this
draft resolution purely for that reason.
The draft resolution is also extremely useful to the
group of its sponsors who are the puppeteers of this
particular initiative. It fits perfectly into the general ploy
information war against our country, and we hope that
the delegations here today will vote against it, thereby
giving a practical demonstration of their principles and,
at last, helping to focus attention on the human rights
38/47

19/12/2016

situation throughout Ukraine, including its southeastern region, where the Ukrainian Government has
in effect declared war on its own people.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its condolences to the friendly delegation of
Russia and our Government’s firm condemnation of the
dastardly assassination of the Russian ambassador in
Turkey this morning.
We would like to dissociate ourselves from the
consensus on draft resolution I, entitled “Situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea”, and we will vote against both draft resolution
III, entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran” and draft resolution IV, on the human
rights situation in Crimea.
A number of Western States and high United
Nations officials claim to be supporting human rights
and have shed crocodile tears over the human rights
situation in Syria. They have all directed fabricated
accusations at our Government, forgetting that it is
the Syrian Government that is fighting terrorism on
behalf of the entire world and that has liberated most
of the territory held by assassins and criminals. The
authors and sponsors of the politicized and partial draft
resolution II on the so-called human rights situation in
Syria are a long way from the reality on the ground.
They have not realized that the takfiri ignorance and
ideology have vanished from Syria, especially Aleppo.
They have once again shown that they have not read
history well. We would like to remind them of some
events.
In 540, King Khosrow I entered Aleppo and
destroyed it. After that, it was burned down by the
Romans and rebuilt by Sayf Al-Daula. In 1260, under
the leadership of Hulagu, the Mongols wreaked havoc
in the city, but it was eventually restored. In 2012,
Wahhabi soldiers, supported by considerable amounts
of money and materiel, invaded it. With the help of the
Erdoğan regime, they plundered its monuments and
smuggled their contents to museums in London, Paris
and New York. On 12 December 2016, Aleppo was
liberated, and those who tried to extinguish the dreams
of the Syrian people fell. The Wahhabi takfiri ideology
has been eradicated. Aleppo is our city — it does not
belong to Canada or Saudi Arabia or Qatar, and it is not
part of Texas. It is not an Ottoman protectorate, and it
is not and never will be under the custodianship of the
16-44795

19/12/2016

European Union because it is the economic capital of
Syria. Aleppans are our people, and the terrorists are
not our people because they are outsiders and are not
part of the Syrian people. Today, they are leaving the
city submissively and defeated.
What is not strange is the fact that once again the
work of the General Assembly is being politicized
through country-specific draft resolutions on human
rights. Adopted by the Third Committee, these draft
resolutions are now at the forefront of the work of the
General Assembly, at the request of some States that have
infiltrated the borders of my country and seek to impose
double standards and policies when issues relevant to
our international organization. Unfortunately, there are
no calls for an emergency meeting on Yemen, where
one child dies every three minutes.
They have tried their best to destroy my country
by backing terrorism and attempting to plant a new
Zionist regime in the Middle East in full view of the
world, with the assistance of the United Arab Emirates,
Turkey and Saudi Arabia. Their hopes and dreams have
been destroyed in Aleppo. The unity of the Syrian
people and its army have achieved victory. The people
of Syria will never forget those who conspired against
it and who destroyed the future of its citizens and its
resources. We never attacked any Member State. We
have been defending the lofty goals of the Charter of
the United Nations in a dignified manner.
The Acting President: We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I to IV, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/202).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada,

A/71/PV.65

Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, South Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Dominica, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Mali,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Philippines, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Seychelles, Singapore, South Africa,
Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic
of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia

16-4479539/47

A/71/PV.65

Draft resolution II was adopted by 116 votes to 16,
with 52 abstentions (resolution 71/203).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Pakistan informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Benin, Bhutan,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African
40/47

19/12/2016

Republic, Chad, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia
Draft resolution III was adopted by 85 votes to 35,
with 63 abstentions (resolution 71/204).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol
(Ukraine)”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Burundi, Cambodia, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Serbia, South Africa, South Sudan,
16-44795

19/12/2016

Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cameroon,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam,
Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 70 votes to 26,
with 77 abstentions (resolution 71/205).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to those
delegations that wish to speak in explanation of vote or
position after the voting.
Mr. Cepero Aguilar (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation disassociates itself from the
consensus on resolution 71/202, entitled “Situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea”, in line with our opposition to the imposition of
selective and politically motivated mandates.
We believe that genuine international cooperation
based on the principles of objectivity, impartiality and
non-selectivity is the only way to promote and protect
all human rights effectively. We urge that here, as in
other cases, an opportunity be given to the Universal
Periodic Review mechanism to promote a debate that
is unpoliticized and without confrontation, with a view
to promoting respectful cooperation with the country
concerned. This resolution continues to promote
sanctions and the dangerous and counterproductive role
of the Security Council in issues outside its purview.
Therefore, Cuba cannot join the consensus on a text
that seeks to support Security Council sanctions and
punishment in situations that do not pose a threat

A/71/PV.65

to international peace and security. We cannot be
accomplices to attempts to deny the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea their right
to peace, free determination and development. We
wish to indicate that our opposition to this selective
and politicized mandate gives no added value to
other pending issues referred to in paragraph 3 of the
resolution, which require a fair and honourable solution,
as well as the agreement of all interested parties.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): This is an explanation of position and of vote
after the adoption, respectively, of resolutions 71/202
and 71/203.
With regard to resolution 71/202, in line with our
principled position on country-specific resolutions that
are submitted to the Third Committee and the General
Assembly, and bearing in mind the harm that such an
unconstructive practice inflicts on the human rights
discourse at the United Nations, the Islamic Republic of
Iran disassociates itself from resolution 71/202, on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We kindly request this position to
be reflected in the records of the Assembly.
With regard to resolution 71/203, on the situation of
human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic, apart from
the unfair and politically motivated approach adopted
by the sponsors of the resolution, which is objectionable
in its own right, resolution 71/203 includes provisions
that run counter to basic principles of international
law and cause the Third Committee to stray from its
statutory course. The content of paragraph 24 of the
resolution sinisterly labels and condemns exactly those
who are in Syria to fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and the Al-Nusra Front and their
affiliates. In doing so, the paragraph blurs the lines
between terrorists and those who heroically fight
them and creates confusion with regard to the United
Nations-designated terrorist groups.
The two forces that are mentioned in paragraph
24 are part of the regular armed forces of the
Islamic Republic of Iran deployed in Syria on an
exclusively advisory basis at the formal invitation of
the Government of that country and are resisting the
terrorist onslaught in Syria. The accusations levelled in
the paragraph, apart from being totally baseless, have
nothing to do with the mandate of the Third Committee,
nor are they compatible with the title of the resolution.
Its incorporation in this resolution cannot amount to

16-4479541/47

A/71/PV.65

anything other than a kind of revenge against those
who have so far been the most effective force on the
ground against terrorism and violent extremism — a
force, which if it were not for its genuine and resolute
fight against terrorism, more of the Middle East would
have by now fallen under the black flag of Da’esh. Who
could believe that many sponsors of the resolution
are concerned about human rights in Syria when,
during the past year and a half, they have been busy
wreaking havoc in Yemen, taking it from deprivation
to devastation through indiscriminate aerial bombing
of civilian targets and residential areas, ironically
claiming to be invited to do so?
The General Assembly should not be exploited
to meet the political goals of the countries whose
main concerns are either losing their strategic grip
in the region or the loss of the billions of dollars
they have spent in nurturing terrorists in Syria and
its neighbouring countries, as well as the destiny of
thousands of their own citizens who are fighting in the
ranks of foreign terrorist fighters against the Syrian
people and its Government.
Ultimately, the people of Syria will defeat terrorists
and their allies — the same allies that are sending
encouraging messages to their vicious forces in Syria
by abusing the General Assembly and adopting this
absurd resolution, which is nothing but a reward to
violent extremism and terrorism and to those who
have helped them through their extreme ideologies and
corresponding financial and logistical resources in the
past many years.
It is also peculiar that a number of countries in the
West that claim the high ground in preaching to others
about human rights have sided with those who at the
very least have always been the source of the export
of intolerance to other parts of the world — the very
intolerance that is in turn the major source of violent
extremism and terrorism, let alone what they do with their
own citizens inside their borders. It is very unfortunate
that, at the same time, the structural weakness of the
United Nations human rights mechanisms is giving
them the opportunity to abuse the system and have such
resolutions be adopted.
Those who initiated this resolution should rest
assured that these and similar acts will not dissuade the
Islamic Republic of Iran from its fight against violent
extremism and its determination to fight extremists
42/47

19/12/2016

who try to sow terror in the neighbourhood and export
it to the entire world.
Mrs. Savitri (Indonesia): I take the floor to give a
brief explanation of the position of Indonesia on the text
of resolution 71/203, entitled “The situation of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
Time and again, Indonesia has expressed its deep
concern about the continued humanitarian crisis in
Aleppo and other parts of Syria. Indonesia remains
deeply concerned about the ongoing conflict and its
impact on the Syrian people, including women and
children. The deaths of thousands and the widespread
destruction require us to urge all parties to immediately
cease all acts of violence and hostilities, including
through the ceasefire agreement. It is imperative that all
parties to the conflict demonstrate the utmost respect for
international human rights law and humanitarian law
and prioritize unhindered and safe humanitarian access
for those in need. We are of the view that, through the
adoption of this resolution, the international community
places importance on the imperative unhindered and
safe humanitarian access and the protection of human
rights for all Syrian people.
We sincerely hope that the international community
and all the parties concerned will concentrate their
efforts on the immediate ending of all forms of
violence, irrespective of where it comes from. The
violence has to stop and it has to stop now. We welcome
the adoption of Security Council resolution 2328 (2016)
by consensus this morning, and it is our expectation
that implementation of that resolution will provide
impetus to address the humanitarian crisis in Aleppo
and serve as a foundation for the creation of conditions
conducive to a political settlement and a peaceful
resolution through an inclusive, non-sectarian Syrianled political process. Indonesia has also consistently
reiterated its principled position that, while promoting
and protecting the fundamental human rights of the
Syrian people, it is crucial for everyone to respect the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Finally, my delegation had hoped for a more concise
and balanced text that would have addressed the
humanitarian and human rights needs, and not focused
on naming and shaming, pointing fingers and blaming
others. It is now time for the international community
and all parties in Syria to unite and together save
innocent lives and end this humanitarian crisis.
16-44795

19/12/2016

For those reasons, Indonesia voted in favour of
the resolution.
Mr. Chu Guang (China) (spoke in Chinese): It has
always been China’s position that differences in the area
of human rights need to addressed through constructive
dialogue and cooperation on the basis of equality and
mutual respect.
China is opposed to the politicization of human
rights issues or putting pressure on other countries with
the excuse of human rights issues. We are also opposed
to country-specific human rights resolutions.
We hope that the actions of the international
community are conducive to peace and stability on
the Korean peninsula and do not have the opposite
impact. Therefore, the Chinese delegation did not join
the consensus on resolution 71/202, on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Bultrikov (Kazakhstan): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like briefly to explain our vote on
resolution 71/205, entitled “The situation of human
rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol (Ukraine)”.
The crisis in Ukraine is a matter of concern for all
Member States, and especially for Kazakhstan, which is
a close friend and partner of Ukraine. Today, members
of the international community are trying to reach a
political settlement in Russian-Ukrainian relations.
The Normandy Format is involved, as well as the Minsk
Contact Group. There is still hope that gradually, not at
once, a political solution to the situation will be found
through the negotiation process. We believe that this
resolution is not aimed at solving the problem and does
not reflect the essence of the issue, namely, the human
rights situation in Ukraine.
The resolution is not conducive to dialogue and to
resolving the crisis, but instead leads to a stalemate and
a further aggravation of the contradictions between
Russia and Ukraine, as well as between Russia and
some other countries. Kazakhstan calls on all Member
States to engage constructively on issues of human
rights protection, instead of through confrontation
and counterproductive and corrosive approaches. We
insist on the need to promote and protect human rights
through equal dialogue in a spirit of mutual respect
and cooperation.

A/71/PV.65

Kazakhstan does not oppose the resolution; we
oppose politicizing the issue of human rights in general.
Kazakhstan is against selectivity in assessing the human
rights situation and against the use of human rights as
an instrument to put pressure on Member States for
political purposes. We also consider that the resolution
is beyond the competence of the Third Committee, as
it reflects on matters of territorial integrity, annexation
and occupation. The position of Kazakhstan on those
issues is reflected in its vote on resolution 68/262,
on the territorial integrity of Ukraine. Our vote on
resolution 71/205 does not reflect our position on the
status of Crimea.
Taking into account everything I just mentioned,
Kazakhstan voted against this resolution.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Let me start by
expressing our sincere condolences to our colleagues
from the Russian Federation with regard to the tragic
event that took place earlier today in Ankara, which
claimed the life of the Russian Ambassador to Turkey.
My delegation asked for the floor to explain its
position on resolution 71/205, entitled “The Situation
of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol (Ukraine)”. Armenia has
always been a staunch supporter of the efforts aimed
at promoting democracy, fundamental freedoms and
human rights, including the equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples. In our view, situations related
to human rights should be discussed and addressed by
applying those norms and principles that are part of
international human rights law.
While the current resolution is introduced in a
human rights context, the references to the principle
of territorial integrity, which are selectively played
out at the expense of other principles of international
law, including people’s right to self-determination,
go beyond the declared objective of the document. In
accordance with its consistent stance, Armenia is not
in a position to support an approach that introduces a
hierarchy between the principles of international law.
Furthermore, the resolution includes a reference to
resolution 68/262, of 27 March 2014, which Armenia
voted against owing to the same consideration I just
mentioned. The delegation of Armenia circulated
its explanation of vote on the day of the adoption of
that resolution (see A/68/PV.80). Our approach has
not changed since then. On that basis, Armenia voted
against resolution 71/205.

16-4479543/47

A/71/PV.65

Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): With regard to
resolutions on the human rights situation in specific
countries, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
would like to reiterate its fundamental position on the
adoption of resolutions and special procedures, or any
other mechanism on human rights situations in specific
countries, by stating that we reject selectivity in terms
of treating this theme for politically motivated ends,
since that constitutes a violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The continued practice
of the selective adoption of resolutions on human
rights situations in specific countries goes beyond the
purview of the Committee and violates the principles
of universality, impartiality and non-selectivity, which
human rights themes should be dealt with. We call for
further progress in the achievements of the Human
Rights Council and for the favouring of the Universal
Periodic Review mechanism as the cooperative formula
for addressing the issue of human rights.
With regard to this principled position on resolution
71/202, on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Venezuela would like to
disassociate itself from the consensus on that resolution.
Mrs. Duncan Villalobos (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Our concerns about the human rights situation
in the specific countries referred to in the resolutions
submitted for consideration by the General Assembly
today led us to support and vote in favour of the
resolutions. We maintain our principled position that
all issues of interest raised by Member States should be
valued on their own substantive merits, which in this
case includes action undertaken by different countries
to improve their human rights situations.
Nevertheless, my country reiterates that the Human
Rights Council is the principal player in this sphere and
has the main tools for considering specific cases that
are of concern to the international community and that,
owing to their seriousness, demand to be addressed on
a country-specific basis.
We recognize that the Universal Periodic Review
mechanism is the appropriate tool for a universal
review based on transparent, credible and objective
information. For that reason, we believe that addressing
country-specific issues ideally should be carried out in
that forum, and that is why we did not co-sponsor these
resolutions in the Third Committee.
44/47

19/12/2016

However, that should not detract from fulfilling
our responsibility to take action on particularly critical
situations in terms of human rights wherever that may be
and to address country-specific issues where necessary.
My country believes that constructive dialogue and
cooperation should continue to guide us along the
path towards the effective promotion and protection of
human rights. We call on all Member States to commit
to such efforts.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, let me express
our deepest regret and sorrow that the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation to Turkey, His Excellency
Mr. Andrey Gennadyevich Karlov, lost his life after
being attacked by a gunman in Ankara. We condemn the
attack in the strongest possible terms. We also express
our heartfelt condolences and strong solidarity with
the delegation of the Russian Federation. The Turkish
authorities will do their utmost to ensure justice,
including through a thorough investigation. The official
statement by the relevant Turkish authorities about this
heinous terrorist attack has already been released.
The United Nations community has today adopted
two resolutions in order to address the humanitarian
crisis in Syria — one in the Security Council (Security
Council resolution 2328 (2016)) and another in the
General Assembly (resolution 71/203). Turkey is a
sponsor of the General Assembly resolution, which
we adopted today. The Security Council resolution
was adopted thanks to the determined initiative of
Turkey, along with a group of other countries, to
hold an emergency meeting special session. We will
continue to closely monitor the implementation of those
resolutions and assess their impact on the ground, with
a view to deciding whether they must be followed by an
additional General Assembly initiative or an emergency
special session.
The regime representatives have spoken of a
liberated Aleppo. What the regime calls liberation is, in
the context of international norms, law and principles, a
humanitarian crisis — amounting to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic and sectarian cleansing
against its own people. Therefore, their words carry no
political or ethical weight. Accordingly, we reject their
statement in its entirety.
Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, we wish to thank all States that voted
in favour of resolution 71/203 today. We call on them
to work together to implement it in order to safeguard
16-44795

19/12/2016

the protection of human rights in Syria. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia continues its international efforts to
protect our Syrian friends from the atrocious attacks
carried out by terrorist gangs and the Syrian regime, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We
are good readers of history and reality. The reality is
represented by the votes of 116 States that are in favour
of that resolution.
Ms. Al-Temimi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to reiterate the statements made by the
representatives of Turkey and Saudi Arabia. We
thank the States that backed resolution 71/203, on the
situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic.
We voted in favour of the resolution because we believe
the reports of what is happening there and we oppose
the violations of human rights. We realize the danger
of foreign terrorist fighters and terrorism. We will
continue to cooperate with the international community
to eradicate terrorism and dry up its resources, as well
as to combat the State terrorism carried out by the
Syrian regime.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 68.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/484/
Add.4)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 106
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/485)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 24 of its report and a draft

A/71/PV.65

decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
25 of the same report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to IV and on the draft decision, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Follow-up to
the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations for
the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/206).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“United Nations African Institute for the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/207).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Preventing and combating corrupt practices
and the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating
asset recovery and returning such assets to legitimate
owners, in particular to countries of origin, in
accordance with the United Nations Convention against
Corruption”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
71/208).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Strengthening the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme, in
particular its technical cooperation capacity”. The
Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
71/209).
The Acting President: We shall now turn to
paragraph 25 of the report to take action on the draft
decision entitled “Reports considered by the General
Assembly in connection with the question of crime
prevention and criminal justice”. May I take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to adopt the draft decision as
recommended by the Third Committee?

16-4479545/47

A/71/PV.65

The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/537).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 106?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 107
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/486)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
and II, one by one.

19/12/2016

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 121.
Agenda item 135
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/488)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 135.

Draft resolution I is entitled “Promoting the
implementation of the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Alternative Development”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to
thank Her Excellency Ms. María Emma Mejía Vélez,
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United
Nations and Chair of the Third Committee, as well as
the members of the Bureau and representatives for a job
well done.

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/210).

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Third Committee
before it today.

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“International cooperation to address and counter the
world drug problem”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/211).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 107.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/71/487)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision entitled
“Programme of work of the Third Committee for the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly”. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision as recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/538).
46/47

Statement by the President
The Acting President: Before adjourning the
meeting, I would like to extend my condolences and
deepest sympathy to the delegation of the Russian
Federation, and I hope that the Assembly will echo
my sentiments. I express my deepest condolences and
sympathy to all our friends in the Russian Federation
on the tragic death, this morning, of the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation in Turkey. It was a stark
reminder for all of us of the vulnerabilities we face
from extremism and terrorism. I hope that our words
of sympathy will be passed on to the family of the late
distinguished Ambassador of the Russian Federation, to
all our colleagues in the Russian Federation’s diplomatic
service and to the people of the Russian Federation.
I now call on
Russian Federation.

the

representative

of

the

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank you, Mr. President, and the delegations
that have expressed their condolences to our country
in connection with the barbaric murder of the Russian
16-44795

19/12/2016

Ambassador in Ankara, Mr. Andrey Gennadyevich
Karlov. The perpetrators of that terrorist attack must be
held to account and brought to justice. We are grateful

A/71/PV.65

for the condolences and we will convey them to the
family of the late Ambassador.
The meeting rose at 2.35 p.m.

16-4479547/47
