S/PV.9026

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9026

th meeting
Friday, 29 April 2022, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Gasri
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mathur
Ms. Byrne Nason
Ms. Mbabu
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 March 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/281)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-33400 (E)
*2233400*

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

of chemical and biological weapons. The CWC, in
prohibiting the development, production, acquisition,
stockpiling, retention, transfer and, of course, use of
chemical weapons, created a more far-reaching and
comprehensive prohibition. When we think back to the
horrors of chemical warfare, from the victims from the
fields of Flanders to the Middle East, it is obvious that
the CWC has made the world not only a safer place, but
also a more humane one.

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 March 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/281)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/281, which contains the text of a
letter dated 30 March 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: It is an honour to address this
Security Council meeting commemorating the twentyfifth anniversary of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC). I would like to take this opportunity to extend
my thanks to the United Kingdom for its long-standing
support to both the Convention and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is one of the most
important achievements in the history of disarmament.
The prohibition and scheduled elimination of an entire
category of weapons of mass destruction 25 years ago
was a truly remarkable outcome. It was not easy, but
it is an outstanding example of what the international
community can achieve when it is united in purpose.
The unprecedented large-scale use of toxic
chemicals during the First World War shocked the
entire world and prompted negotiations on a number of
instruments meant to prevent such a recurrence, most
prominently the 1925 Geneva Protocol to The Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, which banned the use
2/17

29/04/2022

The past 25 years have seen much accomplished
in pursuit of the elimination of chemical weapons. The
Convention is nearing universality, with 193 States
parties and 165 signatories. Thanks to the hard work of
the OPCW and its staff and the cooperation of States,
99 per cent of the chemical-weapon stockpiles declared
by possessor States have been verifiably destroyed.
The Convention has significantly benefited from
its partnership with industry, including its unique role
in the negotiation of the CWC. Industry has played
a vital ongoing role in facilitating the technological
and economic benefits of chemistry and advancing
chemical safety and security. Industry’s role in the
CWC is a fine example, which should be replicated in
other relevant negotiations, including those related to
emerging technologies.
I am proud of the robust and long-standing
partnership between the United Nations and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat, which is dedicated to
achieving the elimination of chemical weapons. That
close cooperation and the mutually reinforcing nature
of our work were exemplified by the United Nations
investigation into the allegation of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Mission and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.
I would like to express my appreciation for the
leadership shown by OPCW Director-General Fernando
Arias and commend the OPCW Technical Secretariat
for its professionalism, dedication and perseverance.
It is an unfortunate fact that today many of
the CWC’s historic accomplishments have been
overshadowed by the continued use of chemical
weapons. I can assure Council members that both the
OPCW and the United Nations have worked, and will
continue to work, closely to respond to those challenges
and in defence of the CWC.
22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

No example showcases that damage better than the
numerous documented instances of chemical weapons
use in the Syrian Arab Republic. The OPCW confirmed
the complete destruction of all chemical weapons
declared by Syria on 4 of January 2016. Unfortunately,
despite the accession of Syria to the CWC, the OPCW
continues to document instances of chemical weapons
use in Syria.
Those reports are a wake-up call to the international
community about the continuing threat posed by those
inhumane weapons. The horrific images of the victims
of chemical weapons, including hundreds of injured
and casualties, should haunt us all.
The objective and professional nature of the
OPCW Technical Secretariat, including its Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT), the Fact-Finding Mission
(FFM) and Investigation and Identification Team, must
be respected. Its work is crucial to reinforcing the CWC
and bringing the perpetrators of chemical weapon use
to justice.
Secretary-General Guterres has repeatedly called
on the international community to act. Yet the Security
Council has not fulfilled its responsibility to hold the
perpetrators of those heinous acts accountable. The use
of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstances is unacceptable. We must act together to
shore up the norm against the use of chemical weapons
and strengthen the CWC, which remains integral and
necessary bedrock of the international disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture.
I assure the Council that the United Nations will
continue to strive with partners, such as the OPCW
Technical Secretariat, and all its Member States to
restore the norm against chemical weapons and to
ensure that those responsible for their use are held
to account.
Turning to my regular briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs has continued to maintain regular contact with
counterparts at the OPCW on its activities related to
that matter. As per established practice, I held a monthly
call with the OPCW Director-General on 27 April 2022
to receive an update on developments and ascertain
his views.

S/PV.9026

I regret to inform Council members that there has
been little, or no, change in the past month on issues
related to this file. Efforts by the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team to clarify all the outstanding issues
regarding the initial declaration and subsequent
declarations of the Syrian Arab Republic remain as
previously informed. I have been advised that the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has not yet received the
requested declaration from the Syrian Arab Republic
on all undeclared types and quantities of nerve agents
produced and/or weaponized at a former chemical
weapons production facility that was declared by the
Syrian Arab Republic as never having been used to
produce and/or weaponize chemical warfare agents.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat also expects
further information and documentation from the
Syrian Arab Republic regarding damage caused during
the 8 June 2021 attack on a military facility housing a
declared former chemical weapons production facility. I
have also been advised that the Technical Secretariat has
not yet received a response to the request for information
regarding the unauthorized movement of remains of
two destroyed cylinders related to the chemical weapon
incident that took place in Douma on 7 April 2018. The
Syrian Arab Republic must respond with urgency to the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests.
Since April 2021, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has attempted to schedule the twenty-fifth round of
consultations between the DAT and the Syrian National
Authority. This deployment has been delayed owing to
the continued refusal by the Syrian Arab Republic to
issue an entry visa for one DAT expert. I understand
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat has repeatedly
stressed that the applicable legal framework does not
entitle the Syrian Arab Republic to select experts.
The DAT will only be in a position to deploy to the
Syrian Arab Republic once entry visas are issued to all
DAT experts.
I have been informed that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has proposed a limited round of consultations
in Beirut, Lebanon. These consultations would allow
for an assessment of the status of all outstanding issues,
discussions on the possible way forward, and receipt of
documents requested by the Secretariat. I understand
that the Syrian Arab Republic has agreed to the
limited round of consultations, while at the same time
requesting the exclusion of one OPCW expert.

22-334003/17

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

Let me state yet again: until these outstanding
issues are closed, the international community cannot
have full confidence that the Syrian Arab Republic’s
chemical-weapons programme has been eliminated.
To this end, I regret to also inform the Council that
the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide sufficient
technical information or explanations that would enable
the OPCW Technical Secretariat to close the issue
related to the detection of a Schedule 2 chemical at the
Barzah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre in November 2018.
I note that an initial agenda has been negotiated for
the in-person meeting between the OPCW DirectorGeneral and the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates. However, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
is awaiting the Syrian Arab Republic’s position on the
latest version of the agenda. The proposed meeting
would be an important opportunity to strengthen
dialogue and cooperation between the two parties.
Consistent with previous updates to the Council,
the OPCW FFM remains in the process of studying all
available information related to allegations of the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. I have
been advised that the FFM is preparing for upcoming
deployments that remain subject to the evolution of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course, subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
With regard to the decision entitled “Addressing
the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the
Syrian Arab Republic” (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on
21 April 2021, I have been advised that, unfortunately,
the Syrian Arab Republic has not yet completed any of
the measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision EC94/DEC.2. I therefore repeat my call on the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate fully with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat in this regard.
The Chemical Weapons Convention calls upon
us to exclude completely the possibility of the use of
chemical weapons. The Convention has been the most
important step in achieving that goal. But as events
continue to prove, we cannot take its success for granted.
I hope that the Security Council will take seriously
4/17

29/04/2022

its responsibilities in safeguarding this invaluable
instrument and the norm against chemical-weapon use.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
High Representative for her briefing this morning.
I would also like to commend the continued
diligence and professionalism of the independent
experts of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We salute their tireless
efforts to ensure the implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
As the High Representative has just highlighted,
today we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Convention’s entry into force. For a quarter of a
century, the United States and other nations that share
our commitment to a safer world have endeavoured to
rid the world of chemical weapons and deter their use
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances. In
that time, the OPCW has achieved great success, with
the Convention having reached near-universality.
Relevant to this meeting, the OPCW oversaw the
speedy destruction of Syria’s declared chemical-weapons
stockpile. We now know, unfortunately, that Syria’s
declaration was incomplete. Our presence in this
Chamber today and the Security Council’s ongoing
monthly meetings to discuss this subject are a
reminder that the success of the Convention and the
OPCW — and more broadly, any success in the realm
of arms control and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction — cannot be taken for granted. Each
month, in the Security Council, we are forced to reckon
with the fact that the use of these horrific weapons,
once thought to be relegated to history, has resumed.
We are reminded that we must collectively remain
vigilant to prevent the emergence and normalization of
chemical-weapons use.
As a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
Syria agreed to never, under any circumstances, use
chemical weapons. Yet we uncontestably know, from the
independent reports of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism and the OPCW Investigation
and Identification Team (IIT), that the Al-Assad regime
has used chemical weapons against its own people on
at least eight occasions since joining the Convention.
22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Unfortunately, the IIT’s work is not done, as it
continues to investigate several additional incidents of
chemical-weapons use. And the picture is even more
grim than that: the United States assesses that the
Al-Assad regime has used chemical weapons at least 50
times since the conflict in Syria began. As a State party
to the Chemical Weapons Convention, Syria agreed to
fully disclose the precise location, aggregate quantity
and detailed inventory of the chemical weapons it
possessed. Yet, as we have heard countless times from
the High Representative and OPCW Director-General
Arias, Syria’s declaration still cannot be considered
complete and accurate, nearly nine years after joining
the Convention.
In the face of irrefutable proof, documented
by the meticulous work of the OPCW, that Syria is
flouting its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Al-Assad regime, in this Chamber,
hurls preposterous accusations of bias at the OPCW’s
independent and professional experts in a failed effort
to impugn them and distract from proven facts. Russia,
which is itself in violation of its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention for its repeated use
of chemical weapons, and which lacks, frankly, even
the most remedial semblance of credibility when it
comes to international peace and security, continues to
peddle falsehoods in an effort to undermine the OPCW,
repeatedly using its Security Council veto to shield
Syria from accountability for its atrocities.
As we collectively mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
United States once again calls on Syria to cooperate
fully with the OPCW as it is bound to do by resolution
2118 (2013) and to comply with its obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention. That includes
stopping its obstruction of the work of the OPCW
and fully declaring its chemical-weapons stockpile
and programmes for destruction under international
oversight. We also call on Russia to act responsibly and
cease its efforts to undermine the Chemical Weapons
Convention by protecting Syria from accountability for
its inexcusable use of chemical weapons.
In conclusion, the most meaningful way to observe
today’s twenty-fifth anniversary of the Convention
entering into force is for every one of us to be faithful
to the commitments contained in the Convention.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for presenting the

S/PV.9026

latest report (see S/2022/281) of the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013). Unfortunately, it is virtually a carbon
copy of the previous report (see S/2022/181). Those
documents have long been based on a presumption of
the guilt of Damascus. Whatever steps the Syrians take
towards satisfying the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, they are never enough.
In principle, all the reports of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to the Security Council could be duly
summarized in advance, without wasting the Council’s
time every month on a discussion of identical reports,
especially as experience has shown that the debate on
the Syrian chemical dossier in the Security Council has
not been hampered by a lack of discussion.
We have repeatedly voiced our position on the
groundlessness of the claims against Syria, especially
in the context of its initial declaration. I will not go
into detail today. In the report before us, what struck
us was yet another inconsistency in the accusatory
anti-Syrian narrative. Its premise rests on the idea that
the Syrian side is uncooperative with regard to the
OPCW Declaration Assessment Team and is based on a
single argument — the failure to issue a visa to one of
the Team’s members.
First, it should be recalled that cooperation with the
Team is part of the voluntary bilateral commitments
that Syria has made. Beyond that, however, it raises
the question: Does all bilateral cooperation between
the Technical Secretariat and the Syrians depend on
a single expert? What if that expert were unable to
come to Syria for another reason? Would the Technical
Secretariat use that reason to cancel the twenty-fifth
round of consultations and suspend the discussion
on the Syrian initial declaration, the importance
and urgency of which our Western colleagues have
raised repeatedly?
With regard to visas, the Russian experts who are
supposed to participate in activities at Headquarters in
New York have repeatedly encountered the challenge of
the non-issuance of visas, even though the host country
is obliged to issue visas in a timely manner. We note
the double standards in the visa-related accusations
against Syrians.
We would ask the question: Even if the Syrian side
were to agree to issue a visa to the Team’s expert, where
is the guarantee that the Technical Secretariat would

22-334005/17

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

29/04/2022

not fabricate another pretext to postpone consultations
and blame Damascus once again?

2017. We urge those who have not yet fulfilled their
obligations under the Convention to follow our example.

It should be recalled in that regard that the Syrians
were ready to host the Team as early as last summer, but
OPCW Director-General Arias publicly refused to send
the Team to Damascus owing to the uncomfortable
environment that he said members would face in
carrying out their work. As a result, the consultations
were significantly delayed. The report does not make a
single reference to that but only makes further attempts
to shift the blame onto the Syrians.

Today we pay tribute to the Convention as a
unique disarmament mechanism to which there is no
alternative. The elimination of Syrian chemical-military
capabilities is an example of the Convention’s
effectiveness. By acceding to the CWC, Damascus has
faithfully fulfilled all its obligations in that regard,
as the Secretary-General reported to the Security
Council in June 2014. The final elimination of Syria’s
chemical-military capabilities was confirmed in 2016
by the OPCW Executive Council and the Conference of
the States Parties.

We therefore view the new excuses provided by the
Technical Secretariat and the OPCW Director-General
to mean that The Hague is simply not interested in
constructive discussions with the Syrian side on
the subject of the initial declaration. We also find it
abnormal that the Director-General, who has held
his post for more than four years, has to date avoided
visiting Syria.
In that regard, we would ask Mrs. Nakamitsu:
From the perspective of her extensive experience with
the United Nations and the practices of the Secretariat,
how common is it for the head of an entity never to
have visited the country that is the focus of its mandate
and to be apprised of the situation on the ground
only through its staff’s reports? Are there other such
examples in the United Nations system? We believe
that the consequences of such a political appointment
are having an extremely negative impact on the
effectiveness of the OPCW in carrying out its mandate.
Today marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC). Rusia was involved in the very inception of
the Convention. For us, therefore, being committed to
its implementation is not just a formality. We believe
that it our moral duty to implement the Convention
in good faith and do everything we can to strengthen
it. That is why, despite the difficult circumstances,
we supported the consensus on the text of the press
statement (SC/14876) issued by the President today. We
also supported resolution 2629 (2022) on Libya, but for
some reason we were criticized for it today.
We are proud of the fact that, in 2017, Russia
fulfilled its obligations with regard to the destruction
of chemical weapons ahead of schedule and under
strict international oversight. That fact is confirmed by
the report of the OPCW Director-General of October
6/17

That outcome was made possible by the strong
commitment of the Syrian authorities to the political
decision
to
abandon
their
chemical-military
programme and the choice made by the international
community to advocate for the establishment of
conventional mechanisms.
But no matter how unique and valuable an instrument
the CWC is in itself, the way its implementation is
monitored by the OPCW is of fundamental importance.
In that regard, the organization has had its ups over
the past 25 years and — as we have unfortunately seen
in recent years — its downs. A few years ago, we saw
the first buds of a dangerous tendency to politicize the
work of the OPCW, and today they are in full bloom.
As the Syrian chemical dossier has shown, the
OPCW is turning from an independent and impartial
steward of the Convention into an instrument for
the punishment of those who do not please Western
countries. Unlawful decisions are being imposed
on its governing bodies to give quasi-prosecutorial
powers to the Technical Secretariat. It conducts biased
investigations into violations of CWC norms and uses
them as a pretext for exerting political pressure.
The Technical Secretariat itself persecutes
freethinkers who disagree with signing off on political
orders from above. At the same time, the leadership of
the Technical Secretariat refuses to speak directly about
all those dangerous tendencies and has no intention of
rectifying them.
We have a long list of such egregious examples.
It includes the infamous report of the OPCW FactFinding Mission (FFM) on the Douma incident in 2018,
the final version of which was radically redacted in
an illustration of anti-Syrian bias under the pressure
22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

exerted by certain delegations and in defiance of the
glaring facts. One extremely shameful aberration
is the activity of the illegitimate Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT), whose establishment was
railroaded through the Executive Council in violation of
the principle of consensus and article XV of the CWC.
The flawed methodology of both the IIT and the
FFM directly violates the Convention and the principles
of conducting investigations in terms of the collection
and preservation of evidence and the chain of custody.
The reports are prepared on the basis of information
collected remotely from biased sources, primarily from
the infamous White Helmets.
The culmination of those unscrupulous practices
was that, for the first time in the history of the
organization, a sovereign State complying with the
Convention in good faith was stripped of its rights.
That punitive decision was pushed through by Western
delegations in violation of CWC norms and the principle
of consensus. That has left the OPCW, at its twentyfifth anniversary, with very serious systemic issues
and a considerably tarnished reputation. Damage has
also been done to the integrity of the Convention itself,
which concerns us greatly.
If the situation is not rectified, the OPCW will lose
its prestige in the very near future. It will become an
instrument for implementing the geopolitical tasks of a
very small group of countries. The Convention will then
become a punitive instrument, which will strike a blow
at the foundation of the chemical weapons prohibition
regime and the non-proliferation architecture as a
whole. It will give rise to distrust in other international
instruments in the area of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
We call upon the leadership of the organization
to take decisions, rectify its mistakes and recover the
OPCW’s inherent spirit of professional, de-politicized
cooperation and apply it to overcome real challenges
faced by the international community in the areas of
disarmament and non-proliferation, primarily with
regard to the threat of the use of toxic chemicals and
warfare agents by terrorist and extremist entities.
Following his re-election as Director-General, Mr. Arias
will now have a second chance to do that.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize again that
despite the issue of politicization, which aggravates
the work of the OPCW, the Convention itself remains
relevant. It remains the only example of a universal

S/PV.9026

multilateral treaty that bans a whole class of weapons
of mass destruction. Russia unconditionally and
effectively supports the Convention and is committed
to its letter and spirit. Our question is, How are its
provisions being implemented by the OPCW?
We are convinced that, so long as there is political
will on the part of the leadership of the organization, it
is possible to rectify the current issues. We stand ready
to contribute in every possible way and call upon other
members of the Council to do the same.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I, too, would like
to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.
As others have noted, today we mark 25 years
since the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC). The Convention’s aim to make the
world safe from the threat of chemical weapons, through
a comprehensive and verifiable ban, is as important
today as ever. On this important anniversary, Ireland
takes the opportunity to reaffirm our unwavering
support for the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), its Director-General and
the staff of the Technical Secretariat.
A key element of the Convention is the
establishment of the OPCW to ensure a credible,
transparent verification regime to verify the destruction
of chemical weapons and prevent their re-emergence.
That the Convention has been such a success is in large
part thanks to the continued integrity, professionalism
and impartiality of the OPCW. The Security Council
has a crucial role to play in supporting the ongoing
work of the Convention and upholding the legal norm
against chemical weapons. The use of those weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances is
an affront to international law, on which we all depend
for our security and well-being.
Unfortunately, however, 25 years after the
Convention’s entry into force the recent marked
increase in the use of chemical weapons presents a
serious threat to international peace and security. The
ongoing case of Syria remains a significant challenge,
and the failure to resolve that case represents a serious
risk to the effective operation of the Convention.
Thousands of Syrian civilians have experienced the
devastating effects of chemical weapons at the hands of
the Syrian armed forces and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, as evidenced in reports of the United

22-334007/17

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

Nations and OPCW. At the same time, we see continued
efforts by Syria and Russia to undermine and politicize
the work of OPCW in order to deflect attention from
serious culpability.
It is essential that we, as the Council, uphold our
responsibilities in resolving this file. We must be clear
in our full support for the OPCW and its ongoing work in
Syria and in rejecting efforts to undermine the OPCW.
We must continue to hold Syria to its obligations under
the CWC and Council resolutions. Equally, Syria must
stop its policy of equivocation and delay and engage in
serious and meaningful cooperation with the OPCW.
The Technical Secretariat and the Conference
of the States Parties have made clear the concrete
actions necessary to resolve the outstanding issues
with Syria’s declarations. It is for Syria to implement
those actions and provide the necessary clarity on all
outstanding matters.
It is unacceptable that Syria has prevented the
deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team
for the past year, despite the efforts demonstrated
by the Technical Secretariat to facilitate a meeting.
The arrangements for the proposed meeting between
Director-General Arias and Foreign Minister
Mekdad, also outstanding for a year, must be settled
quickly, and the meeting should focus on achieving
concrete outcomes.
It is time for Syria to move on from empty words
and delays. Ireland will continue to support all efforts
to resolve the outstanding issues on this file.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I also welcome the delegations of Syria, Iran and
Turkey to today’s meeting.
Before addressing the specific case of Syria,
Mexico believes that the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the adoption of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC)
should be celebrated.
It one of the treaties of the disarmament
architecture. With 193 States parties, it represents
the highest standard of verification in a multilateral
treaty on the prohibition and elimination of an entire
category of weapons of mass destruction. Mexico took
8/17

29/04/2022

an active part in the negotiations on the CWC, as we
believed that that instrument would assist in achieving
general and complete disarmament, as well as ensuring
international cooperation in the chemical industry on
activities for peaceful purposes.
To continue to strengthen this regime, the States
parties to the CWC must meet their obligations and
commitments under the Convention and the relevant
decisions taken by the Executive Council and the
Conference of States Parties to the Convention.
Similarly, it is important to acknowledge and support
the work and professionalism of the OPCW and its
Technical Secretariat.
Thanks to the regime established by the
Convention, we have made progress towards a world
free of such weapons. The worrisome reports that have
confirmed the use of chemical weapons in recent years
compel us to pay attention to the full implementation of
the Convention.
That is why we deplore the fact that, at each monthly
discussion of the Syria file, we have met with very
little progress. Discrepancies remain on 20 outstanding
items of the initial declaration, and it has not been
possible to conduct a new round of consultations, as one
member of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
continues to be denied a visa. Although Syria agreed to
conduct a round of limited consultations in Lebanon, it
imposed conditions.
Those are just some of the obstacles that have led
to the consultations between the DAT and the national
Syrian authorities being postponed for months. We
reiterate that one of the goals of the DAT is to assist
Syria in eliminating the discrepancies in its initial
declaration in order to fully comply with its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Furthermore, we call upon Syria to explain the
unauthorized transfer of two chlorine cylinders related
to the incident that occurred in Douma in April 2018.
Similarly, the tripartite agreement among the OPCW,
the United Nations Office for Project Services and
Syria expires on 30 June. Mexico calls upon the parties
to reach a more broad-ranging agreement that will
provide adequate conditions to facilitate the mandate
of the Technical Secretariat.
Mexico once again categorically condemns the
use of chemical weapons or any other weapon of mass
22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9026

destruction, anywhere, at any time, by any actor and
under any circumstances.

privileges suspended a year ago at the Conference of
the States Parties be restored.

The work of the Security Council should be to
prevent risks in the deteriorated international security
environment due to this situation, not in spite of it.
The Council must show leadership and consolidate
a common front for the defence of multilateral legal
instruments. A more secure and peaceful world should
be based on international law and cooperation, not on
weapons, much less on weapons of mass destruction
with irreversible consequences.

Under difficult conditions, the Technical Secretariat
has shown tenacity and great professionalism. The
disinformation campaigns against it must stop. We will
follow very closely the upcoming consultations of the
Investigation and Identification Team.

Before concluding, this being the last formal
meeting of the month, Mexico acknowledges and
commends the efforts of the British presidency in
conducting the work of the Council during the month
of April.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Today we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, which enabled the destruction of 99 per
cent of declared chemical-weapon stockpiles, thanks to
the integrity and professionalism of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as
others have noted today.
We thought we were done with these shocking
weapons. Yet, a quarter of a century after the
establishment of the OPCW and nearly 100 years after
their prohibition in warfare, the threat of their use has,
instead, become commonplace.
Clearly, the Syrian regime’s repeated use of these
weapons against its own population has broken a taboo.
Since 2013, OPCW and United Nations investigators
have conclusively demonstrated the use of such weapons
on eight occasions. Eight years after the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), we lament the lack
of progress. The OPCW Director-General’s report (see
S/2022/281) is once again very clear in that regard.
The regime continues to obstruct the work of the
OPCW. It is not issuing the necessary visas for the
deployment of the Syrian initial Declaration Assessment
Team. It interferes in the selection of inspectors.
Under false pretences, the regime seeks to obstruct the
missions of the Technical Secretariat. We once again
strongly call on Syria to shed light on its stockpiles,
to answer the questions asked and to comply with its
international obligations. Only then can the rights and

It is essential that perpetrators of chemical-weapon
attacks be identified and held accountable. That is the
reason for our continued advocacy for the International
Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical
Weapons. There will be no respite for war criminals
who use these weapons, which, for so many years, have
been banned under international law.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): I also
would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing. We highly appreciate her repeated calls for
Syrian cooperation and for unity in the Security Council
in order to ensure accountability on the use of chemical
weapons. We deeply regret the finding of a deliberate
lack of cooperation by Syria with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Today we continue to face a situation that has barely
changed since the most recent Security Council meeting
on 10 March 2022 (see S/PV.8990). There is no progress
in the discussions between the OPCW and the Syrian
Government. There is therefore no progress on the next
inspection in Syria. Another seven weeks have been
lost, for the simple reason that Syria wants to select the
inspectors, which it has no right to do. This deadlock
hinders the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013),
and Syria’s chemical weapons programme remains
outside the control of the international community.
The one hundred-second monthly report (see
S/2022/281) of the OPCW clearly assesses that, at
this stage, due to identified gaps, inconsistencies
and unresolved discrepancies, the latest declaration
submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be
considered accurate and complete in accordance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. Like many times
before, we are once again receiving the same response,
the same incomplete document that does not answer the
questions posed.
We therefore continue to wait for Syria to
demonstrate concretely and unambiguously its
willingness to cooperate with the OPCW with regard
to all the demands set out in the OPCW report, in

22-334009/17

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

29/04/2022

accordance with resolution 2118 (2013). Syria’s
refusal — supported by Russia — to cooperate with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat, is irresponsible and
unacceptable. Albania continues to fully support the
professional, independent and impartial work of the
OPCW and its Technical Secretariat.

deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
to Syria, which was proposed for earlier in April, did
not occur. We note the plans for a limited round of
consultations in Lebanon, and we urge that positive
progress be made towards cooperation and discussions
on the way forward.

The Security Council and its members have
the responsibility to protect the international
non-proliferation regime, which underpins our
collective security. It is one of the most successful
disarmament regimes in the world. It has ensured the
destruction of over 98 per cent of declared-chemical
weapons stockpiles.

However, we would also like to underline that
resolution 2118 (2013) explicitly mentions Syria’s
obligations to accept the personnel designated by the
OPCW, to provide those personnel with immediate
and unfettered access and to respect their right to
inspect any and all sites. It is vital to return to regular
deployments of the DAT, with entry visas issued to all
DAT experts.

Our discussions cannot, and should not, in any
way call into question the full cooperation of any State
under investigation by the OPCW, as it is our common
responsibility to protect populations from any attack
using chemical weapons. There cannot, and must not,
be impunity for the use of chemical weapons — not in
Syria, not elsewhere.
Albania rejects all attempts to politicize the work
of the OPCW, which would serve only to delay Syria’s
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), thereby
also damaging the Security Council’s credibility. We
therefore strongly reject any attempt to discredit the
OPCW in order to cover up the horrific crimes committed
by the Syrian regime and escape accountability. As
we know full well, a lack of accountability promotes
impunity — but impunity is neither a choice nor an
alternative. Those responsible must, and will, be
brought to justice.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing on
the progress towards the full elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme.
As we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), let me express Norway’s full commitment to
its provisions. Together, the CWC and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
represent a milestone in global disarmament. Yet
clearly, that work must continue. We call for the
immediate ratification or accession to the CWC by the
States that have not yet done so.
The Security Council is once again meeting with
few developments to report in the Syrian chemical
weapons dossier. It is particularly regrettable that the
10/17

The Syrian Arab Republic must fulfil its obligations
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). Norway urges Syria to fully
cooperate with the OPCW and to provide sufficient
technical information and explanations to close the
20 outstanding issues. It is critical that Syria complete
the necessary measures to lift the suspension of its
rights and privileges as a State party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Let me conclude by underlining that accountability
must be ensured for those responsible for the use
of chemical weapons. Norway remains steadfastly
confident in the work of Director-General Arias and
the OPCW Technical Secretariat. We firmly reject any
efforts to discredit their important work.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African countries
members of the Security Council (A3), that is, Gabon,
Kenya and Ghana.
We are grateful to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing
on the status of the implementation of the elimination
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme and stress
the relevance of the continuing partnership between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
We welcome the participation of the representatives
of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Turkey in this meeting.
As we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
entry of the entry into force of the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9026

Their Destruction, the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, must be awakened
to the potential re-emergence and increasing threats of
chemical warfare and take steps to accelerate action
towards a world free of chemical weapons.

the team, in compliance with its commitments. We
believe also that enhanced cooperation between the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian National
Authority would be useful in order to make progress in
that regard.

The A3 collectively stands against the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances. We remain committed to the
established norms against the use of chemical weapons
and all efforts to eliminate their production, storage or
use, and reiterate our support for resolution 2118 (2013),
which provides the framework for the expeditious and
verifiable destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons.

We take note of the ongoing discussions for the
holding of limited consultations in Beirut and look
forward to a favourable update at subsequent briefings.
We also note the Technical Secretariat’s request of
October 2020, relating to all undeclared types and
quantities of nerve agents produced and/or weaponized
at a former chemical-weapons production facility that
was declared as never having been used as such, as
well as requests for information regarding the damage
caused to a military facility that housed a declared
former such facility reportedly attacked on 8 June 2021,
remain outstanding.

We thank the OPCW for its report covering
the period of 24 February to 23 March 2022 (see
S/2022/281) and express our support for its work as
the foremost body responsible for ensuring the full
implementation of the elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme.
In that regard, we welcome the continued efforts
of the OPCW Technical Secretariat to carry out its
mandate and its readiness to deploy to Syria, subject
to the easing of travel restrictions and the difficulties
imposed by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The A3 takes note of the verification of the
destruction of all 27 chemical-weapon production
facilities declared by the Syrian Arab Republic in
furtherance of its obligations. We also note the Syrian
National Authority’s submission to the Executive
Council of its 100th monthly report regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical
weapons as well as its chemical-weapons production
facilities, as required of it by the Executive Council.
However, we are concerned by the Technical
Secretariat’s assessment that the declarations submitted
by the Syrian National Authority still cannot be
considered as accurate and complete in accordance
with the Convention, resolution 2118 (2013) and the
decisions of the Executive Council. The unaddressed
gaps, inconsistencies and outstanding issues in Syria’s
initial and subsequent declarations must be addressed.
We note that the convening of the twenty-fifth
round of consultations in Syria has once again been held
in abeyance owing to the denial of entry visas to the
full complement of the Declaration Assessment Team.
We continue to encourage the Syrian Arab Republic
to grant the necessary entry visas to all members of

As expressed in our previous statements, we
believe that direct high-level exchanges between the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW Director-General
would be helpful in building confidence and providing
the impetus needed to advance the various aspects of
the programme and encourage greater commitment to
strengthening cooperation.
We also look forward to receiving further
information on the subsequent rounds of inspections
of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre that have been
planned for this year.
We note that the tripartite agreement concluded
among the OPCW, the Syrian Arab Republic and the
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) ends
on 30 June, and we encourage its extension to maintain
the supportive role of UNOPS in the implementation of
the Syrian chemical-weapons programme.
The A3 takes note of the continuing efforts of the
Fact-Finding Mission in Syria and the Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT) as mandated by the relevant
Executive Council decisions and reiterates the need for
them to remain independent, transparent and impartial
as they carry out their respective mandates.
We will continue to be supportive of accountability
measures to strengthen deterrence and reinforce
the well-established norms against the use of
chemical weapons.

22-3340011/17

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, we urge the support of the Council
in addressing more constructively those issues
that constrain meaningful progress in the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). The early
closure of the elimination of Syria’s chemical-weapons
programme forms an important part of our common
goal of international peace and security.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu
for her briefing today.
As mentioned by the speakers before me, today
marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC), which is a global
achievement that has contributed to the destruction of
99 per cent of chemical-weapons stockpiles worldwide.
For that reason, it is imperative for us to continue making
that international effort. In that regard, we welcome
today’s press statement (SC/14876) commemorating
that anniversary.
The United Arab Emirates would like on this
occasion to reiterate its principled position of rejecting
and explicitly condemning the use of chemical weapons
anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances. The
use of such weapons constitutes a flagrant violation
of the provisions of the CWC and the international
law and poses a serious threat to international peace
and security.
Achieving progress on the chemical-weapons
dossier related to the Syrian crisis requires addressing
the existing gaps. In the first place, the holding of a
constructive and meaningful dialogue between the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Syrian Arab Republic should be
encouraged. In that regard, we look forward to the
anticipated meeting between the Syrian Minister
for Foreign Affairs and the Director-General of the
organization, as well as the limited consultations
between the Syrian Arab Republic and the Declaration
Assessment Team, to be held in Lebanon. We urge
both sides to work together to forge ahead and consider
all available alternatives to facilitate the team’s visit
to Damascus.
Notwithstanding the progress that has been made
towards the complete elimination of chemical weapons,
the serious threats that they pose continue to exist, in
particular when they are acquired by terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
12/17

29/04/2022

(Da’esh), which poses a grave threat to international
peace and security.
As we recently witnessed in Al-Hasakah, terrorist
groups continue to develop their methods of attack,
seeking to obtain advanced weapons such as chemical
weapons to achieve their dangerous goals. Accordingly,
we stress the importance of continuing the fight against
Da’esh in Syria to prevent it from rearranging its ranks
or acquiring chemical weapons.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
the importance of making progress on the chemical
dossier, in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013), as
well as all other dossiers concerned with resolving the
Syrian crisis.
Mr. Mathur (India): We would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
update today.
We have taken note of the contents of the most
recent monthly report by the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) (see S/2022/281). We have also noted the
recent monthly submission made by Syria detailing
measures undertaken to implement its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We encourage continued engagement between
Syria and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to resolve
the outstanding issues. We are hopeful that the twentyfifth round of consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority
will be organized as soon as possible. Furthermore,
we also hope that the next round of inspections of the
Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies
and Research Centre will be held at an early date.
Today marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
India attaches high importance to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and stands for its full, effective
and non-discriminatory implementation. We support
the collective efforts by all the parties to ensure that
the credibility and integrity of the Convention is
maintained to the fullest.
India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under any
circumstances. India has consistently maintained that
any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective. Such an
22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

investigation should follow scrupulously the provisions
and procedures embedded in the Convention and in
conformity with the delicate balance of power and
responsibility enshrined under it to establish facts and
reach evidence-based conclusions.
India has also repeatedly cautioned against the
possibility of terrorist entities and individuals gaining
access to chemical weapons, including in the region.
The reports of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have
also referred to the repeated deployment of chemical
weapons by United Nations-proscribed terrorist groups
and those affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant against civilian populations between 2014
and 2016. The international community’s collective
fight against terrorism will be strengthened by
ensuring accountability for the grave and inhuman acts
of terror committed by terrorists and terrorist groups.
To that end, India has made a contribution of $200,000
to support the investigations of the Investigative Team.
India continues to believe that progress on other
tracks would also help in facilitating the overall political
peace process in Syria, as underscored in resolution
2254 (2015).
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Today marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
For 25 years, the Convention has played an important
role in safeguarding international peace and security.
Humankind has been moving towards a vision of a
world free of chemical weapons.
China is a founding State party to the CWC. We
support the comprehensive and balanced implementation
of the CWC and the defence of the legitimate rights
and interests of developing countries with respect to
the peaceful use of chemicals. We call on the country
concerned to seriously fulfil its obligations under the
CWC and complete the destruction of stockpiled and
abandoned chemical weapons as soon as possible.
I wish to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
China has always called for dialogue and
consultations to solve the outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration on chemical weapons submitted
by Syria. We welcome the active preparation by the
Technical Secretariat and Syria for in-person meetings
between the Director-General and the Syrian Foreign

S/PV.9026

Minister. We hope that the two parties will finalize
meeting arrangements as soon as possible and avail
themselves of that opportunity to enhance mutual trust
and cooperation.
The Syrian Government and the Technical
Secretariat are discussing the arrangements for the
twenty-fifth round of technical consultations. China
calls on the Technical Secretariat to respect the
State party’s concerns with regard to visas and move
technical consultations forward in a flexible way in
order to prevent the assessment of the initial declaration
from reaching an impasse.
The issue of chemical weapons is of crucial
importance. The CWC is the legal basis and benchmark
in that regard. The OPCW’s investigation and attribution
of accountability for the alleged use of chemical weapons
should be carried out strictly within the framework of
the Convention. The Technical Secretariat must strictly
adhere to the principles of independence, impartiality
and objectivity, among other things, and must respect
facts and science. Many countries, including China,
have opposed from the outset the practice of adopting
by vote the decision on addressing the threat of
chemical weapons use, which goes beyond the scope
of the Convention, and have opposed the establishment
of the Investigation and Identification Team. China’s
position in that regard remains unchanged.
At present, the politicization of the OPCW is
extreme. A number of parties are often divided and in
opposition to each other. China is concerned about that.
We hope that the Director-General and the Technical
Secretariat will facilitate State parties’ efforts to
overcome their differences and revert to the practice
of making decisions by consensus with a view to
upholding the authority of the OPCW.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking the High
Representative
for
Disarmament
Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
The entry into force of the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) was an important milestone in
international security. We commend the success of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) in overseeing the Convention and verifying
the destruction of 99 per cent of declared stockpiles.

22-3340013/17

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

While almost all States parties have met their
obligations under the Convention, a few continue
to develop, acquire and deploy chemical weapons.
The Syrian regime continues to flout the terms of
resolution 2118 (2013). It has ignored its obligations to
cooperate fully with the OPCW to make progress on the
outstanding issues on its chemical weapons declaration.
This month marks the anniversaries of chemical
weapons attacks at Khan Shaykhun in 2017 and Douma
in 2018. We are unwavering in our commitment to hold
the Al-Assad regime to account for its repeated uses of
chemical weapons against its own people.
In Syria, the use of chemical weapons was both
preceded and followed by disinformation. We are
therefore concerned to see a similar pattern in Russian
disinformation about chemical weapons in Ukraine.
The use of chemical weapons in Ukraine would be
a callous escalation, and we will hold any State that
uses weapons of mass destruction to account. There
must be no impunity for any State that develops,
acquires or deploys chemical weapons anywhere under
any circumstances.
With the entry into force of the Convention, the
international community pledged to eliminate a class
of weapons that inflicted appalling suffering in the past
century. With that in mind, I welcome the Council’s
agreement on a press statement that reaffirms the
objectives of the CWC (SC/14876). On its twenty-fifth
anniversary, we must collectively recommit to the
Convention. It has saved countless lives.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Today marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC), which is an essential pillar of the
non-proliferation regime and aims to spare humankind
the catastrophic effects and scourge of the use of
that kind of weapon of mass destruction. However,
achieving the universality of the Convention will
remain elusive as long as there are those that continue to
provide immunity to Israel and its arsenal of chemical
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, which
represent a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security.
14/17

29/04/2022

The Convention and its executive body have made
significant achievements, most important in assisting
the Syrian Government in 2013 to get rid of its
chemical-weapon stockpiles, for which the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
won the Nobel Peace Prize. However, implementing
the Convention has faced serious challenges given
the United States of America’s reluctance to comply
with its obligations to destroy its chemical-weapon
stockpiles within the set deadlines, in addition to the
manipulation of its provisions and politicization of its
objectives in recent years by the Governments of some
Western countries that used it as a tool to target and
blackmail Governments of countries that refuse to
submit to their dictates.
This month of April also reminds us of two acts
of military aggression against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria. The first was carried
out by the United States of America on 7 April 2017,
targeting the Al-Shayrat airbase, and the second was
perpetrated by the United States of America, the United
Kingdom and France, targeting the Scientific Studies
and Research Centre and other sites on 14 April 2018.
Those unprovoked and unjustified attacks require
that the perpetrators be held accountable. Those that
raise the issue of holding chemical weapons users
accountable must also demand the accountability of
States that provide support to terrorist groups and
facilitate their acquisition and use of toxic chemicals
and weapons.
Accountability is an important and sensitive
legal issue that must be anchored in professional and
objective investigations, based on conclusive and
tangible evidence and in accordance with impeccable
legal mechanisms. Accountability is not achieved by
manipulating provisions of conventions, violating
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
establishing illegitimate mechanisms that carry out
their work in violation of internationally applicable
legal standards or following wrong and unprofessional
working methods.
The Syrian Arab Republic has fully cooperated
with the OPCW and has fulfilled its obligations under
the CWC. Syria joined the Convention voluntarily
and in good faith and showed readiness to implement
it immediately, even before its entry into force. Syria
provided detailed information, including the names,
types and quantities of chemical agents, types of
munitions, production and storage facilities, and then
22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

destroyed its stocks and production facilities through
joint efforts and in record time. That was confirmed by
the relevant reports of the OPCW.
The Syrian Arab Republic has consistently provided
both the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and the OPCW Technical Secretariat with
information about terrorists of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (Da’esh), the Al-Nusra Front and
other affiliated entities seeking to possess chemical
weapons and toxic chemicals and their attempts to use
those against Syrians, including by staging fabricated
chemical attacks to implicate the Syrian Arab Army.

S/PV.9026

the necessary cooperation and facilitation for it to
discharge its mandate. However, the FFM did not
comply with the agreed terms of reference or the
provisions of the Convention. Rather, it deviated from
the professionalism and independence required under its
mandate. The FFM limited itself to conducting virtual
investigations and receiving samples from others that it
did not collect directly without verifying the chain of
custody. It also relied on footage and videotapes from
open sources fabricated by terrorist groups and their
operators, in addition to listening to testimonies of
people from terrorist groups.

Recently, my delegation conveyed information
about the possession of toxic chemicals and missiles
by the Al-Nusra Front/Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which
were modified and armed with those toxic chemicals
in Idlib governorate in coordination with the Turkish
regime forces in preparation for fabricating a chemical
incident. The possession and use of chemical weapons
and toxic chemical substances by those terrorist groups
is extremely dangerous. My delegation therefore
stresses the need to seriously address that important
information and considers that the full and accurate
implementation of the provisions of the CWC by all
States parties is crucial to preventing terrorist groups
from possessing such weapons.

My delegation expresses its deep concern over the
delay and procrastination of the Fact-Finding Mission in
completing its reports on incidents that Syria requested
be investigated regarding the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups. There are incidents reported by
Syria more than five years ago on which the FFM has
still not submitted reports. I have not heard any remark
in that regard.

Syria is keen to hold a high-level meeting between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates and
the Director-General of the OPCW as soon as possible
in order to address all issues related to the work of the
OPCW teams according to a specific and comprehensive
agenda that allows for tangible progress to be achieved.
Syria once again welcomes the visit of the Declaration
Assessment Team in the context of holding the twentyfifth round of consultations. It expresses its readiness
to receive the team, except for one member whose
participation my country previously objected due to
his lack of objectivity and professionalism. It is well
known that the OPCW has hundreds of experts who
are capable of carrying out this task — unless the
aim is to create a problem or false impressions about
Syrian cooperation. My delegation therefore rejects
the attempts by certain countries that seek to discredit
Syria’s seriousness in fulfilling its obligations, and
considers the repeated accusations by certain States
against Syria to be baseless.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

As for the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM), Syria
has spared no effort in providing the FFM with all

In conclusion, the commemoration of the twentyfifth anniversary of the Chemical Weapons Convention
is an opportunity for us to renew the call to depoliticize
the OPCW and preserve its technical nature, while
addressing, in the meantime, the wrongful practices of
its various teams.

Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): We also thank High
Representative Nakamitsu and her team for her briefing,
for their tireless efforts and for their commitment to
justice and international law.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) published the 102nd report of its
Director-General last month. The report demonstrates
that the outstanding issues relating to the Syrian regime’s
initial declaration persist. The OPCW Secretariat is still
waiting for responses to enquiries it sent to the regime
in October 2020 and July 2021 in relation to its chemical
weapons, production facilities and chlorine cylinders
used in the attack in Douma in 2018. The regime is
using delaying tactics not to meet with the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT). We expect concrete action
from the Council to ensure that the regime fully
cooperates with the DAT and immediately declares
the full extent of its chemical-weapons programme to
the OPCW.

22-3340015/17

S/PV.9026

The situation in the Middle East

The current investigations by the Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) and the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) are important to establishing the truth about
chemical-weapons use in Syria. Turkey takes note of
the reports of the FFM establishing the use of chemical
weapons in Marea on 1 September 2015 and in Kafr
Zeita on 1 October 2016. We await the results of the
further investigations carried out by the IIT on those
attacks for the identification of the perpetrators.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere
and under any circumstances is a grave violation of
international law. We strongly condemn the repeated
and well-documented use of chemical weapons by
the Al-Assad regime against its own people. It is our
collective responsibility to ensure accountability for
this heinous crime committed in Syria. We owe this to
the victims.
Council members must leave their political
differences behind and act in accordance with
humanitarian law. Ending impunity is a prerequisite to
achieving peace in Syria. The Council must be unified
in urging the regime to cooperate with the OPCW
without any further delay. This is key to preventing the
recurrence of chemical-weapons use, be it in Syria or
elsewhere in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): As a major
victim of chemical weapons, Iran strongly condemns
the use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and
under any circumstances.

29/04/2022

the facts and reach evidence-based conclusions, and in
so doing, it must strictly adhere to the provisions and
procedures within the framework of the Convention.
No deviation from the Convention shall be permitted.
Syria has made genuine efforts to meet its
Convention’s obligations and has proven its willingness
to collaborate with the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
However, it is disappointing that certain States parties to
the CWC have politicized the Syrian chemical-weapons
file, preventing the OPCW from confirming Syria’s
compliance with its obligations, which could have
resulted in constructive dialogue and cooperation with
the country.
We recognize the critical importance of the Syrian
Government’s efforts to fulfil its obligations under
the Convention. We support the approach taken by
the OPCW and Syria to the high-level dialogue and
hope that this initiative will produce positive results.
We welcome Syria’s submission of its 100th monthly
report to the OPCW, on 16 March 2022, on activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical
weapons and their production facilities
Finally, we reiterate our recommendation that in
order to improve the Council’s efficiency and create
a positive environment conducive to a constructive
dialogue between Syria and the OPCW, the Council’s
deliberations on the chemical-weapons file should be
less frequent and less repetitive.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has requested the floor to make a
further statement.

Today is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC),
which aims to protect humankind from the devastating
repercussions and scourge of the use of chemical
weapons. In this context, we reiterate our call for the
full, effective, non-political and non-discriminatory
implementation of the CWC and for preserving the
authority of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) as well. We believe that
politicizing the implementation of the Convention
and exploiting the OPCW for politically motivated
agendas endangers the Convention’s credibility and the
Organization’s authority.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Because this is the last meeting under this
month’s United Kingdom presidency, I had to take
this opportunity to say that we are very happy that the
month is drawing to a close.

We also emphasize that any investigation into
the use of chemical weapons must be impartial,
professional, credible and objective in order to establish

There is no doubt that your presidency, Madam,
will be studied in the textbooks of diplomacy as a
counterexample of how a President of the Council should

16/17

As we all know from popular movies and books,
British diplomats and other officials are extremely
considerate, polite, concerned about traditions and that
they keep their word in any and all situations. However,
during this month, Madam President, you managed
to seriously undermine, if not completely destroy,
that stereotype in your leadership as President of the
Security Council.

22-33400

29/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

behave, notwithstanding personal convictions or the
interests his or her capital wants to pursue. Madam, you
managed in a month’s time to considerably undermine
or even destroy both written and unwritten rules on
which the trust and cooperation in the Council is based.
Indeed, regardless of the geopolitical circumstances, the
consequences of your actions will be felt for a long time
I do wish every success to the upcoming United
States presidency of the Council. Against the
background of your presidency, Madam, I believe it
will be simple for our American colleagues to succeed.
We will explain the details of that during the wrapup today.
The President: I wish to assure Council members
that the United Kingdom will continue to uphold the
United Nations Charter and the Security Council’s
rules of procedure in our future terms as President, just
as we have done in our current presidency.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

S/PV.9026

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
April, I would like to express the sincere appreciation
of the delegation of the United Kingdom to members of
the Council and to the secretariat of the Council for all
the support they have given us.
It has been a busy month and one which we have
rallied to consensus on several important issues within
our purview. We could not have done it alone and without
the hard work, support and positive contributions
of other delegations and the representatives of the
Secretariat, including the conference service officers,
interpreters, verbatim reporters and the security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of the United
States good luck in the month of May.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-3340017/17
