44

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

in the final report of the Enlarged Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination;53
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide adequate and effective secretarial assistance to the reconstituted Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
and keep it informed of relevant developments within
the United Nations system of organizations;
8. Notes in particular the recommendation of the
Enlarged Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
concerning the use of computers in the United Nations
system of organizations54 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit, in 1971, the report suggested in
paragraph 40 of the final report of the Enlarged Committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the specialized agencies and other bodies in the
United Nations system, to include as part of the report
to be submitted to the Economic and Social Council at
its forty-ninth session, as requested in its resolution 1454 (XLVII) of 8 August 1969, an examination of the existing Secretari~t machinery for providing
scientific and technical advice in the United Nations
system and to prepare recommendations for its reorganization in a way which will enable it to contribute
most effectively to the selection of priorities and to
the planning and programming of United Nations activities designed to meet the growing and changing needs
of the United Nations system, of the international
community and of Member States;
10. Welcomes the practice recently initiated by the
Secretary-General of holding top-echelon meetings of
staff concerned with economic and social affairs within
the United Nations, including the regional economic
commissions and the semi-autonomous organs, and
urges the Secretary-General to bring to the attention
of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
any matters discussed in these meetings which may be
of interest to it;
11. Welcomes the practice of joint meetings between
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and
µrges that these meetings should be continued, bearing
in mind that they have proved their value in facilitating
understanding and co-operation among those dealing
with ,interagency issues at the intergovernmental and
executive levels, respectively;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to
bring to the attention of all organizations in the United
Nations system the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination for
strengthening the present arrangements for co-ordination
by the adoption of more effective procedures for prior
consultations on work programmes;1111
13. Notes the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on co~rdination at the national level116 and requests the
Secretary-General to draw to the attention of the members of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
the recommendation contained in paragraph 80 of the
$nal report of the Enlarged Committee;
' GS Ibid., document E/4748/Rev.1, paras. 27 and 28.

• ~! Ibid., document E/4748/Rev.1, chapter III, rccommen-

aauon B.
' Ill Ibid., recommendation E.
116 Ibid., recommendation F.

14. Notes with interest the other matters considered
by the Enlarged Committee for Programme and Coordination in its final report 57 and agrees that these
proposals should be reviewed by the reconstituted Committee for Programme and Co-ordination.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2580 (XXIV).

Co-ordination of marine activities

The General Assembly,
Having considered the final report of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, 118
Noting that the Enlarged Committee was unable in
the time available to give thorough consideration to a
proposal for more systematic co-ordination of continuing activities of the organizations in the United
Nations system relating to the seas and oceans,
A ware of the complexity of the co-ordination of
existing international activities with regard to marine
science and its applications, and that the field of marine
science is only one aspect of the existing activities of
the organizations in the United Nations system relating
to the seas and oceans,
Noting that use by States of the marine environment
is rapidly becoming intensified and diversified,
Noting with appreciation the work done in this field
by the organizations in the United Nations system,
Concerned that present international machinery may
not permit a prompt, effective and flexible response to
existing and emerging needs of Member States,
Recognizing that, in order to avoid the overlapping
and duplication of programmes and gaps in competence, a full review of the existing activities of the
organizations in the United Nations system relating to
the seas and oceans may be urgently required,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its organizational meetings in January 1970, to consider instructing the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination, after reconstitution, to examine the need
for a comprehensive review of existing activities of the
United Nations system relating to the seas and oceans
in the light of present and emerging needs of Member
States, with a view to making the Committee's recommendations available to the Council at its fortv-ninth
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in the fulfilment of this task;
3. Invites the specialized agencies and the intergovernmental bodies concerned to extend their full cooperation and assistance to the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2581 (XXIV). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment

The General Assembly,
In pursuance of its decision in resolution 2398
(XXIII) of.3 December 1968 to convene in 1972 a
117 Ibid., document
118 /bid.,

E/4748/Rev.1, chapter IV.
document E/4748/Rev.l.
