UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

20 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2357) . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires a-i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14969) . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV .2357

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

23§7th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 20 April 1982, at 12.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. KAMANDA
(Zaire).

wa KAMANDA

places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, IJnited Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2357)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 14969)
The meeting

At the invitation of the Prrsidctzt, MI*. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco)
took places at the
Council table: Mr. Tcrzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Sobhan
(Bangladesh),
Mr. Farah Dirir (Djibouti},
Mr. Coumhassa (Guinea), Mr. Krishnan
(India),
Mr. Djalal
(Indonesia),
Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani
(Iran), Mr. Mohammnd (Iraq), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Zainal Ahidin (Malaysia), Mr. Oumarou (Niger),
Mr. Naik (Pakistan),
Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Djigo (Senegal), Mr. A dan (Somalia), Mr. Abdalla
(Sudalz),
Mr.
El-Fattal
(Syrian
Arab
Republic!),
Mr. Kiqa (Turkey) and Ms. Al-Qasimi (United Arab
Emirates)
took the places reserved .for them at the
side of the Council c!hamber.

of the agenda

was wiled

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative
of
Kuwait in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussions without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

to order at 12.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

H’NS adopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14969)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abulhasscrn
(Kuiwit)
took the plaw reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Fwwh):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/14985, which contains a draft resolution submitted
by Jordan and Morocco. Iraq and Uganda have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings
on this item [2352nd to 2356th meeting],
I invite the representatives of Israel and Morocco to
take places at the Council table. I invite the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives
of Bangladesh,
Djibouti,
Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates to take the

4. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): On behalf of the
sponsors of draft resolution S/14985 and of the States
which presented the complaint, I have the honour to
submit the said draft resolution to the Council and
respectfully to request that it be put to the vote,
5. The outrageous Israeli armed attack which occurred on Easter Sunday, 11 April, against one of the
holiest and oldest Islamic sanctuaries, and the attendant grievous loss of life and numerous injuries have
shocked the entire civilized world. The subsequent
‘1

I
‘.d

IO. As was stated by His Majesty Hassan II, King
of Morocco, in a message he sent to the Council,
Islam preaches tolerance and recommends in its Holy
Book that people act with moderation in order to prevail, by the most appropriate means, upon enemies to
think of themselves as friends. My country endorses
that recommendation,
which is at the very heart of the
message of the three great monotheistic religions.

train of terror, which still afflicts the unarmed civilian
inhabitants of the occupied territories, should be an
intolerable burden on the conscience of the Council,
upon which we call to redeem its obligations.
6. I am in duty bound to make it perfectly clear that
the text of the draft resolution before us today is
regarded by the 36 States which presented the complaint as falling far short of what would be commensurate with the enormity of the crime, which is but part
of a continuing pattern that has gone on unabated and
will continue in the future. But constrained by the
imperative of obtaining the maximum number of votes
from member States, the sponsors thought it prudent
to put the draft resolution in the mild form in which it
is being submitted to make it palatable to the Council.
The Council having had arduous debates on these
momentous events, I have nothing else to add but to
seek your support and to request that the draft resolution be put to the vote.
7.

Il.
Mr. WYZNER
(Poland): The Council is once
again holding a series of urgent meetings to consider
grave events taking place in the occupied Arab territories. Once again it is called upon to deal with the
situation there-specifically
in the City of Jerusalemand to take the necessary steps in the interests of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and of
safeguarding international peace and security, as well
as for the protection of the basic rules of international
law. Once again the aggressive Israeli policies of
creeping annexation of those territories,
and the
resulting methods of terror, and the subject of our
deliberations.

Mr.

de La BARRE
de NANTEUIL
(France)
J%MI French): The Council is meeting
today to consider the complaint of the Islamic countries following an incident the exceptional gravity of
which has not escaped the notice of my Government.
France understands the reactions aroused by these
acts, which are not only criminal but also sacrilegious,
since they were attacks committed against Islamic
holy places-the
mosques of Caliph Omar and AlAqsa-at
the very time when the worshippers had
gathered for prayer.
(interpretcrtion

12. It was with deep shock that public opinion of the
world learned of the armed attack by an Israeli soldier
on the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock
in Jerusalem, one of the most sacred places for Islam,
a monument of Islamic culture belonging to the treasury
of civilization and an object of superb architecture,
The bullets of the perpetrator took innocent human
lives and injured numerous people. New names were
added to a long list of victims who have fallen in recent
days in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967. This
action cannot but add to the serious tensions already
existing in the Middle East; it cannot but increase the
danger of conflagration.

8. Deeply moved by the tragic events of recent days,
the French Government
cannot remain indifferent to
this new tragedy: it shares the feelings of the 41 member States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as their indignation over the unjustifiable
acts which have just been committed. France firmly
condemns those acts, and those responsible for them
should be punished severely. The Israeli authorities
must, in future, take all necessary measures to prevent
a repetition of such tragic events. France would further
remind Israel of the need to ensure respect for the
Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection
of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 1949,’ which is
applicable to the occupied territories.

13. There is no need to point to the explosiveness of
the situation in the region. Poland’s position in that
respect was presented unequivocally on 13 April 1982
by Joseph Czyrek, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Polish People’s Republic, who met with Arab ambassadors accredited to Warsaw. At that meeting, the
ambassadors outlined the position of the Arab States
concerning the present situation in the Middie East,
Mr. Czyrek assured them that Poland would continue
to render its support to the struggle of the Arab peoples for a just peace in the Middle East and that it
would oppose the policy of aggression and terror, as
well as interference, of imperialist forces in the affairs
of Arab nations.

9. My Government is convinced that the best means
of preventing such acts would be to infuse into people’s
minds a spirit of peace and to prevent the manoeuvrings
of fanatics of whatever stripe by restoring a climate of
confidence. Only through dialogue and by working
towards agreement among the interested parties will it
be possible to find the favourable atmosphere of understanding that would make it possible to preserve the
unique and universal character of the City of Jerusalem. Indeed, only through mutual respect among the
different faiths and relations among men of faith and
good will can it be possible to preserve the sacred
nature of that city, which should be a beneficial
meeting place, rather than a place of bloody and sterile
confrontation.

14. The tidal wave of protests and manifestations of
solidarity with the Arab people inhabiting the OCCUpied territories is passing now through many countries. It is not limited to Islamic communities all over
the world; it reaches all those to whom human values
are dear and close. At the same time, we are witnessing
ceaseless Israeli threats and military preparations. We
are meeting with persistent and intensified policies of
terror pursued by Israel towards the Palestinian Arab
population.
2

15. The Council, under these circumstances,
must
live up to its high responsibilities.
Inour view, it should,
inter nlio, strongly condemn the appalling acts that
I referred to earlier, as well as strongly emphasize
and reaffirm the applicability
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ to all territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
as has been done in numerous United Nations resolutions; for it is the occupying Power which bears responsibility for the events on that dark Easter Sunday
and which is obliged to observe the provisions of that
convention
and other international instruments governing military occupation.

22. But the crime committed by Israel this time, the
sacrilegious and treacherous attack on the sacred
Dome of the Rock and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the thirdholiest shrine of the 800 million Muslims all over the
world, defies any comprehension and any exercise of
patience. It also shows that there is no limit to the
Israeli crimes, either in number or in kind.
23. The Israeli representative called this act a despicable act of lunacy. That was about the only right
thing he has said since this horrible incident was
brought before this body. But we do not agree with
him, with his masters in Tel Aviv and with those friends
of theirs who hastened to say almost instantly that it
was the act of a deranged individual.

16. At the same time, the Council should point out
that such criminal acts cause not only loss of, and
injury to, civilian life, but also losses to the cultural
heritage of mankind. In consequence, they also endanger international
peace.

24. Legally it might look so, because it was the culprit, Goodman, who was caught pulling the trigger;
but there is ample proof, as indicated by the report of
the Islamic Higher Council in Jerusalem, that there is
no way that the damage in the Dome of the Rock could
have been done by one shooter.

17. At this juncture, my delegation wishes once again
to stress forcefully that no acquisition of territory by
military conquest is admissible and that all attempts
designed to alter the status of the city of Jerusalem
are impermissible
and illegal.

25. But this crime is so grave and so outrageous that
evaluation of it should go far beyond the mere punishment of the culprit. Rather, any such evaluation should
be made within the context of several relevant considerations, which I shall sum up as follows.

18. In conclusion, I should like to underline that only
the total withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied
Arab territories,
which is a prerequisite for establishing a lasting and just peace in the region, can be the
ultimate
safeguard against acts of violence, destruction or profanation
against religious buildings and
sites in those territories,

26. First, this act should not be looked upon as an
isolated act, because it is not. The same Haram alSharif was subjected to another despicable act when a
fire was set in the Al-Aqsa Mosque in 1979. So, in the
short span of three years, this seven-century-old
Islamic shrine has been subjected to two heinous
crimes. Both have taken place during the Israeli occupation of the Holy City of Jerusalem and both have
been handily characterized as being the act of a deranged person.

19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fiorn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

27. Secondly, this act should also be seen within
the context of the suspicious excavations which have
been taking place beneath the Muslim shrine since the
Israeli occupation of the Holy City of Jerusalem.
In paragraphs 1 and 2 of its resolution 36115, the General Assembly rightly characterized those excavations
as “a flagrant violation of the principles of international law and the relevant provisions of the Geneva
Convention
relative to the Protection
of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,” and
decided that “such violations by Israel constitute a
serious obstruction
to achieving a comprehensive
and just peace in the Middle East as well as a threat
to international peace and security”.

20. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait): Sir, the delegation of Kuwait congratulates you warmly on your
assumption
of the presidency of the Council. This is
a high office that places eno,rmous responsibility
on
your shoulders, but we are certain that, with your
skill, you will handle it with success. We pledge our
support to you. We should also like to thank the outgoing President,
Mrs. Kirkpatrick
of the United
States of America, for her efforts during the month of
March,
2 1, In the United States there is a word for habitual
criminal
offenders who keep on committing
crimes
while waiting for justice to take its course against
their previous crimes. They are called “repeaters”,
In the international
field we have a “repeater”
of the
worst type. Hundreds of unheeded resolutions of the
Security
Council, the Genera1 Assembly and other
United Nations bodies and agencies are pilling up to
stand as monumental
testimony to Israel’s arrogant
defiance of the world community and of the civilized
world.

28. Thirdly, this act should also be seen within the
context of the kind of lunatic ideologies and philosophies with which young Israelis and Jews all over the
world are indoctrinated,
I mean by that the Zionist
doctrines which started with the false maxim of the
Zionist pioneers- “a land with no people to a people
with no land” -and which ended up with philosophies
3

I

man was carried to an ambulance.
walked away laughing.”

which can create the conditions to make that false
equation come true, To achieve that goal, the Israelis
are now acting on these three equally false assumptions: that the whole land of Palestine is the land of
Israel-or
“Eretz Yisrael” as they call it-and that it
should be taken over by the Jews by any means: that
the Palestinian people are aliens in their own ancestral
homes and therefore should be driven out in order to
make room for the Jews; and that any method is right
to achieve those two objectives.

A few of the troops

35. Those soldiers, together with the trigger-happy
soldiers who go on shooting with live ammunition at
stone-throwing teenagers who never shot a bullet in
several weeks of uprising against the ruthless measures
of the occupying Power, are the true disciples of the
teachings of that Israeli trio.
36. It is one of the ironies of our age that the victims
of fascism in the first half of this century have become
the neo-Fascists of the second half. It is yet another
irony of the age that the “David” of the past has become the “Goliath”
of the present. This has been so
obviously manifested by the fact that the army with
the most modern and most sophisticated United
States-supplied arms is acting as though it was afraid
of the oldest instrument of self-defence--the
stone,
But, actually, the so-called valiant Israeli army is not
afraid of stones. It is afraid of the will of the Palestinian people to challenge the Israeli occupation even if
they have to do it with stones. The upsurge of national
feeling in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, which sets
a stone-armed people under occupation against the
most ruthless and relentless occupying Power in
memory, should be proof enough to the Israelis-who
are apparently not good judges of history-that
the
Palestinians are determined to continue their struggle
against their colonialist settlers until they achieve all
their goals-goals which have been upheld by various
resolutions of the United Nations.

29. This ultimate plan of the Israeli colonialist settlers in Palestine is being systematically implemented
by a very comprehensive
set of processes, ranging
from forcibly confiscating the lands of the Palestinians,
to terrifying the people in an effort to drive them out
of the country, to changing the character of the land
in an effort to give it eventually a totally Jewish character.
30. The United Nations is well aware of the Israeli
intentions through the reports of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories, on the one hand, and through the consideration of non-stop Israeli violations of international law
or the Charter of the United Nations on the other.
31. This lawlessness of the Israeli r6gime as indicated by its total disregard of international law as well
as international
norms of behaviour could have only
one impact on the minds of Israeli fanatics, namely,
to encourage them to do whatever they feel like doing.

37. The latest act of desecration perpetrated by the
Israelis against one of the holiest shrines in Islam could
not be, and should not be, taken as an isolated incident
but, rather, as part and parcel of the entire gradual
process of Zionizing the whole of Palestine. It is only
one phase of the Zionist grand design to de-Palestinize,
de-Arabize and de-Islamize the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip in preparation for their annexation to Israel.
Hence the over-all outrage which has swept the Islamic
world, outrage made manifest by the joint draft resolution before the Council [S/14985], on the one hand,
and by the general strike which has marked the total
solidarity of the Muslim world with the Palestinian
struggle, on the other.

32. Now, those fanatics who want to go on stealing
Palestinian land and driving the Palestinians out of
their homes and country by methods more outrageous than those preferred by the less fanatic Israelis
are the fringe in Israel, and the gunman who desecrated the Holy Shrine of the Dome of the Rock is, as
reported by The Wmhingtorz Post of 13 April, “from
the fringe but it is a fringe sustained politically
and
psychologically by a far larger and more central body
of Israeli opinion”.
33. Against that background, it can be easily perceived that the culprit in this heinous crime is not the
individual or individuals
who pulled the trigger but,
rather, the lunatic and deranged ideologies of the
Israeli leadership. AI1 one has to do is listen to the
hate-mongering
trio of Begin-Sharon-Shamir
to be
certain that there will be more and more Goodmans
in the months and years ahead.

38. It is time that the Council lived up to its international duty and tried to put an end to the unending
Israeli defiance of its will. It is also time that the one
permanent member of the Council which provides
Israel’s continued encroachments on world peace with
its protective shield, through its indiscriminate use Of
the power of veto, reassessed its position and lived
up to its commitment
as a guardian of world peace
in its capacity as a permanent member of the Cound.

34. Those are the ideologies that encourage an
Israeli soldier to kill in cold blood a seven-year-old
boy or a fifty-year-old woman just coming back from
the field or another soldier, although he had been
ordered to withdraw after the incident was over, to
throw a tear-gas grenade near the mosque, As The
New York Times of 12 April reported: “worshippers
came out coughing and wiping their eyes. One elderly

39. Mr. IRUMBA (Uganda): Once again the Council
has met to consider the question of the situation in the
occupied Arab territories. Only two weeks ago We
considered the ‘developments in the West Bank and
4

the Gaza Strip resulting from measures adopted by the
Israeli Government-measures
which point clearly
to Israel’s intention to annex the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip and force the Palestinians to flee that area,

45. My delegation wishes to emphasize that it is
imperative that the holy and international character of
Jerusalem should be preserved. To do otherwise would
be an affront to the international community.

40. The shooting and killing of innocent civilians
anywhere is regrettable and ought to be condemned.
It is particularly
reprehensible
when it occurs in
a place of worship. My delegation shares the sense of
outrage of the Islamic community at this senseless act
of sacrilege.

46. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
I now call on the representative of Israel.

41. There have been attempts to explain the act as
that of a lone mentally deranged individual. My delegation does not accept this explanation. The statement of the Islamic Higher Council clearly shows that
it was not an act perpetrated by a mere lone gunman
but that other Israeli soldiers were implicated.
42, This incident should not be viewed in isolation.
The repetition
of these acts of sacrilege follows the
series of legislative and administrative measures aimed
at altering the status and very character of the Holy
City of Jerusalem, which the Tel Aviv authorities have
proclaimed as their eternal capital. This they have done
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly
and the Security Council. The general
pattern of Israel’s policy in the occupied Arab territories is that of violence against the Palestinian people.
It is this policy which gave encouragement to the commission of this wanton and senseless act of 11 April.
It must be emphasized that the root of the turmoil in
the Middle East is the denial of the right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people and the continued
illegal occupation of Arab lands by Israel. The desecration of the Mosque and the Dome of the Rock underscored the need for a quick and just solution of the
root problem of the Middle East. Such a solution must
include, inter ah, the withdrawal of Israel from the
occupied Arab territories, the right of the Palestinians
to return to their homeland and the exercise by the
Palestinians
of the right to self-determination.
43. Since restoration of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian
people constitutes the centrepiece of a
settlement,
it follows that the Palestinians, through the
PLO, their sole representative,
must necessarily be
involved in the negotiations, To pretend that a solution
can be achieved without the participation of the PLO
is indeed to bury one’s head very, very deeply in the
sand.
44. In the course of this debate, the Israeli representative accused the Arab countries of not honouring
General Assembly resolution 181 (II), but conspicuously missing from his statement was any indication
as to whether Israel was prepared to adhere to that
resolution.
The passage of time has in no way detracted
from the validity of that resolution or of resolution 194
(III), which provided for the return of the Palestinian
refugees to their homes.

--

French):

47. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The course of this debate
and the nature of the draft resolution before us [ibid.]
are yet another glaring evidence of the double standard
which Arab Governments and their supporters seek
to apply to Israel. They are also evidence of the abuse
to which the machinery of the Security Council has
been put by the sponsors of this debate. Exercises such
as this are sapping whatever Iittle authority and effectiveness the United Nations may still have retained.
48. While their own countries are torn by dissension, internal strife and endless backbiting, the Arab
Governments, in a rare display of togetherness, have
gathered here to demonstrate their unity in hatred of
Israel. They have fallen over each other in attributing
to Israel crimes of which they themselves are guilty.
49. A despicable act of sacrilege was committed
by a single individual at the Dome of the Rock. That
person has already been arraigned and will stand trial
before an Israel court of law. The Government of Israel
has expressed its dismay and shock and has acted
swiftly, energetically and effectively. Yet, in a ritualistic outburst of frenzy, the Arab Governments and
their fellow travellers have discerned in this affair a
golden opportunity
to stir up religious hatred and
fanaticism. This has been done to mask Arab misdeeds
and to project Arab guilt onto others. The mosquedestroyers and the church- and synagogue-demolishers have held forth sanctimoniously
on the desecration of religious sites. The royal custodian of the
holiest shrine of Islam, who for long suppressed
details of a massive, politically motivated and costly
raid on the great mosque at Mecca, asked for a work
stoppage all over the Muslim world, to condemn an
isolated act in Jerusalem. I mentioned before “fellow
travellers”.
At last two of them spoke earlier in this
debate today, The representative of the martial-law
regime of Poland saw fit to leap into this debate. So
did the representative of Uganda.
50. The PRESIDENT
interpretation
from French):
I call on the representative of Poland on a point of
order.
51. Mr. WYZNER (Poland): Mr. President, with a11
due respect I would recall that some time ago-1 beIieve it was two or three days ago-you made a ruling
that representatives
around this table should be addressed using the proper name of their countries. Could
you kindly ask the representative of Israel to abide
by your ruling.
(interpretation
jivrn
French):
52. The PRESIDENT
As I have had occasion to do in the past, I now reiter-

‘

ate the appeal I made to members of the Council. I now
invite the representative of Israel to continue his
statement.

many churches and holy shrines in Lebanon and of the
58 synagogues destroyed by the Jordanians in Jeru.
salem up to the reunification of the city in 1967.

53. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): The representative
of
Poland, who speaks for a country that is under a
martial-law regime, and the representative of Uganda
have leapt into this debate. Let me tell both of them:
“Charity begins at home.”

60. Any approach that would single out Israel for a
crime it did not commit and one which it has condemned, an approach that would totally ignore in the
same context the massive acts against holy sites of ail
religions in the Arab world, would be a demonstra.
tion of hypocrisy that should not bear the seal of the
Security Council.

54. With regard to Uganda, many of us have been
appalled in recent days by a report of Amnesty International detailing the massive violations of human
rights reported from Uganda-and
I am speaking about
contemporary Uganda, not the Uganda of Idi Aminincluding extra-legal executions, torture and killings of
people in detention and abductions. According to one
report, more than 70 people were killed at Katabi
barracks in Entebbe at the end of March shortly after
they had been rounded up. They were said to have
been buried in a mass grave near the barracks. More
examples of the massive violation of human rights by
Uganda can be found in this press release by Amnesty
International
which was published on 14 April 1982.
55. So let me repeat to the fellow travellers
I said before: “Charity begins at home.”

61. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion fiorn French):
Mr. Clovis Maksoud, the Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure [2352nd meeting], wishes to make
another statement. With the consent of the Council,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make that statement.
62. Mr. MAKSOUD
(League of Arab States): It
was not our intention to make a further statement,
However, developments
in recent days and even
recent minutes indicate that there has been an attempt
to distort the objectives ‘of the Arab and Islamic countries in coming to the Council in the aftermath of the
sacrilegious attack on the holy shrines of Islam in
Jerusalem. There has been an attempt to deflect the
proceedings of the Council from the focus of what
has taken place and from the international consensus
that has developed concerning the vicious attack on
the Holy Dome of Islam, and to picture the situation
as though this display of Arab unity and Islamic unity
was not an articulation of the genuine feelings, the
outrage, of the whole Muslim world about that vicious
attack. The attempt to absolve the occupying Power
in Jerusalem, nb initio, of its direct responsibility
under the fourth Geneva Convention’
and under
international
law is an attempt to create a situation
where Jerusalem is not treated as an occupied territory, an attempt to legitimize what the international
community has correctly defined as illegal and ilkgitimate occupation,

what

56. Had the meetings of the Council over the past
few days been confined to a litany of cynical incantations by the Arabs and their friends, that in itself
would have been bad enough. But the attacks on Israel
were only one part of a studied plan of harassment
by all means possible. These means are now spilling
over into the area of religious and racial incitement.
The Syrians, the Jordanians, the Saudis were never
held responsible nor were they accused of the many
crimes they committed against holy shrines in their
own countries. What is all this if not bigotry-religious,
political and racial bigotry? What is this if not hypocrisy on an unprecedented scale?
57. It would be ndive to characterize this debate
merely as an outrage, for there are great and horrible
dangers in the stirring of religious emotions through
the machinery of the United Nations. These thoughts
must surely have crossed many minds here. Moreover, the silence of many of the onlookers in this
chamber has been profoundly disturbing and reminiscent of a period we thought belonged to the past.

63. We have witnessed Israeli
representatives
coming to the Council and holding a stick with which
they attack, back and forth, right and left, anybody who
questions or criticizes the policies and behaviour of
the Israeli occupying authorities in Jerusalem and in,
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories. They
are treating the Council almost in the same manner as
the tanks and bayonets of the Israeli occupying authorities treat the Palestinian and Syrian inhabitants of the
occupied territories.

58. The draft resolution submitted yesterday is a
mirror image of the entire debate. The draft seeks to
associate Israel with the crime of a single individual
acting on his own.

64. This is not a rare display of Arab and Islamic
unity; rather, it is characteristic behaviour. It is true
that we might have our great challenges and different
responses to our internal social problems and develop
mental processes, But the debate within the Arab body
politic, however acute it might be, results from the
organic nature of our national relations and respop

59. Israel would have been prepared to consider
supporting the terms of a draft resolution that spoke
of the 95 mosques and the many churches destroyed
in Hama by the Syrian army, of the necessity of
studying the lessons to be gleaned from the attack on
the Great Mosque in Makkah, of the destruction of the
6

I

sibilities.
So, when, the Arab and Islamic countries
approached the Council to seek relief in regard to the
crimes being committed in Jerusalem and in the rest
of the occupied territories, it was because we had a firm
belief, a conviction, and indeed faith, in the credibility
and effectiveness of the United Nations, its mechanisms, its Charter and its resolutions-a
belief, conviction and faith in contradistinction
to the institutionalized
contempt that Israel has for the United
Nations, its Charter, its resolutions and its mechanisms. To say that we have come to the United Nations
in order to fan hatred is totally untrue. Indeed, that
would be uncharacteristic of both Islamic and Christian
believers, who respect Judaism and an integral part
of our spiritual and moral heritage, and who know
that at no time has any Muslim or Christian in the Arab
and Islamic world considered an Arab Jew to be anything but an Arab. For in its real value system Islam,
as well as Christianity, teaches that we have to respect
all religious beliefs. And it is out of our desire to bring
about a level of tolerance, compassion and human
reconciliation
that we have come to the Council,

attacks against those who criticize its policies. That is
a well-known phenomenon to which Israel has repeatedly resorted. If it cannot answer criticisms and condemnations,
it resorts to trying to undermine the
credibility and veracity of its critics and those who
condemn its activities.
69. This is an issue of deep emotional and moral
concern for the entire Islamic world. This is a matter
of which the Council must be seized, because at the
roots of the strikes against Muslim shrines in occupied
Jerusalem are the beginnings, the seeds of conflict that
might at a certain moment in the future be uncontrollable and unmanageable.
70. That is why we came to the Council-to
bring
about genuine and historic reconciliation-not
to fan
the emotions ofhatred, as has been distortedly claimed.
71. Mr. IRUMBA
(Uganda): The representative of
Israel has, in his characteristic way and that of his
country, attempted to slander my country, as indeed
anybody who speaks out in favour of the Palestinian
people.

65. To treat criticism of Israel or condemnation of
its activities and behaviour as a form of intolerance is
just ludicrous. Israel cannot assume that it speaks
for Judaism or the entirety of the Jewish people. If
I may say so, in many ways, philosophically,
Israel
usurps the representation
of Judaism and of world
Jewry. That is why all our endeavours are directed
towards ensuring that the United Nations, including
the Security Council, is seized of the problem so that
all hell will not break loose. The recklessness of
Israeli behaviour, the institutionalized
discrimination
against non-Jews represented by many of the behaviour
patterns of Israeli authorities in the occupied territories, Israel’s racist concept of others, the dichotomy
between the Jew and others that Israel has institutionalized and built into a mystique and a State structure: all that is at the root of the behaviour pattern of
an Israel that unfolds its conquering and annexationist
policies inside and outside Jerusalem.

72. This slander has not been confined to Uganda
alone. As we know, they extend it to former President
Giscard d’Estaing. They extended it to Chancellor
Schmidt and to Secretary Casper Weinberger. And the
Council will recall that when Israel annexed the Golan
Heights and the United States made a statement and
representations
to them about annulling that act,
Prime Minister Begin summoned the Ambassador of
the United States and gave him a lecture in which he
indicated that they knew about the American bodycount concept in Viet Nam and that they should not be
lectured about human rights violations by the United
States-even
though it is their benefactor. That is the
type of slander for which Mr. Blum is well known.
73. With reference to my country, the Council might
recall that it has gone through a period of Fascist
dictatorship from which it is just recovering-a
dictatorship with which, I must say, Israel fraternized
until things went sour for them.

66. How can we be told here that the whole Organization of the Islamic Conference and all the States of
the Arab League have brought this question to the
United Nations to fan hatred, when what we want is
to resolve the roots of a conflict peacefully? In our
entire heritage, the Arab heritage and the Islamic
heritage, we have borne hatred for nobody. But we
claim the legitimacy of our resistance to annexation, to
occupation,
to usurpation and to the violation of our
rights.

74. The Uganda Government has been co-operating
with the United Nations in the areas of human rights
and returning the country to normalcy-unlike
Israel,
which does not allow United Nations human-rights
personnel to visit it to investigate human rights. Our
country is returning to normalcy; we have held elections. There have been attacks by people unwilling to
accept the results of the election and the ballot-box
results. We do investigate those human-rights violations that are indicated.

67. If at any time the young children of Palestine
have raised sticks and stones when confronted with
the bayonets and tanks of Israel and that is considered
violence,
it is the violence of those who have committed themselves to the dignity that equality introduces.

75. But what the reuresentative of Israel has done
is to rely on reports w’hich are at best unsubstantiated
press reports. The tactics of the representative of Israel
will not prevent Uganda from supporting the just rights
of the Palestinian people.

68. Israel claims that it is an aggrieved party and goes
roaming
around on a fishing trip in its strikes and
7

76. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion from French):
I take it that the Council is ready to proceed to the stage
of voting on the draft resolution before it [S/14985].
77. I shaIl now call upon those representatives
wish to speak before the vote.

committed on 11 April. That act has to be seen in the
context of Israel’s own deliberate policies of Statesponsored violence against the Arab peoples in the
occupied territories, of colonization and annexation,
of expulsion and repression of the Palestinians. Those
official acts of a Government which has itself acted
in defiance of the will of the international community
and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
provided encouragement for the criminal and brutal
act.

who

78. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): The Council has once
again been seized of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, particularly
in Jerusalem, where we have
witnessed increased tension following
the tragic
shooting of innocent worshippers and the appalling
sacrilege committed
against the Dome of the Rock
and Al-Aqsa Mosque in that fioly City last Easter
Sunday.

86. My delegation will support the draft resolution
in document S/ 14985.
87. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jiwn French):
I speak now in my capacity as representative of
ZAIRE.

79. This is indeed a source of profound sorrow not
only to those who adhere to the Islamic faith but aIso
to all those who earnestly wish to preserve the Holy
City of Jerusalem, the centre of the great spiritual traditions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

88. It was with genuine shock that the Government
and people of Zaire learned of rhe sacrilegious attack
against peaceful worshippers in the Al-Aqsa Mosqtte
and against the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem.

80. My delegation deeply regrets the loss of innocent
lives and the desecration of the Dome of the Rock and
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and we fear that the situation
in the occupied Arab territories
might deteriorate
further. We strongly hope that Israel, the occupying
Power, will fulfil its responsibilities
by protecting
and safeguarding the sanctity of the Holy Places in the
occupied Arab territories and preventing any acts of
destruction or profanation of the Holy Places in the
future.

89. Jerusalem, a holy city venerated by the three
major revealed, monotheistic
religions of the world
-Judaism,
Islam and Christianity-is
both the symbol
of supreme inspiration to believers and the focal point
of their faith. The sacred nature of heavenly Jerusalem-of
the new Jerusalem which emerged a jewel
from the desert, in the words of Racine-a city where
Muslism and Christians, bound together by deep faith,
mingle in the bustling streets-has been affirmed down
through the ages. Be it the set of dogmas and practices
of a particular religious belief or a moral and mystical
approach to life based not on revelation but on reason,
the heart and on various human traditions, religious
faith is what intimately compels people to follow given
rules of conduct. It has always been a major force, if
not the major force, galvanizing men to action inspiring
believers to the very limits of sacrifice. It is considered
by believers to be one of their most sacred duties, and
the essence of monotheistic religion is that it honours
a single God, as Saint Thomas said, for the sole reason
that He is the prime mover behind the creation and
government of the world.

81. My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution in document S/14985.
82. Mr. KARRAN
(Guyana): The Council has once
again’met
to consider the serious situation existing
in the occupied Arab territories, this time at the request
of His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco in his
capacity as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
83. The particular
event that brought about this
request was the dastardly act of violence and sacrilege
committed in the Holy Places of Jerusalem on 11 April
last. On that day an Israeli soldier-and
we are told
by the Israelis that he was mentally deranged and acted
alone-attacked
and cold-bloodedly
murdered and
injured innocent Muslims as they worshipped at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque.

90. According to age-old traditions,
prayer and
religious observance on the part of believers are a
visible assertion of that essence. Thus one can easily
understand how in such an atmosphere any irreverent
manifestation, any act of disrespect to God, to their
faith, to holy things, to places of worship and prayer,
is regarded by the faithful as an act of provocation. As
such, it can have extremely grave consequences.

84. My delegation adds its voice in strong condemnation of that reprehensible act. The violence committed
against innocent Muslims at prayer in itself calls for the
strongest condemnation,
but the act was consummated
in the sacred Al-Aqsa Mosque, one of the holiest
shrines of the Muslim people. That act greatly affronted
not onIy the Muslim people and their refigion, but all
religious faiths throughout the world,

91. Such manifestations,
as you know, have often
been the root-causes of war, because acts of desec*tion are often considered attacks upon respect for what
is most intimately cherished by man: his autonomy
and dignity-in
sum, everything he is and represents,
And it will be noted that the problem now before US
affects not only Moslems. No other religion, no other
religious group, could tolerate such acts against it,

85. In my delegation’s view, the Israeli authorities
cannot escape blame for the violence and sacrilege
8

92. That is why, in its many resolutions, particularly
resolution 476 (1980), the Council has reaffirmed the
need to respect the character and status of the Holy
City of Jerusalem and has reiterated that all measures
and actions which purport to alter the geographic,
demographic and historical character and status of the
Holy City of Jerusalem are null and void and must be
reversed under the terms of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.

99. It is in that spirit that the delegation of Zaire will
vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/14985, without necessarily linking this
act of sacrilege and fanaticism to the Government of
Israel, which has itself condemned it here in the
Council.
100. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.
101. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put to the
vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/14985.

93. That is why the shooting of peaceful worshippers
in the Al-Aqsa Mosque-a
wanton, deranged act of
provocation-horrified
millions of believers all over the
world and throughout the international community.
94. Indeed, not a single voice has been heard in this
chamber which has not condemned and deplored that
act of senseless violence committed against one of
Islam’s most sacred mosques, in the holiest city of
the world, and on a day of special significance to
believers, particularly to Christians: Easter Sunday.

In ~&XII’: China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zaire.
Against:

United States of America

95. Muslims and Christians of Zaire rightly share the
feelings of the international
community
and of the
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and have condemned this act of sacrilege.
96. Thus, the unanimity of this universal condemnation shows that, despite certain quite natural differences among us-because
we are all differently situated--in
the end we are all members of the same
human family; that therefore, we all recognize and
agree that there are things which are not done and
things which cannot be touched without violating our
very humanity, our very freedom, our very will to be
and to remain what we are-links
in the great chain of
human brotherhood-and
that we may draw from
these ideas the strength to transcend our differences.

102. The PRESIDENT
(irztel.pr.Ptation f,.orn Frcneh):
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to explain their vote after the vote.
103. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
My Government, like other members of the international community, was deeply shocked by the dreadful
crime committed at the Dome of the Rock on 11 April.
We are greatly saddened by the injuries and loss of life
which occurred and wish to extend our sincere condolences to all those who were injured or bereaved.

97. The fact that this barbarous act took place in one
of the most sensitive areas of the world, where for
many years- all too many years-Arabs and Jews have
been pitted one against the other in the complex Middle
East conflict, imbues it with a tremendous political
dimension,
because it is difficult for the parties, when
carried away by emotion, to hold forth rationally and
calmly on whether the act was an isolated one or not,
or on whether it was accidental or planned as a provocation. And therein lies the enormous gravity of such
a situation.

104. All of us in the Council recognize and are deeply
conscious of the great depth of feeling which attaches
to all matters concerning the Holy Places in Jerusalem.
This feeling has found expression in many of the
statements which have been made in the debate. We
greatly regret that it was not possible for the Council
to reach consensus on a draft resolution, and in the circumstances I think we need to ask ourselves whethei
in this case the interests of the international community were best served by having a resolution at all.

98. That is why the Council must be in a position to
express unanimously
the universal condemnation
of
that act; to assuage the legitimate anger of a group of
human beings cut to the very quick by this act of
sacrilege; to recommend that appropriate measures be
taken and that Israel step up its vigilance to protect the
holy places and spiritual treasures in the occupied
Arab territories,
including Jerusalem, in keeping with
its obligations
under the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,’
so that such patently dangerous situations can be
averted in future.

105. My Government
voted in favour of the draft
resolution because we wished to associate ourselves
with the condemnation
of the act of sacrilege which
occurred. We did so, however, on the understanding
that the draft resolution cannot prejudge the facts of
the incident, which we understand is under investigation. We take full note in this context of the clear
statement by the representative of Israel that his Government has promptly and vigorously condemned the
crime and that the people of Israel and Jewish people
around the world share the sense of revulsion at this,
9

despicable

act [2352nd meting,

111, We understand that this goal-to
decrease tensions in the area and prevent further acts of ViOknCe
and loss of life-is also the chief objective of the COuncil. We have considered it carefully in my Government, but regrettably we do not believe that the draft
resolution before us helps to achieve our shared objective.

P(v~~. 421. I should

like to take this opportunity to reiterate mY Government’s firm view that the fourth Geneva Convention
of 12 August 19491 is applicable to all the territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, including East Jewsalem. We have frequently made clear our condemnation of Israeli practices both in East Jerusalem and in
other occupied territories, but at the same time we
recognize that the Israeli authorities have in general
fulfilled their obligations on access to the HO]Y Places.

112. For these reasons, we think it serves no constructive purposes, but will further embitter the peop]es of the region and deepen the divisions
that could
lead to conflict. Thus, as much as we condemn the act
of violence that occasioned this debate of the Council,
we must oppose this draft resolution, which, in our
view, would make new acts of violence more, not less,
likely to take place in the future.

106. More widely, I should like to reiterate my Government’s recognition, expressed in the Venice declaration of I 3 June 1980, of the special importance of the
role played by the question of Jerusalem for all the
parties concerned [S/14009, para. 81. MY Government adheres to the position set out in that declaration that it will not accept any unilateral initiative
designed to change the status of Jerusalem, and that
any agreement on the city’s status should guarantee
freedom of access for everyone to the Holy Places.

113. We voted against the draft resolution because
it contains language, in the preambular and the operative paragraphs, which implies that the responsibility
for this terrible event lies not with the individual who
was responsible for the incident but with the Israeli
authorities, who have unequivocally
denounced the
act. The text also implies that Israel has hindered
the efforts of the Islamic Higher Council to perform
its responsibilities for the administration
of the Holy
Places, whereas the evidence is that Israel has in the
main carefully respected the Council’s role.

107. Mrs, KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): Mr. President, I should like to begin by expressing
my personal admiration, and that of my Government,
of the dispatch and good judgement with which your
conduct of the difficult affairs of the Council has been
marked.
108. The United States profoundly regrets and
strongly condemns the senseless act of violence that
occurred on 11 April at one of Islam’s most sacred
mosques, the Dome of the Rock. We extend our condolences to all those who have suffered physically
and spiritually from this act.

‘114. To eliminate any misunderstanding,
I may add
that our vote does not affect our long-standing position on the status of Jerusalem. As President Reagan
explained to the Muslim ambassadors last Friday, the
United States position remains as previously stated,
that is, that the final status of Jerusalem can only be
determined through negotiations among all concerned
parties.

109. Last Friday, 16 April, President Reagan met
with six ambassadors delegated by the Islamic countries represented in Washington. I should like to read
out the official report of that meeting.

115. Mr. DORR (Ireland): Ireland voted in favour of
the draft resolution. We did so to express our concern
at the events in Jerusalem on 11 April which have been
the subject of debate in the Council over the past
week. Our concern derives from three points: first,
we are concerned at the immediate loss of life involved
in the incident and at the injuries caused to innocent
bystanders and worshippers in the mosque; secondly,
we are concerned about the outrage to the feelings
and religious beliefs of many millions of people, which
must inevitably arise from an act of desecration to one
of the holy shrines of the Islamic faith; thirdly, we are
deeply concerned because of the wider dangers of the
situation in the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem. It is evident that an atmosphere of tension,
of grievance and of alienation
prevails at present
throughout territories occupied now for some 15 years,
Our fear is that in such an atmosphere any spark could
strike a flame that could easiIy lead to a wider conflagration in the region,

110. President Reagan, it said,
“expressed his deep personal sorrow and that
of a]] Americans over last Sunday’s violence at the
hands of a deranged individual in an area sacred to
three of the world’s great religions. The President
expressed his sympathy with the concern of the
Islamic world over the disruption of the tranqui]]ity
of one of its most holy shrines. This concern is
shared by members of all faiths, he noted,
“He reiterated his conviction that the peace of the
Holy Places of Jerusalem must be maintained, and
confirmed the dedication of the United States to
encouraging the conditions necessary for the wellbeing of those who draw their spiritual inspiration
from that city.
“The President called upon all the Governments
and Peoples of the Middle East to work to decrease
tensions in the area and prevent further acts of
violence and loss of life.”

116. For all of those reasons, we thought it right to
express our serious concern by voting for the draft resolution. We regret that it was not adopted. Neverthe10

b

less we maintain our support for the position repeated
again in paragraph 3, that Israel must observe and
apply fully the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention throughout the occupied territories.
I17. Having expressed these serious concerns, I also
wish to recognize and acknowledge fully the fact that
the Government of Israel has strongly condemned the
outrage of 11 April. An individual is in custody and
criminal charges are being brought. Furthermore, the
representative of Israel, speaking before the Council
on 13 April, expressed the sense of revulsion of the people of Israel and of Jewish people around the world at
the act in question [235&d meeting, pnra. 421. We
believe it right that this expression of deep concern
should be fully acknowledged.
For our part, we believe that any further measwhich may be necessary to maintain the security
and preserve the sacred character of the mosque, which
is revered by so many believers, should quickly be
undertaken
by the Israeli authorities so that such a
dangerous incident may not recur.
I lg.

ures

I 19. This present issue emphasizes once again for
my delegation a point I have stated frequently in the
Council:
that is, that what is required in the region
is a comprehensive, just and lasting peace settlement
achieved by a negotiation involving all the parties and
taking full account of all aspects of the problem. This
must, of course, include the issue of Jerusalem, a city
which occupies a special place for believers of three
great world religions and for all the peoples of the
region,
We know that the achievement of such a settle120.
ment often seems a distant goal. Pending some new
effort,
in the Council or elsewhere, to address the
fundamental
issues through such a settlement,
we
are limited to doing what we can to damp down tensions
when they threaten to explode, as in the present case.

121.
With this in mind, we voted for a draft resolution which, in substance, condemns the act, deplores
as dangerous any profanation of Holy Places and calls
for full application of the fourth Geneva Convention.
122.
Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(interpretation
from Russian): Today’s
negative
vote in the Council by the United States
warrants
dwelling on it particularly. It seems that the
representative
of the United States, Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
has preferred to leave today’s meeting already, no
doubt
on the principle known since the time of Shakes peare -the Moor, having finished his business, may
leave.
However, I think that the sense of the vote of
123.
the United States and the ominous context in which it
W%LS cast makes it worth while to dwell on this particularly.
This context has three elements. The first
is that on 20 January this year [2329tlz meeting], the
United
States vetoed a draft resolution [S/148.?2/Rev.l1

which would have punished Israel for its illegal annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights. The sense of this vote
by the United States was that the United States was
ready to forgive Israel for its annexation of territory
of the Syrian Arab Republic. Secondly,. on 2 April
this year [2348th meefing], the United States used the
veto against a draft resolution [S/14943] which called
upon Israel to rescind illegal measures on the West
Bank with regard to the dissolution of municipal councils and the dismissa of the mayors of three towns.
The sense of that vote was permission from the United
States to Israel to continue its creeping annexation of
the West Bank. Thirdly, today, 20 April, the United
States did not permit the adoption of the draft resolution [S/14985]-and
I would say that it was a more than
mild draft resolution-which
called upon Israel to put
an end to acts of vandalism against Muslim Holy
Places in Jerusalem. The sense of this most recent
vote of the United States is that it does not intend in
general to limit Israel in any way. I shall not be revealing any great secret if I say that the United States
voted against this draft resolution also because it
does not recognize that East Jerusalem is territory
occupied by Israel. The United States, like Israel,
believes-and
it has confirmed this by its vote todaythat Jerusalem is the unified, sole and eternal capital of
Israel.
124. Now, what does all this demonstrate-and
even before the United States came forward in the role
of champion and protector of Israel? What has been
happening in the fast few months is a qualitatively new
shift in the policy of the United States in the Middle
East. The United States has thrown overboard the
policy of even apparent even-handedness
between
Israel and the Arabs. Now Israel, which has recently
been called officially an ally of the United States,
enjoys Washington’s unlimited sympathy. The United
States has jettisoned the principle of non-acquisition of
territory by force, a principle to which at one time the
United States subscribed. Now the United States is
covering up, and thereby encouraging the carrying out
by Israel of territorial annexation in the Middle East.
125. Something that was concealed and has now
become clear is the substance of the agreement on
strategic co-operation between the United States and
Israel-and
the Soviet delegation mentioned this only
yesterday. Now those people should give some thought
to this; because of their political naivety they have not
yet understood this. Through the strategic co-operation
agreement, the United States and Israel are counting
on force in the Middle East, on the annexation of Arab
territory and on converting the Middle East into a
colonial protectorate
of American imperialism
and
Israeli Zionism. To buttress this policy, American
emissaries today are travelling around the Middle East
looking for bases and other strong points for the
stationing of United States troops in the Middle East
-the so-called rapid deployment force.
126. However unsavoury it may appear, this is the
policy-a
policy detrimental
to the interests of Arab

countries and peoples and to the advantage of Israel,
which is being promoted and defended by the vote of
the United States in the Council.

I wonder what happened to the mosques and the
churches in those villages that were rased.
133. The issue is not between the Jews and the Muslims, The issue is between Zionism, on the one hand,
and the world-whether
Christian or non-christianon the other. It concerns every person here, of any
religion, any denomination,
any creed, any ideology.

127. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked to speak. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
128. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic): The
Israeli representative of the Zionist entity saw fit-no
doubt encouraged by his masters-to cast aspersions
on and make accusations against Syria again.

134. I would have expected-even
wished-to hear
representatives of countries that were once called “the
daughters of the Church” defending Christian interests in Jerusalem because, according to all information
from primary sources, 100,000 Christians have left the
occupied territories since 1967. We know that churches, Christian institutions,
cannot receive aid and
assistance from outside.

129. The matter before us is not an isolated act. This
has been said by almost every delegation which has
spoken on this subject. It is the continuation of the
process started in 1948. That process is the Zionization of Palestine under the guise of Judaization-that
is, using religion to attain colonial gains.

135. We know how money has been squandered by
the Israeli establishment.
The corruption in Israel is
not a new thing. We heard news today about another,
a second Minister.

130. I think that the representative of Jordan yesterday reviewed the history of this entity that keeps
expanding,
annexing, evicting, killing,
deporting,
depriving the inhabitants of their rights protected under
the fourth Geneva Convention. I do not have to go into
that again.

136. The United States veto was expected. We could
see in the Delegates’ Lounge, in the Council chambers
here and there, the pressures exerted by the superPower to delete the words “including Jerusalem” and
I have explained the reasons for ,&hat before. However,
in response to Mr. Reagan’s White House press
release, let me say that we do not need his deep personal sorrow. We need the sorrow of the American
people-that
is, the United States Government. It is
claimed that the United States Government and its
President are elected, but his personal feelings cannot
deflect us from the goal we wish to reach, that is, the
liberation of Jerusalem. Let him keep his personal
sorrow to himself. We do not need it. It does not help;
it only harms.

13 1. Israel, we should not forget, annexed Jerusalem
in 1967 and last year that city was declared the “eternal
capital” of the Zionist colonial entity. Yet we should
like to remind the permanent and non-permanent members of the Council that Jerusalem is the West Bank
and the West Bank is Jerusalem. Therefore, when the
United States through its veto indicates that Jerusalem
must be left apart because some secret or overt agreements were reached at Camp David, to us it means
that when Jerusalem is separated from the West Bank,
the West Bank is already annexed. This should be
borne in mind and studied in depth by the members of
the Council who are interested in peace-keeping, in
protecting our world from another conflagration and
in maintaining the peace and security of the area and
of the world.

137. It views Jerusalem as a city of religion. Jerusalem is not a city only of religion. Jerusalem is an Arab
Muslim city which has been occupied by a secular
movement, a colonialist movement born in Europe
shaped along colonialist lines, which took advantage
of the United Kingdom and others to establish an
imperialist-colonialist
base in our area, to extend its
hegemony over our oil, over the Suez Canal, over the
strategic routes. This is the conflict. It is not religious;
it is political.

132. There is a certain mentality behind the Israeli
pronouncements
in the Council. This mentality was
portrayed by Mr. Dayan, who died, but who nevertheless was responsible-he
and his establishment-for
genocide against the Arabs-and I do not want to mention any figures. He confided that:

138. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiwzfiom
French):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to be allowed to speak. I now call on
him.

“Jewish villages were built in the place of Arab
villages. You don’t even know the names of these
Arab villages, and I don’t blame you, because these
geography books no longer exist. Not only do the
books not exist, the Arab villages are not there
either. Nahalal [Dayan’s own village] arose in the
place of Mahlul, Gvat [a kibbutz] in the place of
Jibta, Sarid [another kibbutz] in the place of Haniefa,
and Kfar-Yehoshua
in the place of Tel-Shaman.
There is not one single place built in this country
that did not have a former Arab population.”

139. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): The peak of arrogance was reached this afternoon
when the representative of Israel tried to arrogate to
himself the powers of the judge of the universe, the new
Almighty; but I am not really surprised. However,
there is a point of history and fact that I should specify.
I do not know about the 58 synagogues referred to that
12

were destroyed in Jerusalem, It so happens that I am
a son of Jerusalem and I lived for as long as I could in
Jerusalem.
I know there were about three or four
synagogues there. But, of course, I do admit that there
were chapel-like small places of worship in different
houses. They could have numbered 58 or 100-I do
not know. But if we had to consider every little chapel
around the world as a cathedral, then there would be
millions of them. But be that as it may, those houses,
which were the property of the Magreb waqf, were
destroyed by the Israeli army and not by the Jordanian army. Therefore, I would suggest that our friend
from Morocco, who is from the Magreb, should seek
indemnification
for this assumption by the Israelis of
the ownership. of those buildings that belonged to the
Magreb ~vaqf, The Jews of Jerusalem had nothing to
do with that. They only had property amounting to
something
like 20 per cent of the area.

Conference, the Al-Quds Committee and their
respective Chairmen, and the rest of the world, have
to reconsider and reassess their relations with the
Government of the United States of America. The
Government of the United States must pay the price
for its hostile attitude and policies towards the Palestinian people, the Arab nation, towards Islam and the
Muslim believers, towards peace and stability in the
world. The Government
of the United States has
selected an ally, a strategic ally, as against those it
considers as friends and those who had considered
the United States as their friend. This identification
and solidarity with Israel has just been reaffirmed. The
negative vote is only an affirmation of the fact that the
United States and Israel are co-culprits, that the
United States no longer considers the Holy City of
Jerusalem as occupied territory and that the Government of the United States considers and recognizes in
fact the legitimacy of all measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, in Jerusalem. That position, as
was shown here, is definitely against the international
consensus.
Islamic

140. However, at the closing of this debate, in the
name of my brothers and sisters in Jerusalem, in
Palestine,
in the Arab world and the Islamic world,
and in the name of the PLO, I wish to thank the members of the Council who voted in favour of the draft
resolution.
I also wish to thank all the friends who
participated
in the current debate on a heinous crime,
an act of State terrorism. And I sincerely wish to thank
the representative
of the Government of the United
States-who
has decided to leave the meeting-for
her vote. It really helps to unmask the real policies and
designs of the Washington Administration,
if more
clarification
were really needed.

144. Mr. President, as for the Palestinian people,
under the leadership of the PLO, we assure you that
while we maintain our faith and trust in the Organization and in the Council, we are still determined to
struggle by all means to regain our rights and to achieve
peace in the land of peace, in Palestine, in Jerusalem.
The United Nations is duty-bound to provide a remedy,
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace through peace
in Palestine. And if the role of the United Nations, as
has been demonstrated
there, is undermined by a
permanent member of this Council, the United States,
then we have no alternative but to resort to the other
legitimate option. Our resistance by all means-strikes,
demonstrations, stone-throwing and even explosivesto foreign occupation, to Israeli occupation of our
homes, is legitimate. It is our right, it is our duty and
members may rest assured that we shall not abandon
our rights.

141. In my statement yesterday, I said that the United
States:
“is duty-bound
to reaffirm that the status of the
Holy City of Jerusalem has not been changed and
that the United States is committed to upholding
the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention, and
to reaffirm the applicability of its provisions to OCcupied Jerusalem. The failure of the United States
Government
to state that in very clear terms can
only be interpreted by us Palestinians, Arabs and
Muslims
all over the world as a clear and unambiguous commitment
of the Government to support
and encourage Israel in its policies and practices.”
[2356th meeting, pm. 393

145. The PRESIDENT
(infclpr.etution.f,‘~,n French):
The representative of Morocco has asked to be allowed
to speak. I now call on him.
146. Mr, MRANI
ZENTAR (Morocco) (interprPtclfionfiom French): First of all, Mr. President, I should
like to address to you and to the members of the Council the gratitude of my delegation for having responded
to the request by His Majesty King Hassan II, Chairman of the AI-Quds Committee, by convening a Council meeting during which moving and sincere statements have been made in response to the horrified
feelings of the Islamic community,
which was most
deeply wounded by the profanation of holy Places in
Jerusalem.

142.
By the negative and arbitrary vote today to
prevent
the Council from pronouncing itself on the
xnost recent Israeli act of State terrorism against my
people,
by that veto to obstruct the task and the work
of the United Nations, the United States has in very
clear terms and with no ambiguity chosen to be a minority of one, isolated from the rest of the world and a
renegade.
The Government of the United States of
America
has rendered the Council and the United
Nations-the
hope of mankind-helpless
and ineffective.

147. I should also like to express the thanks of mY
delegation and those of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference as a whole to the many delegations that
voted in favour of our draft resolution. While the

143.
Now it has become clear and imperative that
the: Arab world, the members of the Organization of the
13

results of the vote which has just taken place do not
respond exactly to the expectations of those who
called for this debate in the Council, they cannot in
any manner change the unanimous condemnation
of
Israel which has been expressed in this Council as well
as throughout the world, nor can they attenuate the
seriousness of the crime which has been committed by
at least one armed Israeli soldier in uniform against
peaceful worshippers at a holy site profaning and
desecrating one of the holiest places of Islam.
148. Israel’s responsibility for this indescribable act
is beyond doubt, because in carrying out its blind
policy of out-and-out provocation, the Begin Government has been constantly and openly encouraging
potential or actual criminals of that kind. The Israeli
Government has neither attempted nor done anything
to prevent such acts, while in Israel there flourish
archaic and obscurantist
organizations that go on
making the gravest threats against the Islamic holy
places in Jerusalem, threats that are unfortunately
followed by destruction and profanation, like the acts
perpetrated against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
Mosque of Omar.

series of crimes against law, justice and reason perpetrated by Israel in all the occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem.
150. But we have faith and we believe that law,
justice and reason will prevail in Jerusalem also,
because the Islamic community,
like the universal
community, is too devoted to the cause of peace and
freedom not to shoulder its responsibilities towards
the Palestinian people and the Holy City of Jerusalem,
which for centuries has been the very symbol of
freedom, fraternity and peace.
151. Strongly condemning the state of violence and
intolerance that disfigures and desecrates the Holy City
of Jerusalem and steeps it in blood, His Majesty King
Hassan II ended his message to the Council with
dignified and wise words that are entirely appropriate
to conclude this debate: “Only tolerance and mutual
respect among men of faith and goodwill, not new
religious wars, will enable Jerusalem once again to
regain its truly holy significance.”
The meeting

rose at 2.45 p.m.

149. In his message to the Security Council [2352nd
meeting, pal-n. 1.51, His Majesty King Hassan II stated
that Israel’s responsibility
cannot be disputed, The
international
community
has over and over again
clearly repudiated
and vigorously condemned the

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

Yolk

NOTE

I United

00300

Nations,

Twcr?y

Series,

vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

88-609894une

1959~2.050
