S/PV.7351

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7351st meeting

Friday, 19 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahamat/Mr. Mangaral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Zuain
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Labbé
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. Wali
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Terrorism and cross-border crime
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations to help States
and subregional and regional entities in Africa in fighting terrorism (S/2014/9)
Letter dated 4 December 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary- General (S/2014/869)

14-70690 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1470690*

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/9, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations
to help States and subregional and regional entities in
Africa in fighting terrorism.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security

I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/869, which contains a letter dated
4 December 2014 from the Permanent Representative of
Chad to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

Terrorism and cross-border crime
Report of the Secretary-General on the work
of the United Nations to help States and
subregional and regional entities in Africa in
fighting terrorism (S/2014/9)

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.

Letter dated 4 December 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/869)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Ministers and other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their participation is
an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Germany, Guatemala, Italy, India, Iraq,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Morocco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, the Niger, Pakistan, Senegal, Spain, Sweden,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Managing Director for Global and
Multilateral Issues of the European External Action
Service, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2/62

begin

19/12/2014

its

Mr. Feltman: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral and as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), I thank Chad
for convening this timely debate. Chad is playing a
leadership role in the Sahel to address terrorism and
cross-border crime. We sincerely appreciate President
Deby Itno’s vision and commitment to seeing the
United Nations mission in northern Mali succeed, and
we deeply regret the loss of the Chadian peacekeepers
in recent months
This week, we were reminded yet again why we
must not tire in our efforts to counter terrorism — the
despicable attack on a school in Pakistan by the Taliban.
Let us mourn and honour the 126 children killed by
countering rhetoric and acts of hatred with concerted
international efforts. Terrorism represents today a core
threat to international peace and security. Transnational
crime is fuelling terrorism with money, arms and
support to move across borders and destabilize States,
particularly the most challenged.
In the Secretary-General’s recent visits to Africa
he was constantly reminded that terrorism and crossborder crime cannot be addressed separately. The
Secretary-General stressed earlier this year in his
report to the Council on terrorism in Africa that
terrorists increasingly rely on cross-border criminality
to further their agenda and that these linkages “pose a
major threat to peace and stability” (S/2014/9, para. 12).
Drug-trafficking, organising abduction rings,
extracting natural resources, conducting joint financial
operations — the ways in which terrorists and
organized criminals work together seem boundless.
Cross-border crime weakens the authority of the State
as it puts into question the Government’s ability to
maintain security and provide a peaceful context for

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

economic development. It also creates the conditions
that foster corruption and human rights violations,
thereby undermining the State’s legitimacy.
Our efforts will not bear fruit unless we combine
law enforcement actions with measures to strengthen
good governance, rule of law and human rights. We
will not uproot the ideologies that lead to violence if we
do not win over hearts and minds.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy takes precisely that comprehensive approach,
particularly in its pillar I, which focuses on addressing
the political and socioeconomic conditions conducive
to terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force supports Member States’ efforts in
implementing the Strategy. The CTITF articulates the
United Nations response to terrorism and cross-border
crime by, first, monitoring and analysing the threat,
and assessing the needs of Member States; secondly,
implementing tailored capacity-building projects; and
thirdly, delivering this assistance in a coordinated and
coherent manner to multiply impact.
First, in the area of monitoring and assessment,
the Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities — one
of the CTITF’s 35 entities — plays a key role in analysing
the evolving terrorist phenomenon and reporting on
it. Recently, it submitted to the Council a report on
specific cases of cooperation between crime syndicates
and the Taliban and associated terrorist groups.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which is also a CTITF entity, consistently
warns in its country assessments against the strategic
spaces that transnational crime opens to terrorists, and
has developed valuable initiatives to promote regional
cooperation in challenged areas such as the Maghreb,
the Sahel, and West and East Africa.
Secondly, in the area of capacity-building, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
is implementing a vast array of projects in Africa to
strengthen legal regimes, criminal justice cooperation
and border controls. The Regional Judicial Platform
for cooperation in the Sahel, the West Africa Coast
Initiative to create transnational organized crime units,
and the Global Firearms Programme are good examples
of the valuable work of UNODC in the region.
The United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism
(UNCCT) has stepped up capacity-building efforts to

S/PV.7351

address terrorist threats at the national, regional and
global levels. The Centre is supporting Southern and
Central African countries to develop regional counterterrorism strategies to significantly strengthen their
ability to jointly combat terrorism and transnational
organised crime. These efforts build on the UNCCTsupported development of a joint plan of action for the
Central Asian region adopted in 2011, which recognized
linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
Thirdly, in the area of coordination, the CTITF’s
10 inter-agency working groups devote considerable
attention to the transnational linkages of terrorism,
including organized crime, and how the United Nations
can more systematically address them at the national,
regional and global levels. From a global project on
assets freezing to a regional one on border controls in
the Sahel and North Africa, as well as a national project
in Nigeria on countering violent extremism, the Task
Force and its working groups decisively contribute to
strengthening the capacities of challenged countries
and regions.
In the same spirit of developing comprehensive
responses to current security challenges, the SecretaryGeneral also established an inter-agency task force on
drug trafficking and transnational organised crime,
co-chaired by UNODC and the Department of Political
Affairs. Another coordination tool, the United Nations
matrix of CTITF projects and activities, which includes
more than 220 projects around the world, serves as a
useful tool to better map gaps and needs, efficiently
allocate resources and increase transparency and
accountability in areas of our activities.
As a way to strengthen system-wide coordination
and emphasize that terrorism and crime affect the
development, human rights and rule-of-law sides of our
work, the United Nations has also developed a number
of broader initiatives. The United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are strengthening the rule of law in settings
that are at risk of being used by terrorists or criminals
to conduct their operations. In one of those settings, the
Sahel, the United Nations is implementing an integrated
strategy that relates governance, security and resilience
to development.
Those are just some examples of how the United
Nations is confronting terrorism and cross-border
crime. Going forward, we need to better understand
the implications of terrorist and criminal collaboration,
systematize our responses and focus on impact in

14-706903/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

affected countries and regions. Just as recent peace
operations have incorporated cross-border crime
analysis into their mission planning, terrorism should
be part of the mainstream of the work of the United
Nations, particularly through our special political
missions, peacekeeping operations and country teams
in the field.
The need for urgent action to address terrorism
and its transnational linkages is, regrettably, well
illustrated — for example, by the intensification of
Boko Haram activities throughout the Lake Chad basin
region of Central Africa. Over the past few months,
Boko Haram has started to take over and control
territories in parts of north-east Nigeria, further
compounding the threat to regional peace and security.
This situation is expected to worsen as cross-border
tension and violence persist. All efforts should be made
to ensure the swift operationalization of regional and
international initiatives to address the cross-border
threat posed by Boko Haram following the security
summits in Paris, London and Abuja.
As instructed by the Security Council, the United
Nations Office for Central Africa and the United
Nations Office for West Africa will continue to work
together, in the spirit of their recent joint mission to
Chad and Cameroon. They will assist the countries
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to address the
transnational impact of Boko Haram activities on the
political, socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in
the region. That will include transnational linkages to
organized crime.
Boko Haram, Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Daesh and
their sinister peers make it abundantly clear that the
pervasive synergies between terrorism and crossborder crimes foster conflicts, prevent their resolution
and increase the chance of relapse. Ensuring that the
tools that we have at our disposal are relevant and
effective against the new face of international terrorism
will be essential to protect innocents, resolve conflicts
and promote the principles and values of the United
Nations.
While I can assure the Council that the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations family will continue
to use, but also to adapt, its expertise and tools to
address the multidimensional and interrelated security
challenges of terrorism and its transnational linkages,
including organized crime, we also count on all members
of the Council and all members of the international

4/62

19/12/2014

community to unite in advancing our capacities and
coherence, not only to counter but to prevent terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations.
Mr. António (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to acknowledge the presence among us of
the Ministers from Nigeria, Luxembourg and Libya, as
well as the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Argentina,
the Director General for Foreign Policy of Chile and
Ms. Marinaki, Managing Director for Global and
Multilateral Issues of the European External Action
Service. I should like to convey the regret of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
would have wanted to be present and this meeting but
could not owing to other obligations.
Allow me to reiterate our warm congratulations to
the Republic of Chad on his accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December, as
well as to thank it heartily for organizing this second
high-level open debate on the crucial issue of terrorism
and transnational crime. This initiative is particularly
relevant as it focuses on the relationship between those
two phenomena on the African continent, where the
terrorist threat continues to worsen, as well as on the
impact on international peace and security.
My thanks and congratulations also go to the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his detailed briefing and for
the leadership he has shown since taking office as head
of the Department of Political Affairs, including the
coordination of efforts in the fight against terrorism.
Let me first of all reiterate the African Union’s
unequivocal rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, ans well as to strongly condemn all
terrorist acts, which no circumstances can justify.
(spoke in English)
The African Union welcomes this debate as a
unique opportunity to examine how the intersection
of cross-border crime and terrorism pose serious
challenges to conflict prevention and resolution efforts,
especially in Africa. It is certainly no coincidence,
Mr. President, that under your country’s presidency
of the Security Council this month the question of

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

terrorism has been given a prominent place among the
priorities of the Council’s programme of work. This
is simply a reinforcement of the importance Chad
attaches to addressing this scourge. In that context,
we are reminded of the particular leadership role of
your country, Sir, as Chair of the African Union Peace
and Security Council in the convening, in Nairobi on
2 September 2014, of the special summit devoted to the
issue of terrorism held.
Cross-border criminal activities on the continent
have both contributed to the onset of conflicts as well
as further complicated subsequent management and
resolution efforts. As we are all well aware, the situation
in northern Mali, characterized by limited Government
presence and services along its border, provided a
conducive environment for cross-border trafficking
to flourish and further expand into dangerous forms
of criminal activities, such as kidnapping-for-ransom,
arms- and drug-trafficking and mercenarism. That
environment subsequently became an ideal haven
for terrorist groups, exacerbating political strife and
ultimately leading to the hijacking of the uprising by
criminal and terrorist groups, which had established
strong presences in the region.
In the Sahel region, consistent reports indicate
that drug- and arms-trafficking, human smuggling,
kidnapping-for-ransom, the illicit proliferation of arms
and money laundering — all of which are variants
of transnational organized crime — have become
intimately intertwined with terrorist groups’ activities
and sources of financing. Groups such as the Movement
for Unity and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO),
Boko Haram, Ansaru and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb (AQIM) have benefitted substantially from
the kidnapping of foreigners and affluent nationals
for the purpose of securing ransom for their release.
The MUJAO, an offshoot of AQIM, which is mostly
financed by narcotics-trafficking, illustrates well
the lucrative support that the drug market brings to a
number of terrorist groups. Furthermore, kidnapping
for ransom in the Sahel belt has emerged as an integral
financing model for the furtherance of terrorist
activities in Africa and globally. It has now developed
into an industry that includes the terrorist organization
at the core, interacting with a chain of intermediaries,
criminal groups and local tribesmen and sympathizers.
In Somalia and the Horn of Africa, cross-border
crime facilitated Al-Shabaab’s terrorist activities in
Somalia and beyond, placing civilians and troops of

S/PV.7351

the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
at great risk. The group’s extended control over the
port of Kismayo enabled it to profit from the illegal
charcoal trade and the procurement of weapons through
international illicit trade networks.
The situation in Central Africa is another example
of the deadly convergence of threats. The Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) is increasingly implicated in
the poaching of elephants and illegal trade in ivory,
highlighting the emerging threat of exploitation of
natural resources by terrorist groups. We should be
alarmed by the irrevocable damage this can have on
the environment and the many livelihoods that depend
on it. To further emphasize the intersection of crossborder crime and terrorism, the LRA is believed to be
using arms emanating from as far north as Libya, which
indicates the wide-ranging illicit trafficking networks
that continue to operate across the continent.
The African Union has not remained idle in the
face of these threats. The innovative approaches and
mechanisms deployed by the AU serve us today as
good starting points and lessons we can share with the
Council to its benefit as to that of other relevant organs
and bodies of the United Nations.
The mechanism for enhancing security cooperation
and the operationalization of the African Peace and
Security Architecture in the Sahel region, also known
as the Nouakchott Process, recognizes the multifaceted
and multidimensional approach required in dealing with
transnational threats in a sustainable and collaborative
manner. The Nouakchott Process has to date facilitated
interactions at multiple levels, including the policy
and operational levels. The Heads of intelligence and
security services of the region met in six sessions
to discuss enhancing cooperation and exchange of
intelligence, including collaboration with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Border and customs
officials also held two meetings in Tripoli, in 2013, and
in Ndjamena, last month, to discuss and agree on basic
measures and areas of cooperation to combat illicit trade
and trafficking in humans, arms and drugs. This is in
addition to three ministerial meetings and the Summit
held yesterday in Nouakchott, Mauritania. This process
is further enhanced by the multidimensional AU
strategy for the Sahel region, which addresses conflict
prevention and resolution, security and development.
The Nouakchott Summit considered the political
and security situation in the Sahel-Saharan region as

14-706905/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

well as efforts aimed at overcoming the challenges
at hand and promoting lasting peace, security and
stability. In their final declaration, the participants
expressed in particular their full readiness to
contribute, in consultation with the United Nations,
to the strengthening of MINUSMA, through the
establishment of a rapid intervention force to contribute
to the fight against armed terrorist and criminal groups
and to facilitate the successful completion of the
stabilization efforts in Mali.
It is worth mentioning that in her report presented
to the 455th meeting of the AU Peace and Security
Council, held at the level of Heads of State and
Government on 2 September in Nairobi, Kenya, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Her
Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, outlined
the following six main reasons for the emergence and
redeployment of terrorist groups in Africa and, in
particular in the Sahel-Saharan region. First, poverty,
illiteracy and the high rate of unemployment among
young people and the general population render them
vulnerable to the manipulative messages of terrorist
groups and their promises of quick gain. Secondly, the
poor working conditions and insufficient training and
discipline of law enforcement personnel make them
easy prey for corruption. Thirdly, criminal networks are
seeking safe haven and refuge in a zone characterized
by vast territorial expanses, low and insufficient
security coverage and administrative presence.
Fourthly, they are seeking new sources of funding,
especially through smuggling, drug-trafficking and
illegal migration. Fifthly, there is a need to conquer
new areas for recruitment and redeployment with
the objective of expanding the field of confrontation
beyond their traditional zone of operations. And
sixthly, the weakness of Government institutions and
the existence of long stretches of porous, Largely illmonitored and poorly-controlled borders, combined
with vast, ill-administered spaces of territory, facilitate
the illegal cross-border movement of people and goods
and provide fertile ground for exploitation by terrorists
and transnational organized criminals.
In the Horn of Africa, AMISOM and the countries
of the region have long recognized the need for a
collaborative approach to address the threat posed
by the cross-border criminal and terrorist activity
of Al-Shabaab and thus established the regular
information-sharing and coordination mechanism
bringing together the countries affected, neighbouring
countries, the troop-contributing countries and the
6/62

19/12/2014

Committee of Intelligence and Security Services in
Africa.
The Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the LRA is one of the AU’s most
recent innovative approaches. The AU is currently
working through its Post-conflict Reconstruction and
Development programme to support Member States
in extending basic infrastructure and services to the
populations most affected by the LRA so as to increase
their resilience and mitigate their vulnerability to
predation by the group. That includes addressing the
integration of ex-combatants.
At the operational level, the African Union
Commission has remained actively engaged at the level
of solutions aimed at addressing this scourge, which
includes steps to mobilize member States towards the
full and effective implementation of the AU normative
counter-terrorism framework. The Commission also
continues to work closely with the African Centre for
Studies and Research on Terrorism in capacity-building
support, notably for training and assistance in the
elaboration of the requisite legislation on the basis of
the AU model law adopted in July 2011.
Based on those experiences, the African Union
wishes to share a few observations and to offer some
recommendations, which we believe could further
enrich the debate and provide ideas on the way forward.
First, addressing cross-border crime in conflict
situations should be a priority intervention, especially
when it has the potential for further exacerbating
it. Whether we are working through a peacekeeping
mission or mediation efforts confined to a particular
geographical region, we should have an inclusive
approach that brings together the concerned
neighbouring States to devise and implement measures
to mitigate the potential for the internationalization and
prolongation of the conflict.
Secondly, border communities remain our first line
of defence against cross-border crime and transnational
terrorist activity. They should be actively engaged and
provided with the alternatives, through both quickimpact projects and long-term rehabilitation and
development strategies, as a disincentive to crime and
terrorism. In that connection, we have to emphasize
the critical need for establishing and restoring trust
between the State and border communities.
Thirdly, terrorist groups, regardless of the
ideologies they subscribe to, remain calculating
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

interest-driven entities that will continue to seek
safe havens and resources to survive and fund their
activities. Judging by our experience, border regions
that are poorly governed, where communities have
limited or no alternatives, and in which cross-border
crime flourishes, remain their optimal choice. We must
therefore strengthen our early-warning mechanisms to
identify potential situations of conflict that could be
exploited by terrorists groups, and take the necessary
preventive action.
We would like to be clear: the African Union does
not advocate closing or restricting bordersm nor does it
seek to infringe on the sovereignty of States with regard
to the management of their territories. The porous
African borders have long served to bring communities
together and facilitate trade and have contributed
to the prosperity and the enriching diversity of our
people. But “porous” needs not translate into threats
and risks of crime and terrorism. That is precisely
what the AU Convention on Cross-Border Cooperation
aims to achieve. The Convention was adopted by the
June 2014 Summit of the African Union and provides
a cooperative framework to transform border areas
into catalysts for growth, to enable socioeconomic and
political integration, to ensure efficient and effective
integrated border management and to collectively
address cross-border crime and terrorism.
In conclusion, it is important to recognize that,
over time, cross-border criminal activity becomes
a self-sustaining enterprise in which the rewards
are much higher to be offset by traditional conflictresolution measures. There is therefore a need for
innovative, collaborative and inclusive approaches that
are led by the concerned States, based on confidence
and transparency among them and without hindrance
or restrictions on legal cross-border flows of people and
trade.
I thank the Council once again for providing us this
opportunity to share our perspective at this debate. As
this is the last open meeting of the Security Council
this year, I would like to thank the outgoing members
of the Council — Argentina, Australia, Luxemburg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda — for their valuable
contributions to the work of the Council. Likewise, I
would like to extend our warmest congratulations to
the new non-permanent members — Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela — and to reiterate
our full confidence in their commitment and ability to
bring added value to the Council in the discharge of its

S/PV.7351

mandate to maintain international peace and security,
including in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. António for his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/917, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic
of Korea, the Russian Federation, Rwanda and the
United States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2195 (2014).
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs and African
Integration of Chad.
I would like to thank all colleagues who travelled
here to take part in this meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
for their briefings.
I welcome the fact that Chad, as a member of the
Security Council for the first time, took the initiative
on the first resolution on the dangerous and growing
linkage between terrorism and cross-border crime. It
highlights the importance of enhanced cooperation
among States and the strengthening of capacitybuilding and coordination of the United Nations in
the efforts to combat these two phenomena, which are
mutually strengthening in many cases. We welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2195 (2014).
Terrorism and cross-border crime are two
phenomena that have a very negative impact on
international peace and security, particularly in the

14-706907/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

Middle East, in Central Asia and in Africa. The African
continent, unfortunately, is facing more and more these
two phenomena. In recent years, the terrorist and
criminal acts that have been perpetrated by groups such
as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, Ansar
Al-Sharia, the Lord’s Resistance Army and Al-Shabaab,
to just mention a few, have stepped up their intensity
in the Sahel, in the Maghreb and in West, Central and
East Africa. Those groups have shown themselves to
be the most dangerous, stepping up attacks against
civilians, including women and children, and United
Nations personnel, particularly peacekeepers, and their
installations and infrastructure. They finance their
activities through the payment of ransoms and all sorts
of trafficking.
The factors that contribute to that state of affairs
are, among others, the weakness of States with regard
to extending their authority over their entire territory:
weak cooperation and coordination between States
in legal and security matters; a high level of youth
unemployment; and broad poverty. Groups of terrorists
and criminals use those weaknesses to recruit and to
grow. Faced with the scale of the threat, the actions
taken by States and organizations against terrorists and
criminals must be reinforced.
With regard to Africa, we must seek to strengthen
our cooperation and coordination through the
mechanisms set up by the African Union, the regional
economic communities and individual States. From
that point of view, the summit of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union held in Nairobi on
2 September, under the chairmanship of Chad, called
upon the African Union Commission to consider,
among other measures, establishing a special fund to
combat terrorism, establishing special combat units
at the subregional and regional levels, strengthening
the legal framework for combating terrorism through
cooperation among police forces, and establishing an
African arrest warrant against those who carry out and
abet terrorist acts, as well as a mechanism to help to dry
up the sources of funding for terrorism.
In that regard, we should point out that one of the
principal sources for the financing of terrorism in Africa
is the payment of ransoms to terrorist groups. Despite
the decision of the African Union against the payment
of ransoms and despite Security Council resolution
2133 (2014), we note with regret that terrorists continue
to benefit, directly or indirectly, from the payment

8/62

19/12/2014

of ransoms or from political concessions by States
whose citizens are taken hostage. Furthermore, drug
trafficking, often linked with other forms of organized
crime, including trafficking in weapons and in human
beings, the illicit trafficking of natural resources, such
as wildlife and coal, corruption and money laundering
are all a source of growing destabilization and a brake
on the development of African States.
We must redouble efforts to combat corruption,
particularly within services for security, the
suppression of fraud, and border control. We have no
other choice but to strengthen and ensure respect for
our legislative and regulatory measures against such
crimes. We remember the Boeing 727 nicknamed “Air
Cocaine,” which landed in northern Mali in December
2009, carrying about six tons of the drug. The value of
the cocaine transited through Africa, by sea or by air,
and using the Sahel route to the Mediterranean coast, is
estimated in the billions of dollars.
At the national level, Chad is particularly concerned
by the crises and areas of tension surrounding it.
The Libyan crisis has had, and continues to have,
serious consequences for the stability of a great part
of the Sahel. We note with concern that the situation
prevailing there has allowed terrorist organizations to
establish safe havens. The growing threat represented
by the barbarians of Boko Haram in Central and West
Africa, instability in the Central African Republic
and in Darfur, and Al-Shabab’s asymmetric war in the
Horn of Africa are all major challenges that require
pooled efforts by the countries concerned and greater
mobilization by the international community .
In that regard, we pay tribute to the commitment
of the group of countries neighbouring Libya, not only
in supporting peace and reconciliation within those
countries, but also for ensuring greater monitoring of
the common borders in order to contain the terrorist
threat. In that light, Chad is making efforts to ensure
security within its borders, despite its huge territory
and its limited resources. Together with the Sudan,
we have established a joint force that operates joint
patrols along our common border to deter criminals
and bandits of all natures. Under the Lake Chad Basin
Commission we have revitalized the joint multinational
force to confront the terrorist threat in the subregion.
Chad is also giving particular attention to regional
security. The Chadian army has been active in Mali,
where, at great cost, it has helped hunt down terrorist
groups and narco-traffickers. Chad is very involved,
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

with other States, in the Nouakchott Process, launched
by the African Union in March 2013, with a view to
strengthening cooperation in security matters and the
operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture in the Sahel.
It lies primarily with us to enhance our respective
national capacities with a view to fully ensuring our
own security. We must work, with the assistance of
partners, on effective operationalization to confront
terrorism, cross-border crime and radicalization and
violent extremism. In that regard, we would like to
pay tribute to France’s engagement at our side, through
Operation Barkhane, and to thank the United States and
the European Union for their support.
Furthermore, we call upon the United Nations
entities, particularly the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Office for Drugs and Crime, to redouble their efforts.
We urge those States that have the resources to do so
to enhance their capacities, particularly in terms of
matériel and technical and logistical assistance. That
support is particularly necessary for the African States
in the Sahel and the Sahara, which have to control
immense areas. Most often, criminals and terrorists are
heavily armed and are often in complicity with terrorist
groups.
Beyond enhancing interregional cooperation and
coordination to counter the phenomena of terrorism and
cross-border crime, including trafficking in weapons
and drugs, we must emphasize the fight against
poverty. Young people are easy prey for terrorist
groups, which have considerable resources coming
from drug trafficking and other illicit trades. To put
a stop to practices that seriously threaten the security
of the continent, it is important for the international
community to support development programmes and
projects launched within the framework of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
As we await the Secretary-General’s report
requested in resolution 2195 (2014), we hope that
the ratification and implementation of conventions,
protocols and relative instruments will allow us to
respond to the challenges represented by the linkage
between terrorism and cross-border crime.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

S/PV.7351

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to open this debate on a topic of
great importance to my country and my subregion. I
also thank your delegation for the excellent concept
note (see S/2014/869, annex) provided to guide our
discussions. We have listened attentively to our briefer,
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, and we thank him
for sharing his insights.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the Niger
on behalf of the Republic of Benin and the member
States of the Lake Chad Basin Commission: Cameron,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
my colleagues, the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg,
Chile and Libya, and the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Argentina. I thank Ambassador Téte António of the
African Union for his statement.
Cross-border crime and organized crime are, in
themselves, threats to the peace and security of States.
When they intersect with terrorism, they become an
even greater threat, not only to States, but indeed to
entire regions. An important dimension of terrorism
in my subregion, West Africa, is its transnational
character. There is evidence indicating that terrorist
groups operating in the subregion have formed alliances
among themselves and with organized criminal gangs
involved in the trafficking of drugs, weapons and even
human beings. That inextricable link between organized
crime and terrorism creates significant challenges for
West African nations. It is in realization of that that the
leaders of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), in February 2013, adopted the
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Implementation Plan to
fight terrorism and related criminal acts in West Africa.
The Plan also aims to facilitate the implementation of
relevant international counter-terrorism instruments
and to provide a framework for joint action by ECOWAS
member States.
As indicated in the concept note (S/2014/869,
annex), the link between terrorism and organized
crime was clearly underscored by resolution 1373
(2001), which required all Member States to adopt
laws criminalizing terrorism and its financing. In that
regard, I am pleased to note that we in Nigeria have
put in place multiple legal and institutional frameworks

14-706909/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

to combat the financing of terrorism. In 2004, the
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission was
established to coordinate the national effort in the
fight against money laundering and the financing of
terrorism. In the same year, the Nigerian Financial
Intelligence Unit was established to analyse currency
transaction reports and suspicious transaction reports of
financial institutions. In 2009, the federal Government
adopted the Anti-money Laundering and Combating of
Financing of Terrorism Regulation, aimed at improving
the detection of terrorist financing. In 2011, the federal
Government strengthened the legislative framework for
fighting terrorism with the adoption of the Terrorism
(Prevention) Act. The Act provides measures for
the prevention, prohibition and combating of acts of
terrorism in Nigeria. It also prescribes penalties for
terrorists and their collaborators. The Act prohibits
terrorist financing and provides for the seizure of funds
and property held by individual terrorists or terrorist
organizations. In 2013, the Act was amended, and it
now designates the Office of the National Security
Adviser as the coordinating institution for Nigeria’s
counter-terrorism efforts. The Act also requires the
Attorney General to maintain international cooperation
in Nigeria’s fight against terrorism.
The value of international cooperation in the fight
against organized crime cannot be overemphasized.
In that regard, the engagement of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is of crucial
importance. The UNODC notes that international
cooperation could be used as a tool for strengthening
sovereignty and security, not for surrendering it. The
Office also notes that States can use the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to
cooperate through the sharing of criminal intelligence
and financial intelligence. The Convention’s provisions
for mutual legal assistance, extradition and the
confiscation of assets also offer avenues for mutually
beneficial cooperation among States. Through its
technical assistance programmes, UNODC has helped
States parties to the Convention to strengthen their
capacity to combat organized crime.
Nigeria commends UNODC for these and other
efforts, which help to define its role as a global leader
in the fight against organized crime. Similarly, we
acknowledge the leadership role of the CounterTerrorism
Committee,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force in the global
fight against terrorism.
10/62

19/12/2014

Still on international cooperation, we are working
very closely with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon, the
Niger and Benin to establish a multinational joint task
force to combat the terrorist group Boko Haram, which
has become a threat not only to Nigeria, but indeed to
neighbouring countries as well. We are also cooperating
with our bilateral and multilateral partners, including
all the permanent members of the Security Council,
and other friendly nations, to deal decisively with the
problem of Boko Haram. We are deeply grateful for
the assistance we have received, and we are certain
that, with sustained international support and our
unwavering determination, we shall before long defeat
and uproot Boko Haram.
In terms of our national response, we have put in
place the necessary legal and regulatory frameworks
that would make it difficult for terrorist groups and
criminal networks to launder money obtained through
criminal cross-border activities. However, there is
no doubt that this is an ongoing war. Therefore, as
terrorists and criminal gangs continue to search for
loopholes and systemic weaknesses they can exploit
to carry out their nefarious activities, it is our duty to
remain vigilant. We will continue to cooperate with our
neighbours and international partners in seeking ways
to effectively shrink and eventually close the space
available for terrorist groups and organized criminal
gangs to operate.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate your country, Sir, Chad, for
having organized, during its presidency of the Security
Council, this open debate on a very crucial issue: the
fight against terrorism and cross-border organized
crime, two scourges that mutually reinforce each other,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East. The fight
against these two scourges is the heart of resolution
2195 (2014), which we have just adopted unanimously at
Chad’s initiative, and of which Luxembourg has become
a sponsor. I thank you, Mr. Minister, for having invited
me to participate in this debate. Finally, I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Jeffrey
Feltman, and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union, Ambassador Téte António, for their statements.
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
We are witnessing a profound change in the terrorist
threat. That is evidenced by the fact that terrorist groups
seek to control entire swathes of territory. That was the
case in northern Mali, with groups such as Al-Qaida
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

in the Islamic Maghreb. It is still partly the case in
Somalia, with A1-Shabaab. It is certainly the case in
Iraq and Syria with Daesh. In all of those cases, there
are strong links between terrorist groups and organized
crime elements, either in terms of funding, equipment
or the use of illicit trafficking networks, including for
the trafficking in natural resources, be they minerals,
charcoal or oil.
What should concern us most is the fact that crossborder organized crime increases the strategic space
available to terrorists for operating. Criminals and
terrorists may have different motivations, but they
largely concur on their methods and the way they
operate. Criminals and terrorists thrive where the
State is weak or absent, as is the case in many border
areas, such as the Sahel. Criminals and terrorists
take advantage of instability and conflict. They take
advantage of war economies and therefore have a
particular interest in prolonging conflicts. Criminals
and terrorists seek to destabilize the established State
authorities at the central and decentralized levels, not
only through violence, but also through the corruption
of State institutions, especially security institutions
and the judiciary.
At the operational level on the ground, criminals
and terrorists are increasingly targeting directly
missions mandated by the Security Council, which are
not always equipped to counter that threat. In certain
regions, terrorism has grown stronger by forging links to
criminal networks that thrive from profits derived from
human trafficking and illicit trade in arms, drugs and
natural resources. That transnational threat demands
a coordinated response at the international, regional
and national levels, as well as greater cooperation and
increased assistance to States faced with that double
threat.
Luxembourg is firmly committed in that regard. We
are doing our part to strengthen African capacities to
combat the financing of terrorism. By way of example,
we supported a training programme in Senegal
established by the National Financial Intelligence
Unit. In May, in Tunis, we financed a workshop on
the freezing of terrorist assets, which was organized
by the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Middle East and North Africa
Financial Action Task Force.
The report that the Secretary-General will submit
six months from now will enable us to better identify the

S/PV.7351

measures required to reduce the profits that terrorism
extracts from organized crime. However, it seems clear
at this point that our goal should be to strengthen law
enforcement and border control institutions as well as
legal structures. The Peacebuilding Commission can
play an important role in that regard by supporting
fragile States in the aftermath of conflict, mobilizing the
support of the international community to strengthen
those States’ capacities and by encouraging regional
approaches and inter-State cooperation.
Luxembourg is particularly concerned by the
disproportionate impact of organized crime and terrorist
activity on children. Because of their vulnerability,
children are easy prey for recruiters, as Mr. Feltman
noted earlier. For that reason, children associated with
extremist groups should be treated first and foremost
as victims. Anti-terrorism measures should conform
to international human rights and child protection
standards, with particular regard for the norms of
juvenile justice. The prolonged detention of children for
their real or alleged association with an extremist group
exposes them to degrading and inhuman treatment. We
must join forces to fight that sinister trend.
On 15 January 2013, on the occasion of my very first
statement to the Security Council as a non-permament
member, I spoke of the imperative of combating
terrorism (see S/PV.6900). That open debate took place
under Pakistan’s presidency of the Council. I wish to
take this opportunity to extend my condolences to the
Government and the people of Pakistan and to add
my voice to that of those who have condemned in the
strongest possible terms the infamous terrorist attack
committed by the Taliban on 16 December against a
school in Peshawar, in which more than 140 victims
lost their lives, including 132 children. Today, as our
mandate in the Security Council nears the end of its
term, and not without a degree of emotion, I reiterate
Luxembourg’s commitment to combat the scourge of
terrorism.
We have come full circle, in a sense. Over the course
of the past two years, we have lent our efforts with
determination to promoting international peace and
security. We conclude our mandate with the hope that we
have contributed, however modestly, to achieving that
noble goal. I assure the Council that Luxembourg will
remain committed and will spare no effort to contribute
to promoting security, development and human rights,
the three ingredients that are indispensable to assure a
better future for all.

14-7069011/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you,
Foreign Minister Mahamat again for being here with us
in person. The United States greatly appreciates Chad’s
leadership and its work to focus the Council on the
nexus between terrorism and transnational organized
crime. I also thank Foreign Minister Wali and Minister
Asselborn for their presence here today, which serves
to underscore the critical importance of these issues. I
particularly appreciated Luxembourg’s attention to the
impact of these issues on the welfare of children, an
issue that Luxembourg insistently raises with regard
to all the challenges we face, and a critical part of
Luxembourg’s legacy on the Council. The United States
is very eager to support Nigeria and Chad and the other
other multinational partners in the effort against Boko
Haram, a monstrous movement.
While the motivations of terrorists and
transnational criminal organizations may differ, their
use of brutal violence and the insecurity, fear and
suffering that they cause are often remarkably similar.
Terrorists and transnational criminal organizations are
increasingly learning from one another’s sophisticated
tactics to raise funds, to move people and arms and
to spread the fear that is a critical source of their
power. We see this cross-pollination between terrorist
groups and transnational organized crime all around
us. Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Boko
Haram, the Al-Nusra Front and numerous other
terrorist organizations raise tens of millions of dollars
annually through kidnapping for ransom. In Somalia,
Al-Shabaab has filled its coffers through illegal and
environmentally devastating charcoal exports. Of the
$250 million worth of charcoal estimated to have been
exported from Somalia in 2013 and 2014, 30 per cent
is estimated to have gone to Al-Shabaab. AQIM and
other terrorist groups regularly obtain arms through
Maghreb and Sahel trafficking networks, relying on
the same trade routes as transnational smugglers. And
extremist groups raise cash through a variety of other
criminal activities that cross borders, from selling
drugs to stealing natural resources.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is another example of the increasingly similar modus
operandi between those groups. While continuing
to carry out deadly attacks propelled by its sadistic
ideology, ISIL is also increasingly operating like a
profit-driven criminal organization. Using fear, threats
and attacks, ISIL extorts money from local businesses
and traders and robs from banks and households alike.

12/62

19/12/2014

Working through long-established regional smuggling
networks, ISIL transports oil across borders, netting
roughly $1 million a day through black market oil
sales. There are credible reports that ISIL is profiting
from Syrian and Iraqi so-called blood antiquities, sold
by criminal middlemen to unscrupulous or unknowing
buyers worldwide.
Those new sources of financing allow extremist
groups to diversify their revenue streams and reduce
the risk of disruption of the funds they need to carry out
their horrific attacks. As terrorist criminal activities
become more entrepreneurial and business-minded,
the Security Council needs to better understand
their tactics. We must develop and deploy a set of
sophisticated tools to disrupt those expanding networks
and cut off the funds that they are generating. To that
end, the Council should prioritize three tasks.
First, the Council should build greater international
cooperation, needed to fight the inter-related problems
of terrorism and organized crime. We have taken
steps to address that urgent need, including resolution
2170 (2014), on ISIL, and resolution 2178 (2014), on
foreign terrorist fighters. We have established a robust
international legal framework under the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the United Nations Convention against Corruption and
the three United Nations drug control conventions that,
taken together and implemented effectively, provide
common parameters and tools for recognizing and
responding to different forms of transnational crime.
Building on that work, the Council should
encourage Member States to do more to collectively
address transnational threats. For example, greater
international cooperation should facilitate the
exchange of information and analysis about terrorists
and crime networks. For its part, the United States
has effectively used the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime as the basis for
international legal and law enforcement cooperation
against transnational organized crime with more than
55 countries. Our use of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and bilateral
treaties has led to the return of nearly 30 fugitives to face
prosecution in the United States. Greater cooperation
is needed both among and within Governments so we
can bring together experts from the law enforcement,
military, diplomatic and intelligence communities.
This is why today the Council called on Member
States to work together to secure their borders, counter

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.7351

illicit financing and money laundering and implement
international best practices and existing conventions.

their terror. That is the work before us and we must
succeed.

Secondly, the Security Council should acknowledge
that weak governance both encourages and is exacerbated
by the terrorist use of crime. Terrorist groups and
criminals gravitate towards places with rampant
corruption and impunity. For this reason, strengthening
the criminal justice systems in vulnerable countries is
one of the most effective ways to fight transnational
organized crime. Since our collective security is only
as strong as our weakest link, we have a shared interest
in building stronger, more transparent governance and
justice institutions beyond our own borders. Military
measures alone will not be enough.

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We commend you, Sir,
for the choice of this particular topic at a time when
terrorism and violent extremism continue to challenge
the resolve and efforts of the international community.
I thank Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing and able coordination
of United Nations initiatives against terrorism and
transnational organized crime. I also thank Ambassador
Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for his briefing and we
align ourselves with his statement on behalf of the
African Union.

Thirdly, the Security Council should call on States
to provide assistance to those States most affected by
these terrible threats. Tackling these challenges requires
deploying all the tools we have, from innovative law
enforcement and criminal justice tools to financial
measures and sanctions. Yet all States do not currently
have the same ability to take these steps. Member
States should therefore identify areas where targeted
assistance is most needed and focus support in those
places. We particularly welcome the role of the United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies, particularly the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee’s monitoring team, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
identifying threat and capacity gaps.
We have come through a horrific week, as others
have mentioned, of terrorist attacks. On Tuesday, the
Pakistani Taliban killed 145 people, 132 of them kids
aged 5 to 17. It was an appalling attack on a school. A
young student named Zeeshan told a reporter, “I saw
militants walking past rows of students shooting them
in the head”. On Wednesday, more than 230 bodies of
people believed to have been executed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant were found in a mass
grave in Syria’s Deir ez-Zor province. And yesterday
we learned that more than 100 women and children
were kidnapped and 35 people killed during a weekend
raid in the northeastern Nigerian village of Gumsuri,
believed to have been carried out by Boko Haram.
We know that we must do more to prevent these
attacks, not only in Pakistan, Syria and Nigeria, but in
all of our countries. We must dismantle the groups that
threaten our collective security, but we cannot achieve
that goal without tackling the organized criminal
networks that extremists increasingly rely upon to fuel

We have noted that, despite various findings on
the intersection between terrorism and transnational
organized crime for the last decade, there is not a
dedicated Security Council forum to discuss both
topics jointly. Rwanda believes that effective strategies
to tackle one should be responsive to the strategies to
tackle the other.
Organized crimes, such as wildlife trafficking in
the Central African region, in particular in the Central
African Republic; maritime piracy; drug trafficking
in northern Mali; kidnapping for ransom; the illicit
trade of charcoal involving Al-Shabaab; the illegal
mineral trade by armed groups, including the genocidal
movement Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; as
well as all smuggling by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq,
has become the lifeline for terrorist organizations. Even
more worrying is the contribution of organized crimes
to the instability of countries emerging from conflict
and to the collapse of fragile States. In Africa this is true
from the West to East African coast, where organized
crime has undermined governance and accountability
structures, creating a breeding ground for terrorist
organizations.
It is important that we enhance the capacity
of national law enforcement and counter-terrorism
institutions and ensure the strong coordination and
collaboration of all stakeholders if we are to succeed in
the fight against terrorism and transnational organized
crime. In this regard, I hope that the Secretary-General
report requested by the just adopted resolution 2195
(2014) will enable the Council to make a comprehensive

14-7069013/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

assessment of the nexus between terrorism and
transnational organized crime, but also consider its
input on conflict prevention and conflict resolution
efforts, particularly in Africa, and make concrete
proposals on effective measures required to deal with
these issues.
We welcome the Nouakchott declaration adopted
yesterday during the first summit of countries
participating in the Nouakchott Process on the
enhancement and operationalization of security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Sarahan
region. This declaration stressed the importance of an
exchange of information and intelligence in the fight
against terrorism and transnational organized crime.
In this respect, the continued collaboration between
the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism and the Committee of Intelligence and
Security Services of Africa is critical to eradicating
both scourges on the African continent.
Border security and management remains one
of the core challenges for countries facing the most
imminent threat of terrorist attacks, in particular in
Africa. Therefore, the lack of adequate capacity to
effectively control border security and management
easily fuels transnational organized crime and the
unhindered movement of terrorist groups with their
negative impacts on State authority and sovereignty.
In this context, it is encouraging to note that the
matrix of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force on United Nations counter-terrorism projects
features prominently important projects addressing the
issue of border security and management globally and on
the African continent. However, more work needs to be
done, including by the Council. We need to use existing
Security Council mandates and tools to analytically
address organizational and operational connections
between networks of transnational organized crime and
those of international terrorists and organizations. These
exercises could provide opportunities to disrupt global
criminal activities and pre-empt terrorist operations.
To achieve this, inter-State and regional cooperation
assistance will be crucial, since it will require, among
other issues, information-sharing and common methods
of intelligence gathering and analysis.
Organized crimes and terrorism have plagued some
of the areas in which the United Nations has deployed
its peacekeeping or special political missions, and in
most cases those missions have neither the mandates
14/62

19/12/2014

nor the required capacities to deal with the scourges.
This is the case of the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. It is therefore
critical to tailor specific United Nations peacekeeping
mandates to specific situations, taking into account
the scope of terrorist threats. Meanwhile, we look
forward to the recommendations of the High-level
Panel on Peace Operations appointed by the SecretaryGeneral. We believe that the report of the SecretaryGeneral expected in mid-2015 will guide the Council in
orienting its focus for its future peacekeeping operation
mandates, taking into consideration new and emerging
threats, including terrorism and violent extremism.
Finally, we believe that these debates should
remain open for future in-depth exchanges between the
Council and troop- and police-contributing countries,
considering the political landscapes and geographical
presence of United Nations peacekeeping operations
throughout the world.
Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like at the outset to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chad, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for the
invitation to participate in this debate. I would also
like to thank, through him, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and the Permanent
Observer of the African Union, Ambassador Téte
António, for the information that they have provided us.
I wish also to welcome here the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria and Luxembourg, as well as the
other representatives of the countries that make up the
Security Council.
Argentina condemns in the strongest terms
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
believes that such acts represent a threat not only to
international peace and security but also to human
dignity; peaceful, civilized coexistence; and stability
and the consolidation of democracy, as well as a
disincentive to the economic and social development of
nations.
States must carry out a thorough analysis of the
conditions that foster the spread of terrorism, which
include, inter alia, prolonged, unresolved conflicts;
absence of the rule of law; human rights violations;
discrimination for ethnic, national or religious reasons;
political exclusion; economic or social marginalization;
and lack of good governance, while acknowledging that
none of those conditions can excuse or justify terrorist
acts.
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

The globalization of horror through the media fuels
the spread of fear. However, the military response can
never be the preferred option for combating terrorism,
as it has already shown its limitations and failures. In
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, we require a comprehensive approach aimed at
strengthening our collective work relating to, inter alia,
the conditions that foster the spread of terrorism and its
financing. We must therefore work together for the full
validity of the rule of law in every one of our countries,
given the urgent need to build a balanced and just global
order that is based on effective multilateralism and
cooperation, and promoting policies of social inclusion.
Argentina notes with concern the attempts made
to confuse terrorism with transnational organized
crime, as if both had the same nature, methodology and
purposes, or as if there were a necessary relationship
between them. That is why it is very important to clarify
that terrorism is something very specific to which a
regime of international law applies, and that it calls
for distinctive remedies that cannot be extrapolated to
other crimes, which are subject to other legal regimes.
Just as the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime — the Palermo
Convention — and its Protocols constitute the legal
framework to combat transnational organized crime,
United Nations international conventions to combat
terrorism specify the acts categorized as terrorist. Even
though the international community has not been able
to reach a universally agreed definition of terrorism, it
is nonetheless possible to determine which are the acts
condemned by the international community.
Argentina has twice experienced international
terrorism, driven by fanaticism and destruction. There
was an attack against the embassy of Israel in 1992,
and against the Asociación Mutual Israelita Argentina
in 1994. As the Security Council heard last September
from the President of Argentina:
“My country, the Argentine Republic, and the
United States of America are the only two countries
on the American continent to have been the object
of savage terrorist attacks.” (S/PV.7272, p. 8)
We are convinced that terrorism must be fought
within the framework of the rule of law and of
respect for fundamental guarantees. We abhor the
idea that human rights violations are acceptable in
certain circumstances. We also call for the measures
adopted by States to combat terrorism to fully respect

S/PV.7351

international law, including in particular international
human rights law, international humanitarian law
and refugee law. Such measures must also respect the
purposes and principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, such as sovereignty, territorial integrity, the
political independence of States and the principle of
non-intervention in internal affairs.
I wish to express our concern at the threats posed
to religious and ethnic minorities with the advance
of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
with the consequent harmful effects for regional
and international peace, security and stability. The
expansion and consolidation of the Islamic State and
the spread of sectarian violence are the result of the
militarization of the prolonged and uncontrolled
conflict in Syria, which has its roots in the inability
and unwillingness of local, regional and international
players to reconcile their differences through peaceful
means, as well as in the massive flow of arms to the
parties. Argentina has always called in the strongest
terms to the international community to refrain from
fuelling the conflict in Syria by providing military
equipment.
Argentina has also denounced again and again
the double standard of those countries that tailor their
actions and statements to their own interests and
geopolitical considerations. We will always warn about
the risks that such actions pose for peaceful coexistence
among nations by subordinating the accepted rules
of international law, which thus are held hostage to
specific objectives according to circumstances.
We are also deeply concerned by the advance of
terrorist groups in Africa, which hampers the efforts
of the States of the continent to promote the economic
and social development of their peoples. We firmly
condemn each and every one of the repeated attacks
in African countries, including those targeting United
Nations offices. In Africa, as elsewhere, cooperation
and coordination on the part of the international
community are required in order to address the terrorist
threat.
The fight against terrorism requires, first of
all, the firm commitment of every State to combat
terrorist acts at the national level and not to deliver
assistance to the perpetrators of or participants in
terrorist-related activities, and to strengthen national
legislation, focusing on the prosecution or extradition of
perpetrators. Secondly, we must tackle the phenomenon
at its roots, especially the conditions of marginalization

14-7069015/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

19/12/2014

and political exclusion, and promote the economic and
social development of peoples.

enable us to deal successfully with its multi-faceted
manifestations.

Argentina is convinced that the United Nations, as
the cornerstone of the multilateral system, must be the
Organization that leads the actions of States to fight
against terrorism. While we value the contribution that
can be made by various other forums and initiatives,
it is this Organization that ensures the legitimacy of
decisions reflected in standards, guidelines or good
practices. We are convinced that multilateral action
through the United Nations pursuant to the principles
of the Organization will allow us to tackle the threat
of terrorism with full respect for international law,
international human rights humanitarian law and
international humanitarian law, and thus achieve a
safer world for all.

The delegation of Chile would like to join those
who have once again expressed their condolences to
Pakistan in the wake of the horrific terrorist attack
in Peshawar. The victims chosen for the attack,
and the barbarism with which it was carried out,
reflect the extremes that such terrorist logic can lead
to. It is also a massive wake-up call telling us all to
respond effectively — I repeat, effectively — to the
terrible threat that looms over all of us, because an
attack of this nature is indeed an attack on the entire
international community. In that context, my country
greatly appreciates the thorough report on the issue
under discussion today, expressed in the concept note
distributed by the presidency (S/2014/869, annex).
Chile agrees with its main elements, in particular the
proposal to initiate a strategic review of the existing
tools in order to shrink the strategic space that crossborder crime provides to terrorist groups.

In less than two weeks, Argentina will end its
current term as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. Over the past two years, our delegation, headed
by Ambassador María Cristina Perceval, has worked
to contribute to the realization of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, which also inform my
country’s foreign policy. They are also those established
by the President of Argentina, Ms. Cristina Fernández
de Kirchner, in her speech to the General Assembly
at its sixty-seventh session in September 2012 (see
A/67/PV.7), in which she emphasized that what we are
striving for is a genuine peace, which is built on truth,
justice and equality. She went on to assert that peace is
impossible where countries are not treated equally and
also that we have a clear mission to defend peace and
human rights, whatever the country in which they are
threatened.
In that context, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation, as well as the
members of the Security Council for the years 2013 and
2014, for the opportunity to work on our agreements
and differences in order to shoulder our shared
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Labbé (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to thank Chad, as current President of the Security
Council, and you, Sir, for taking the initiative to
convene this important debate on threats to peace and
security: terrorism and cross-border crime. Both of
the latter are threats to world peace and stability that
make it essential that we agree on a strategy that can

16/62

Such interaction between terrorism and organized
crime, on various levels, for which we have irrefutable
evidence, directly undermines our ability to build a
safe world. While there is no single consensus on a
definition of what constitutes terrorism, we know that
we are talking about is an unacceptable and illegitimate
political instrument. Some terrorist groups use terms
such as “armies”, “resistance fronts” or “political
parties” in an effort to gain some legitimacy in achieving
their ends. However, it is the means they use in their
fight that are reprehensible and that should be fought
with all possible energy and force. Time and time again
in the discussion of this issue, Chile has pointed out
that there can be no justification for terrorist acts.
The role of the United Nations in combating
these phenomena is fundamental, and it is essential
that we reinforce our existing arsenal through
coherent and systematic implementation of the
international instruments designed to fight terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The weakening of
States’ authority and capacity through the action of
terrorist groups, armed with the proceeds of crossborder organized crime, not only affects the crossborder reality of a State and its citizens, it also alters
the geometry of international security, including, of
course, United Nations action, conducted through
peacekeeping and security operations.
As a result, international coordination and
cooperation to fight terrorist financing associated
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

with money-laundering by criminal organizations
continue to be one of the most significant challenges
the international community has faced in this decade.
In that regard, we also consider it relevant to take into
consideration best practices and lessons learned from
the work of the Council’s sanctions committees. Their
efforts aimed at controlling the illicit trade in arms and
natural resources are an effective tool for identifying
cross-border crime and terrorism’s main sources of
access and financing.
Chile is aware of the various positions that exist
on the links between organized crime and terrorism.
While acknowledging that not all organized crime
groups are terrorists and not all terrorists are organized
crime groups, it must nonetheless be admitted that
many terrorist groups operate and are financed
through illegal activities such as extortion, the use
and recruitment of children, the illicit smuggling of
migrants and trafficking of humans, kidnapping, arms
and drug trafficking, mineral smuggling, fishing and
other illegal ways of exploiting natural resources.
Furthermore, few terrorist groups can operate without
conducting activities linked to organized crime. That
is why the involvement of terrorist groups in organized
criminal activity for the purpose of financing offers a
connection that should be analysed in depth both from
an operational and a strategic viewpoint.
Terrorism and transnational criminal organizations
are capable of undermining societies and the
Governments and security of their citizens, including
the most vulnerable. In our opinion, preventing
and suppressing such activities is a priority, but
categorizing such crimes cannot be the only way to
address the phenomenon. Once again, we would like
to emphasize that some of the most effective tools we
have for fighting them are education, the elimination of
inequality, inclusive development and continued work
with society’s most marginalized groups.
Given the complex interaction of these two
phenomena, and with special attention to their potential
effect on civil society, States and the international
system, the strategic review that Chad has proposed
will enable us to better understand the links between
them and help us to better establish our capacities for
their prevention and eradication. For that reason, Chile
is very grateful to Chad.
Chile will continue to support the fight against
terrorism and cross-border crime, out of the conviction

S/PV.7351

that we are thereby contributing to the dignity, peace,
stability and inclusive development of our societies.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing and personally
presiding over today’s important debate. The debate
comes at the right time, as the growing nexus between
terrorism and transnational organized crime calls for
the urgent attention of the international community. My
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 2195
(2014), the first stand-alone Security Council resolution
to address this multifaceted issue.
Terrorism and transnational organized crime have
long been sources of concern for the international
community. While Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups
threaten international peace and security through
violence, transnational crime presents mounting
challenges to stability, particularly in Africa, hampering
socioeconomic
development
and
jeopardizing
peacebuilding efforts. What is even worse is the
combined threats from terrorism and transnational
organized crime as seen in the cases of transnational
crimes providing terrorists with financial and other
resources to fund their terrorist activities.
Against such a troubling backdrop, it is high time
for the international community to step up its efforts to
sever the vicious links between the two scourges and
address them in a holistic manner. First, illicit trade
and criminal activities benefitting terrorists should be
effectively disrupted. We welcome the focused approach
taken in the resolution to address terrorist financing.
We take note of recent Council actions, including
resolution 2170 (2014) and the presidential statement on
terrorism (S/PRST/2014/23). At the level of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), deliberations are ongoing with a view
to adopting concrete recommendations to deal with
ISIL and Al-Nusra Front financing. However, those
efforts can be meaningful only when implemented. In
the light of that, we call for the full implementation
of such measures and other relevant United Nations
conventions to prevent and combat terrorist financing
through transnational crimes.
Secondly, we must close the structural loopholes
that terrorists are exploiting. The existence of illicit
markets allows terrorists to translate their criminal
activities into profits. Weak governance, porous borders
and rampant smuggling all enable this increasingly

14-7069017/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

dangerous union. We should step up our efforts to
strengthen legal and institutional capacity, particularly
vis-à-vis border and customs control.
While the primary responsibility lies with each
national Government, the problem cannot be tackled
by any one country alone. In that regard, we support
ongoing regional initiatives such as the Regional Action
Plan on illicit drug trafficking, related organized
crime and drug abuse in West Africa of the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union’s Plan of Action on Drug Control. We also call
for enhanced coordination among the relevant United
Nations entities, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, to tackle these challenges.
Thirdly, we have to address the structural conditions
that are conducive to criminal activity and terrorism.
Countries grappling with poverty and conflict are more
susceptible to compounding threats from transnational
organized crime and terrorism. This nexus further
complicates their socioeconomic development and
conflict resolution efforts. Poverty eradication and
sustainable development are essential in that regard.
The Republic of Korea believes that the foregoing
efforts should be undertaken by the entire international
community to defeat terrorism and transnational
crime. We will continue to do our part in that common
endeavour.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Téte António for their
briefings. I would also welcome Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad, for
his initiative in convening today’s open debate and for
presiding over it. I thank him warmly and congratulate
him more broadly for Chad’s excellent presidency of
the Security Council this month.
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
Terrorism is a global scourge that affects all
States. This phenomenon is even more worrying
when it develops in fragile States or States that are
under reconstruction. That is why it is particularly
useful for the Council, upon Chad’s initiative, to have
an opportunity to address the issue of terrorism and
organized crime in Africa.
The terrorist threat is increasingly present on the
African continent. In the Maghreb and the Sahel, the

18/62

19/12/2014

Secretary-General states in his report (S/2014/397),
terrorist attacks increased by 60 per cent in 2013 as
compared to 2012. Elsewhere in East Africa, in Kenya,
the terrible attack at Westgate Shopping Centre in
September 2013 is still fresh in our memories.
The growth of organized crime is in itself a threat
to the stability of States. It is also a breeding ground
for terrorist movements, which now tend to thrive on
all types of trafficking — in charcoal by Al-Shabaab in
Somalia, in human beings and drugs in West Africa, in
arms in Libya — as well as theft and looting that enable
these groups to fund themselves, or, as we were shocked
to see again this week, kidnappings by the Boko Haram
sect in Nigeria. These are among the many situations
where the links between terrorism and organized crime
combine to give birth to a real gangrene for African
States and the world.
The international community must do everything
possible to prevent some African countries falling
into the hands of terrorists or become for them a
sanctuary. France has taken on all its responsibilities
by intervening in Mali to prevent the progression of
terrorists who threatened Bamako. Today, my country
has a new strategy for the Sahelo-Saharan zone
designed to address all at once the issues of security,
development and governance. This strategy covers
cooperation with six countries — Senegal, Mauritania,
Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger and Chad — and it
aims in particular to strengthen the capacity of States
to give them the means to fight against terrorism and
large-scale trafficking, but also against radicalization
and to facilitate regional cooperation.
The French Sahelo-Saharan strategy represents
more than €400 million of bilateral development
assistance each year. In addition, the French military
Operation Barkhane, launched in 2014 at the request of
five countries of the Sahel, represents the contribution
of France to the fight against terrorism and the
improvement of security in the Sahel, with a view
in particular to stemming the movement of terrorist
groups in the area.
But it is crucial that African responses to the various
crises be found. Efforts at the regional and subregional
level should continue. We welcome, in that regard, the
holding of the Dakar International Forum on Peace
and Security in Africa, which ended on 16 December
and which aimed to bring together stakeholders in the
security sector. We also welcome the work carried out
by Mr. Buyoya and his team.
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

The diversity of the initiatives on Sahel — the United
Nations strategy or those of the African Union and the
European Union — is a sign of a strong mobilization on
the part of the international community. I also welcome
the establishment of the Group of Five Sahel, aimed at
coordinating the efforts of key countries. Indeed, we
must ensure the proper coordination of these initiatives.
At the United Nations, we welcome the ongoing
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, led by Jean-Paul Laborde, on the issue of
borders in the Sahel, and the Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism initiative, led by the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. The work
undertaken by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime is also of great importance and must continue.
All these efforts are moving in the right direction,
but they must be pursued so as to lead to concrete
projects in all areas. Capacity-building should be a
priority for the United Nations. The United Nations is
also called on to help States of the region and African
organizations to strengthen their cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. We support the operationalization of
such initiatives in the context of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
Resolution 2195 (2014), which we have adopted
today, will give us a better overview of the ongoing
United Nations efforts to address the issue of the
support afforded by organized crime to terrorism and,
on that basis, to strengthen the Organization’s reponse
to that challenge. My country has chosen to co-sponsor
the text. In general, France will continue to provide
national support in the European framework and in
the Security Council for initiatives to assist African
countries in the fight against terrorism and organized
crime.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Chadian initiative to convene today’s
open debate on terrorism and cross-border crime. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing
and Ambassador António for his statement on behalf of
the African Union.
Frequent terrorist attacks have taken place recently
in Asia, Africa, Europe, the Americas and Oceania,
resulting in numerous casualties and focusing the
attention of the international community. The broad
geographic spread of terrorist attacks, the brutality of
the terrorists, the incitement and recruitment practised
by terrorist organizations on the Internet and social
media, and their convergence with cross-border crime

S/PV.7351

are posing a grave and real threat to international
peace and security. Against such a grim backdrop, the
international community should cooperate more closely
in the fight against terrorism, strengthen exchanges
of information and intelligence, share successful
experiences, enhance capacity-building and conduct
coordinated activities with a view to effectively
fighting terrorism and maintaining international peace
and security together. In that respect, I wish to stress
the following points.
First, in order to effectively deter terrorism, the
international community should adhere to a common
standard. Double standards and selectivity should not
be used in the fight against terrorism. We must also
take care not to link terrorism with any particular ethnic
group or religion. Counter-terrorism activities should
abide by the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations and respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned. The lead role of the United Nations and
the Security Council should be brought into fullplay.
Pursant to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and relevant Security Council resolutions,
all countries should adopt effective measures to cut
the access of terrorist organizations to people, funds,
materials and channels for incitement and propaganda,
and adopt integrated measures to eradicate the breeding
grounds of terrorism.
Secondly, heightened attention must be accorded
to Africa, which is at the forefront of the international
fight against terrorism. Due to a multitude of historical
and contemporary factors, some regions of Africa
are experiencing turbulent political and security
circumstances. Terrorists are exploiting the situation to
infiltrate African countries, thereby posing a serious
threat to regional peace, security and stability and
constraining economic and social development in
the continent. Counter-terrorism work in Africa is an
important component of the global counter-terrorism
effort. The international community should prioritize
it and actively help African countries and regional
and subregional organizations to fight terrorism and
maintain peace and security on the continent. The
international community should effectively help
African countries in strengthening their counterterrorism capacities and provide assistance without
political conditions. The United Nations should make it
a priority to help African countries in enhancing their
counter-terrorism capacities in the implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Counter-

14-7069019/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

terrorism mechanisms, such as the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, should provide
African countries with more assistance.
Thirdly, counter-terrorism activities should be
well targeted. In some regions, especially in Africa,
terrorism and cross-border criminal organizations are
closely linked to one another. Terrorist organizations
finance their activities by trafficking in arms and
drugs and engaging in illicit trade, endangering the
sovereignty of the countries concerned and intensifying
the spill-over effect of their domestic conflicts, thereby
threatening regional security and stability. The regions
concerned should engage their counter-terrorism
activities in fighting terrorism and cross-border crime
simultaneously with a view to severing the link between
them. The international community should assist the
countries involved, particularly in Africa, in building
their border control, customs and counter-narcotics
capacities.
United Nations special political missions to the
countries concerned should raise awareness of these
new features of counter-terrorism efforts, actively
develop programmes of work, and play a useful
coordinating role. The international community should
closely follow the cross-border criminal activities
of terrorist organizations by using information and
communications technologies such as the Internet, and
take measures to prevent and combat such activities.
Like other countries, China has been a victim of
terrorism. We understand the threat posed by terrorism
to certain countries, especially in Africa. China supports
the ability of African countries to independently choose
the paths of their own development that suit their
national situations. China supports African solutions,
led by Africans, to African problems. China supports
African countries in their counter-terrorism efforts.
China is a party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime. China actively
works to fulfil its obligations under the Convention
through legislation, law enforcement and judicial
measures, and promotes international cooperation in
that regard. China will continue to conduct bilateral
and multilateral exchanges and cooperation against
terrorism and cross-border crime with the international
community, especially African countries. China
will do its utmost to provide material assistance and
capacity-building to relevant countries with a view to

20/62

19/12/2014

advancing their efforts to fight international terrorism
and maintain regional and world peace and stability.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Whatever pretexts
terrorists may employ to justify their murderous acts,
there can simply be no justification for what they do.
Terrorism is nothing less but an assault on our very
humanity. Horrific events, like the massacre of school
children in Peshawar three days ago, reinforce the
sense of dramatic urgency for the Council to continue
focusing sharply on and acting with resolve against
threats posed by international terrorism.
In that regard, the initiative of the Chadian
presidency to take forward the Council’s counterterrorism agenda by highlighting the linkages of
terrorism with transnational organized crime is
commendable and highly pertinent, as it provides a
better understanding of how terrorist groups manage
to sustain their activities by collaborating with
transnational criminal groups, and sometimes by
mimicking them.
As the concept note (S/2014/869, annex) suggests,
from Afghanistan and Syria to West Africa and the
Sahel, the linkages between terrorism and transnational
crime act as a force multiplier. They strengthen terrorist
groups by generating funding and providing logistical
support, sharing skills and tactics, to such a degree that
that at times the dividing line between them is extremely
blurred. These interrelated security threats not only
take advantage of instability, but are themselves drivers
of conflict. Their combination amplifies the challenges
to broader conflict-prevention and -resolution efforts
and demands a comprehensive and multidimensional
response, as most representatives who spoke before me
have stressed.
Let me focus today on three key areas, the targeting
of which can disrupt those linkages and significantly
diminish terrorists’ ability to sustain their activities.
The firstis countering money-laundering and illicit
financial flows. Various illicit techniques are used to
mask the origins and recipients of funds, as well as
to divert funds to terrorist groups. States’ abilities to
effectively identify and prevent the illicit cross-border
movement of cash, to tackle head-on the emerging
trends and sources of illicit financing, which are often
linked to specific criminal activities, to set adequate
regulations for alternative remittances, and to stem the
abuse of charities and non-profit organizations for the
purpose of terrorist financing is a crucial component of

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

counter-terrorism efforts. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the importance of the full implementation
of the comprehensive international standards set forth
by the Financial Action Task Force, as well as enhanced
engagement with similar regional bodies.
The second key area is countering illicit activities
that are used as a self-sustained means to raise funds.
Terrorist organizations increasingly rely on the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, drug smuggling,
human trafficking for coerced labour and sexual
exploitation, kidnapping for ransom, and illegal
trade in antiquities, ivory, and wildlife, all of which
are typically attributable to transnational criminal
networks. Given the diversity of the activities and the
environments in which they take place, it is important
that law-enforcement measures not be disconnected
from those contexts and that they take into account the
particular routes, commodities and other specificities.
The third area is countering the illicit movement
of terrorists, arms and equipment. Over the past few
years, we have seen unprecedented mobility and flow
of foreign terrorist fighters to theatres of conflict. Their
recruitment strategies and methods seem to evolve
faster than our responses to the threat, and their reach
seems to have no boundaries. On the other hand, the
much-too-easy access to illicit arms and weapons and
the unhindered flow of such weapons in and across
conflict-affected areas suffering from borders that
are poorly protected, if at all, is changing the security
environment and placing civilians under increasingly
higher risk of harm. Effective physical border controls,
information sharing and analytical capability at border
crossings, as well as effective sanctions and armsembargo implementation are required in order to
disrupt such transboundary flows.
We would also like to note that, even if the threats
posed by terrorism and transnational organized crime
are distinct, the means to counter them are often closely
related, be it securing borders, tracking money flows,
disrupting illicit ventures or curbing the movement
of criminals and terrorists. This reinforces the need
for a coordination and coherence in international and
regional efforts to respond to these threats, both within
and between organizations. That applies to the United
Nations system itself, whose entities have developed
vast expertise on dealing with these two phenomena
separately but need to engage more closely and build
on one other’s work, especially with regard to capacitybuilding. The United Nations presence on the ground

S/PV.7351

should be an integral part of these efforts, and the
Council should take that into account when designing
mandates for peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and in the work of country teams.
With regard to disrupting terrorist networks and
undercutting their action base, the One United Nations
principle is as valid as can ever be. Fragmentation
of efforts in a typical silo manner will help neither
counter-terrorism nor conflict resolution, nor ultimately
development efforts on the ground.
Given the scope and nature of the terrorist threat
and existing linkages with the criminal underworld, the
importance of regional approaches cannot be stressed
enough. The African Union-led Regional Cooperation
Initiative, the Nouakchott Process, and the activities of
the Economic Community of West African States are
good examples of regional cooperation in West Africa
and the Sahel. The open debate that took place in the
Council two days ago under the Chadian presidency
(see S/PV.7343) was a good opportunity to reflect on
how the cooperation between the United Nations and its
African regional partners could be further advanced,
including in countering terrorism.
Before I conclude, let me express my delegation’s
hope that resolution 2189 (2014), which was adopted
today and co-sponsored by Lithuania, will make a
tangible contribution towards mobilizing efforts at
all levels to address the phenomenon. In that regard,
we look forward to the Secretary-General’s report
with recommendations of concrete options both for
strengthening Member States’ capabilities, as well as
United Nations activities needed to disrupt the nexus
between terrorism and transnational organized crime,
and to further discussions on this issue.
Finally, Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to
be made later today on behalf of the European Union.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for having convened this debate and for
presiding over it personally. I also thank Mr. Feltman
and Mr. António for their statements today.
Resolution 2195 (2014), adopted today, addresses a
key aspect of the global fight against terrorism. The
financing of terrorism, including that benefiting from
transnational organized crime, allows terrorists to
perpetrate more deadly campaigns of terror. Criminals
may trade in illicit goods, but when terrorists benefit
from such activities, they trade in a more despicable
currency of human lives. Tragically, we see evidence

14-7069021/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

of this every day, including this week, when so many
young Pakistani students were gunned down by
terrorists in Peshawar.
In regions where United Nations peacekeepers are
on the frontline, most notably in Africa, transnational
organized crime also increases the risk and complexity
of their job and undermines efforts towards sustainable
peace.
The United Kingdom welcomes today’s initiative
for three main reasons. First, it is a timely reminder
of the existing obligation on United Nations Member
States to prohibit all forms of terrorist finance. We
have a responsibility to sever the lifelines that support
terrorism. The United Nations has a robust set of
binding counter-terrorism resolutions. On top of longstanding obligations to suppress terrorist finance, we
must work to fully implement recent counter-terrorism
resolutions on kidnap-for-ransom, the foreign terrorist
fighter threat and the need to defund the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I welcome in particular
the emphasis that you placed in your remarks, Sir,
on the need to tackle the way in which terrorism
continues to be financed through kidnapping. We must
also fully implement the sanctions regimes adopted
under resolution 1267 (1999). It is worth restating that
sanctions regimes established by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter place obligations on all
Member States.
Secondly, the evolving nature of the linkages
between terrorism and transnational crime are of grave
concern. It is increasingly evident that groups in many
regions of the world, including ISIL, Al-Shabaab and
Boko Haram, among others, exploit transnational
criminal trafficking groups. In some instances, there is
evidence of a growing list of illicit commodities being
treated. The trafficking of arms, persons, drugs, oil,
artefacts or wildlife offer terrorist groups a major source
of finance. All such sources need to be addressed. That
is why in 2014 we have rightly expanded sanctions
designation criteria in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic to cover wildlife
and wildlife products, and off the coast of Somalia, we
have authorized the interdiction of charcoal trafficking
in order to cut off another illicit finance source. Yet it
is ISIL that offers the most challenging example of this
trend. The profit from oil sales within ISIL-controlled
territory is widely estimated to run to tens of millions
of United States dollars every month. This illegal trade
puts money directly into the hands of terrorists.

22/62

19/12/2014

Thirdly, today’s resolution focuses on the need to
continue to provide capacity-building assistance for all
afflicted countries and regions. Only a comprehensive
and multidisciplinary response to terrorism by Member
States will bring lasting solutions, and that includes
adequate criminal justice, respect for human rights
and international law when prosecuting counterterrorism, and effective border management. The
report we commissioned today can help. It provides
an opportunity to take stock of the relevant counterterrorism tools of the United Nations with a view to
developing a more coordinated, comprehensive and
impactful international response to the problem. There
are excellent United Nations resources to draw on. The
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate is a centre
of analytical expertise, and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force is a centre of capacitybuilding expertise. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime also has a pivotal role to play, and the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre offers a new
source of support to affected Member States. A unified
response is required. We must use all the tools at our
disposal.
I have outlined the United Nations binding
international framework for counter-terrorism, the
urgency of the threat and the need for counter-terrorism
capacity-building. In 2014, the Council has taken steps
to strengthen our response in each of these areas, but
more still needs to be done. Today’s resolution is a
further and welcome step in ensuring that our response
tackles every element of the terrorist scourge.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over this very
important debate, which focuses on the nexus between
terrorism and transnational organized crime. We
express our deep appreciation for the efforts of Chad
in drafting resolution 2195 (2014), which we have just
adopted on the subject.
Terrorism in itself is a very serious threat to
international peace and security — and all the more
so when it is connected to the activities of organized
transnational crime. That undoubtedly further
undermines the stability, security and sovereignty of
affected States, as well as further exposing civilians to
greater violence and increasing the difficulty of finding
solutions or reaching settlements for conflicts. And it
would strengthen the potential for exporting crises
to neighbouring States and extending the length of
conflicts.

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

Terrorist organizations throughout the world,
especially in the Middle East and Africa, have continued
seeking sustainable financial resources that they can
be used to carry out their terrorist activities and to
strengthen their sources of income. In doing so, they
have relied on a number of illicit sources. That requires
all Member States to accord greater importance and
attention to the question of the financing terrorist
organizations and to address more rigorously the
issue of drying up the sources of financing terrorist
organizations.
The fact that terrorist organizations use and
exploit organized transnational criminal activities is
not limited to a particular region. We are now seeing
witness terrorist organizations being engaged in
organized criminal activities in Somalia, Nigeria,
Libya, Yemen, Syria, Iraq, Mali and Afghanistan. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other similar
terrorist organizations in the Middle East constitute a
concrete example before our eyes of how these benefit
from organized crime.
Combating terrorism and organized transnational
criminal activities and the connections between them
requires Member States to carry out a number of wellthought-out measures, primarily developing adequate
criminal justice systems and national legislations as
well as adopting development plans in border areas
in order to prevent recruitment and engagement
in smuggling networks and any cooperation with
terrorists. It is equally important for States to freeze
funds, assets or economic resources belonging to
terrorist organizations without delay. Border-control
activities and border-management measures are the
foundation for any efforts in that regard. It is very
important as well that they should be accompanied by
adequate regional coordination and cooperation and
information-sharing among the relevant authorities at
the regional and international levels, and that they do so
also through INTERPOL, which has a very important
role to play in that context.
In addition, implementing United Nations
sanctions regimes, including bans on financing and
travel, will establish a firm foundation for addressing
this phenomenon. However, sanctions regimes alone
are not enough to fully address and combat the issue,
as it also requires carrying out security and preventive
measures at the national and multilateral levels and
United Nations entities increasing their efforts through
creating and strengthening well-planned partnerships

S/PV.7351

with Member States that would bring us to a stage of
providing the necessary concrete support to States in
the area of capacity-building to enable them to fulfil
their commitments.
Jordan exerts great efforts to monitor and control its
borders and to confront terrorists and criminal activities
of the organizations in Syria and Iraq. In addition to
these organizations’ attempts to infiltrate the borders
and to send terrorist elements to carry out terrorist
activities inside neighbouring countries, we must also
be alert to attempts by the terrorist organizations to
establish smuggling networks throughout the region,
which would have negative ramifications on all States.
Jordan reiterates the calls to other States,
international partners and all United Nations entities
concerned with counter-terrorism and combating
international organized crime to provide the necessary
support to help build the capacities of the countries
combating terrorism and transnational organized crime
in the front lines to enable them to confront this danger,
shoulder the burden and increase their capabilities to
control their borders.
In conclusion, we look forward to the report to be
submitted by the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the efforts carried out by the various United
Nations entities to address the threat of terrorists who
benefit from organized crime in the affected regions,
as well as concrete recommendations and options to
be provided by the United Nations to strengthen the
capacities of States.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of Chad for
its timely initiative to hold today’s meeting on such an
important and urgent issue. We should like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Feltman, and the
Permanent Observer of the African Union, Mr. António,
for their substantive briefings.
I would like to begin by expressing the sincere
condolences to the delegation of countries that have
recently suffered from terrorist acts. The horror and
senseless nature of terrorist acts becomes especially
obvious when children are its victims. This Security
Council meeting is taking place against the backdrop
of those tragic events, highlighting the urgency of
the links between terrorism and transnational crime.
Thus cutting off the channels of financing for terrorist
acts in the Afghan-Pakistan border region would
seriously reduce the capacities of the groups operating

14-7069023/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

in that region, including Tehrik-i-Taliban, which was
responsible for the bloody raid in Peshawar.
The Security Council has frequently drawn
the attention of the international community to the
nexus between international terrorism, transnational
organized crime and the illegal drugs trade. The risk of
financing terrorism from those sources is demonstrated
in the recent report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council’s
Sanctions Committee concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban movement (see S/2014/815), and also in the
report on the typologies research project of the Financial
Action Task Force aimed at identifying and blocking
the illicit funds flowing from the illegal production
of and trade in Afghan narcotics. We must also not
forget such important income sources for terrorists as
the illegal trade in Syrian and Iraqi oil. With regard
to the African continent, on which today’s discussion
has focused, suppressing the illegal exploitation by
terrorists of other natural resources, including gold and
other precious metals and stones, remains of particular
urgency.
Threats of terrorism, transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking can be effectively dealt with
only through the actions of the whole international
community under the leadership of the United Nations.
It is also important to further strengthen the treaty and
legal basis for international cooperation in countering
those threats.
With regard to the African region, of particular
importance is technical cooperation aimed at capacitybuilding for law enforcement forces and improving
border security. We welcome the active efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) in coordinating assistance to African and other
States. The support for designing real and effective
measures to prevent threats related to the financing of
terrorism through the proceeds of crime is particularly
important. We support the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) with the
African Union and other regional structures, through
cooperation in the anti-criminal sphere.
We welcome the Security Council’s adoption
today of resolution 2195 (2014), aimed at drawing
the international community’s attention to the need
to comprehensively combat financing for terrorism
through various types of criminal activity and the
illegal drug trade. The resolution contains measures
to strengthen and further improve the work of United
24/62

19/12/2014

Nations agencies dealing in counter-terrorism and
anti-crime. We look forward to the Secretary-General
report on the efforts of various United Nations entities
in response to the threats of fuelling terrorism from the
proceeds of criminal activity on the basis of information
provided by UNODC, CTED, the Monitoring Team and
other specialized United Nations entities+.
Today’s resolution particularly emphasizes the role
of public-private partnership. Indeed, at the national
level, it is important to create conditions for establishing
full cooperation between State and business entities in
combating transnational organized crime, corruption
and terrorism. We hope that the adoption of today’s
resolution will be followed up results-oriented measures
by States and United Nations specialized agencies the
implementation of which will lead to cutting the links
between terrorism and transnational crime.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): The links between
terrorism and transnational crime and the dramatic
impact they have on contemporary conflict is a subject
that this Council has not adequately addressed before.
I therefore thank you, Mr. President, personally for
being here and for Chad’s leadership in convening this
debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing and Ambassador Téte António for his
statement.
All speakers today have described how terrorist
groups and criminal networks each pose an increasing
threat to peace, security, development and growth.
Combined, the consequences are greater and more
complex. No region is immune. The effects are
particularly manifest in countries already affected by
conflicts, where the consequences of criminal activity
often exacerbate their very causes. Weak institutions are
corroded further, corruption is more firmly entrenched,
legitimate economic opportunities decline and become
less appealing, development is hindered, and conflicts
are prolonged.
The adoption of today’s resolution 2195 (2014)
is an important advance. The report requested of the
Secretary-General should survey the links between
terrorism and transnational crime and should better
position the United Nations system to disrupt the ability
of terrorists to establish and benefit from those links.
The report should define how the Council can play a
more effective role
In the meantime, the Council can sharpen two of
its core tools. Both are important for the report we

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

have mandated from the Secretary-General and also
from the Secretary-General’s independent review of
peacekeeping operations.
The first is United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions. Eight of the eleven countries
facing the highest threat from Al-Qaida-affiliated
groups currently host United Nations missions. And
organized crime is a major threat in almost every
theatre in which United Nations missions are present.
In addressing the threat, we need to get more serious
about the role of those operations. We cannot ignore the
elephant in the room, as a recent International Peace
Institute report described it.
This starts with strengthening mandates in relation
to transnational organized crime. Missions also need
more tools and training to gather information on and
analyse the threat to help host States disrupt illicit
activities. United Nations police components can play
an important role in building the capacities of hostState law enforcement in that area, as highlighted in
Resolution 2185 (2014), on policing, which the Council
adopted last month. Skills in areas like criminal
investigations, analysis and financial crime are relevant
to both transnational crime and terrorism.
The United Nations should deploy more serious
crime support units, such as the model proposed in
the Central African Republic, and the Standing Police
Capacity needs more expertise in this area. But the
support from United Nations missions also needs to
extend to judicial systems. Actual prosecutions and
convictions are one of the most important tools in the
fight. Strengthening border management is potentially
the most challenging task. The Council needs to consider
where the United Nations can play a more effective
role — drawing on modern technologies, providing
capacity-building of border agencies, supporting border
community engagement programmes and facilitating
regional initiatives.
Secondly, one of the most effective tools at the
Council’s disposal — sanctions — should continue
to be finely honed to deny terrorist groups access
to resources and sanctuary and, most importantly,
to starve them of funds. As Chair of the Council’s
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee for the past two years, I
have consistently tried to highlight that any individuals
who materially support the actions of a person or entity
on the Al-Qaida sanctions list are themselves eligible
to be included on the list and subject to the sanctions.
That includes organized criminal groups, even if

S/PV.7351

they have no ideological connection to Al-Qaida. The
Council reinforced that point when it identified the
key sources of financing for Islamic State for Iraq
and the Levant-Daesh in its 19 November presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/23), which Australia brought
to the Council. States need to bring those facilitators to
the Council’s attention.
And, as today’s resolution 2195 (2014) reaffirms,
sanctions self-evidently need to be implemented if they
are to have any effect. The Council and the United
Nations system must deliver more support to key States
to ensure they have the technical capacity to implement
the sanctions measures. Member States are begging
for such assistance. And as Ambassador António has
said this morning, that is especially important for
neighbouring States when an arms embargo and a peace
operation are being set up. Only then will we effectively
constrain the ability of terrorists and spoilers to procure
funds, arms and recruits.
It is also essential that the Council continue to
take more innovative steps to enforce the sanctions
measures where violations are acute. We have done that
in Somalia, as others have mentioned, by mandating
maritime interdiction of weapons and charcoal.
Charcoal alone has been giving Al-Shabab a financial
lifeline to the tune of $80 million annually.
There is also a great deal that Member States can
do. They can ratify and implement the key international
treaties on terrorism and transnational organized crime
to provide a stronger platform for cooperation; better
align responses to the nature and scale of the threats by
making more effective use of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) transnational crime
threat assessments; and build technical capacity in
law enforcement, border controls and criminal justice.
We would add to that capacity in following the money.
Going after the proceeds of crime through the use of
anti-money-laundering tools, financial intelligence,
asset freezes and seizures can be as effective in
reducing the incentives of criminal activity as going
after the criminals themselves.
Finally, stronger bilateral and regional partnerships
are
fundamental.
Strengthening
intraregional
cooperation builds trust, facilitates information
exchange, enhances capacities and eliminates safe
havens for transnational crime. We welcome advances
in African regional networks that we have been briefed
on today. We have seen this work in our own region,
the Pacific, with the 18 Transnational Crime Units

14-7069025/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

that make up the Pacific Transnational Crime Network
having worked successfully to disrupt illicit drug,
firearms and wildlife trafficking throughout the region.
As the UNODC has often said, it takes a network to
defeat a network. We must strengthen our networks, use
the tools we have to maximum effect and above all keep
pace with the rapidly changing nature of the threat.
To conclude, it is today axiomatic that terrorism
and transnational crime are increasingly linked. It is
imperative we understand that reality and calibrate
our responses accordingly. This must be an ever-more
crucial dimension of the Council’s role in maintaining
international peace and security. We again thank Chad
for the initiative in bringing this to us today.
Mr. Al-Dairi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased
to see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over this important
meeting today, as a brother and colleague representing a
brotherly country that is very dear to us and with which
we enjoy good-neighbourly relations. We thank you for
organizing this meeting and for having invited me to
participate. I am sure that resolution 2195 (2014), just
adopted by the Security Council, will enhance the joint
work being done at the international and regional levels
to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.
I pay tribute to the ministers present at this meeting:
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Chad, Nigeria and
Luxembourg. I would also like to thank the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union, for
their excellent briefings.
I wished to participate in this meeting because the
subject under consideration is one of the priorities of
the Libyan Government at this time. Indeed, Libya is
experiencing a moment of unprecedented instability.
The new Libyan army is combatting terrorist groups.
In cooperation with neighbouring countries, we are
seeking to control our borders in order to prevent
infiltration by terrorists and foreign terrorist fighters
and to prevent transnational crime.
Throughout its history, Libya has been the doorway
from Africa to the Mediterranean and Europe. Today
that is again the case, as evidenced by the extensive
legitimate and illegitimate activities and the movements
of various elements and individuals within our country
for various reasons, including tribal issues and the
presence of foreign individuals. Furthermore, Libya
attracts those who wish to improve their economic
situation and who are determined to emigrate to
Europe, even if they need to employ illegitimate means
26/62

19/12/2014

to do so. Therefore, Libya is an important hub in which
to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime
in North Africa and the Sahel.
In recent months, the challenges that face the
legitimate Libyan authorities have become quite clear.
Indeed, terrorist groups loyal to Al-Qaida control
entire Libyan towns and announce to the entire
world that they support Daesh in Syria and Iraq. The
most recent confrontations between the Libyan army
and those terrorist groups have shown that the latter
do, unfortunately, include hundreds of Libyans and
non-Libyans. In particular, they harbour citizens of
neighbouring countries among their ranks.
We assert that the terrorism in Libya is international
in nature. That international terrorism has spread to
Syria and other countries and seeks to spread further
into the Middle East, North Africa and the Sahel. An
attack was carried out by militia on 13 December in the
oil region in the centre of our country; the groups that
carried it out seek to transfer control of those areas into
terrorist hands so that they will control entire swathes
of the territory in central Libya and the Sahel.
There is a close relationship between terrorism
and other transnational crime, such as trafficking in
weapons, drugs and oil, money-laundering and human
trafficking. Therefore, it is important to enhance
international, regional and subregional cooperation
and cooperation with neighbouring countries in border
control and to put in place coordination and information
exchange mechanisms that can allow us to pursue
criminals and prosecute them. Libya understands the
importance of cooperation among countries of the
region in this area and hosted a ministerial meeting on
border control. That produced the Tripoli action plan
on regional cooperation and border control, which was
adopted by the ministerial regional council, held on
11 and 12 March 2012. Despite the limited resources
and capacities of the Libyan army at this stage, we were
able to agree upon a certain number of measures to
control our borders with all our neighbouring countries.
Despite that fact, foreign fighters unfortunately
continue to join the ranks of terrorist groups, and
weapons continue to enter and leave Libya. That is
beyond the control of the Libyan Government, given
the lack of our resources to monitor our lengthy
borders in uninhabited desert areas. We need to work
on international cooperation among all States that
have pledged to join the international campaign to
combat terrorism and with neighbouring countries
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

who are experiencing this scourge. This international
effort must include the provision of weapons to the
Government and efforts to dry up sources of funding
for terrorism.
The situation is growing increasingly dangerous and
grave. The statement issued on Tuesday, 16 December,
by the House of Representatives, following upon its
statement of 11 November, asserted its support for the
political efforts being made by United Nations Special
Representative Bernardino Leon in the wake of the
13 December attacks, which were even worse than those
undertaken last month by the same terrorist group. The
statement made the following points.
First, the operations undertaken by certain Libyan
groups in the name of the so-called Libyan National
Council reflect the use of violence to achieve the
political aims of groups acting outside the framework
of national legitimacy. Secondly, there is a clear link
between the Libyan National Council for Relief and
Support, Ansar al-Sharia and other Libyan groups.
Ansar al-Sharia was declared a terrorist group by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on 19 November. The
actions of Libyan people and Government, alongside
other entities opposed to the extremists groups that
continue to impose bloodshed and destruction on the
country, should enjoy the support of the international
community. Thirdly, the statement called on the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, to oppose all trafficking in oil, which
constitutes an act of aggression not only against the
Libyan people, but also against the peace and security
of neighbouring countries and the international
community as a whole.
In conclusion, Libya is encountering serious
challenges and threats, which it is meeting together
with other States of the region. Without strong support,
we would be unable to combat and defeat terrorism and
the country would soon become a cancerous tumor. I
therefore call on the Council to take our situation into
account by providing the necessary assistance to the
legitimate Libyan authorities in extending their control
over their borders and territory.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): Let me begin by thanking you,
Sir, for organizing this debate on the theme “Threats to
international peace and security: terrorism and crossborder crime”. I also thank the Under-Secretary General

S/PV.7351

for Political Affairs and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union for their very useful briefings. I will
avail myself of this opportunity to also compliment
your delegation for the very comprehensive concept
note that has been prepared (S/2014/869, annex).
India has been a victim of terrorism for over two and
a half decades. In our view, which we share with most
members of the international community, there can be no
reason or motivation that can possibly justify terrorism.
Terrorism is the most heinous of crimes, for which the
international community can only have a policy of zero
tolerance. The fact that terrorism is an international
problem that can only be tackled collectively is
something that is most clearly known to all of us who
have suffered it most. Terrorism is an international
phenomenon; it is international in its organization and
international in its effects. International solidarity is
required to meet an international threat. Countries that
have been preyed upon by a global network of terrorism
simply cannot cope with the challenge alone.
Every terrorist organization — be it Daesh,
Al-Shabaab, Lashkar-e-Toiba or Al-Qaida — has an
ideological basis that contradicts the basic tenets of
humanity. Ideology alone, however, is not enough to
sustain terrorists. They need sustained financing and
space to operate. These are, unfortunately, provided
to them. The concept note rightly draws attention
to the fact that financing is often supplemented by
illegal resources generated through drug trafficking,
piracy, kidnapping for ransom, extortion, and so on.
Apart from generating resources, these activities also
create conditions for the growth and proliferation of
terrorist networks. The revenue generated from poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan has more often than not
found its way to the Taliban and other terrorist network
in that country.
The listing of a terrorist organization is supposed
to lead to travel bans, the freezing of assets and an arms
embargo — in other words, cutting off the lifeline that
sustains terrorism. This, unfortunately, does not always
happen. Lashkar-e-Toiba was able to orchestrate an
attack on the Indian Consulate in Herat, Afghanistan, in
May. It is a listed organization. Its role in the attack has
been documented in the latest report of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Monitoring Team. Lashkar-e-Toiba
obviously does not live on love and fresh air. It has
more than adequate funding. Regrettably, there seems
to be little that the Council’s sanction committees
can do about such open and brazen violations of the

14-7069027/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

sanctions regime. This is an area that would benefit
from consideration by the Council.
The concept note mentions the strategic impact
of terrorism and cross-border crime. It very correctly
makes a point that cross-border crimes weaken the
State, including its military and police capabilities.
Examples from Somalia and Mali, where cross-border
crimes facilitate terrorism and make terrorist groups
even more formidable than the State, are indeed apt. We
also agree with the assessment that there is potential
for the Council to explore tools that would degrade the
ability of terrorist groups to take advantage of crossborder crimes. Given the gravity and universality
of the problem, we would urge open and complete
consultation with Member States that are not members
of the Council.
I take this opportunity to also draw attention to
the fact that there is unfinished business in the General
Assembly as well. Leaders, at the 2005 World Summit,
decided that expeditious action would be taken to
finalize the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism. That, however, has not happened. The price
that we pay for procrastination is in human lives. That
should not be allowed to continue. Terrorism takes
away the foremost of human rights — the right to life.
It is truly a crime against humanity.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Both terrorism
and cross-border crime continue to constitute a serious
threat to international peace and stability. The planet
is riddled with criminal markets and channels for
trafficking in drugs, arms, hazardous materials,
including materials with nuclear use, human beings,
donor organs and others. The threat undermines
economies at all levels, corrupts authorities, fuels
conflicts, as well as aggravates drug addiction, sexual
exploitation and environmental damages. Unfortunately,
this scourge is also capable of undermining the rule
of law and good governance, which are so crucial for
sustainable development.
A phenomenon that is growing at an alarming rate
is the close nexus between transnational terrorists and
criminals who collaborate and share tactics, benefiting
from this interaction. The result is bolstered capabilities,
enhanced organizational infrastructure, improved
access to resources and expanded geographical reach.
One of the most dangerous and challenging threats

28/62

19/12/2014

is the ideological influence and spiritual rhetoric of
terrorists on the young generation through information
technology and the Internet, as recent examples indicate
that terrorist and transnational criminal groups may
evolve, converge, transform or otherwise alter their
ideological motivations to recruit new members and
justify their acts and crimes.
The overwhelming extent and nature of
criminal-terrorist relationships, which have a direct
impact on the national security of individual countries,
as well as global security, are a cause of concern to my
country also. The potential convergence of criminal
and terrorist actors, skills, resources and violent tactics
can have devastating consequences in and across
regions. Globalization has extended the transnational
reach of terrorist and criminal groups. The nature
and activities of terrorist organizations, merged with
transnational organized crime, are manifested as
nuclear proliferation. We are aware of the potential
for criminal service providers to play an important
role in proliferating nuclear-applicable materials and
facilitating terrorism.
All these threats and challenges demand longterm coordinated actions by all Member States and
other stakeholders through a comprehensive approach
and cooperation at the national, regional and global
levels. Education, human rights, social protection,
economic development, the promotion of tolerance and
non-discrimination are also significant and cannot be
overestimated as they are crucial components of life
betterment, particularly for the young generation.
An important role should be played by regional
and subregional organizations. Kazakhstan is a party
to all the major international conventions against
terrorism and supports the practical implementation
and improvement of all anti-terrorist mechanisms.
Furthermore, Kazakhstan is actively engaged in the
practical security measures of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. Under
the auspices of these entities, law enforcement agencies
of Member States fight terrorism and transnational
crime through joint practical actions, international
and regional exercises, the exchange of best practices
and data. We are active members of the Anti-Terrorist
Centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States
and the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as a signatory
to the Shanghai Convention on Combating Terrorism,
Separatism and Extremism, and all the agreements on
combating the illicit trafficking of arms, ammunition
and explosives.
We work closely with the regional office of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Central
Asia and other agencies of the United Nations system.
In September this year we organized a visit of Mr. JeanPaul Laborde, head of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, to Astana, which was yet another
practical step to improve the cooperation of the United
Nations with relevant Kazakhstan law enforcement,
financial and special bodies. We engaged in the Joint
Plan of Action to implement the global strategy in
Central Asia elaborated by several partners — countries
of the region, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, the European Union and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. At the national level, we adopted in 2013 a State
programme for countering religious extremism and
terrorism for the period of 2013-2017 and allocated
$600 million to its implementation.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to being actively involved in combating
terrorism, radical extremism and cross-border crime
along with other responsible members of international
community.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, and welcoming the initiative of
Chad, as President of the Council, for convening this
open debate. I would also like to thank you, Sir, for
your concept note (S/2014/869, annex) and to welcome
the thorough briefings given by Ambassador Téte
António of the African Union and Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman.
This debate is taking place one day after the first
summit of the countries participating in the Nouakchott
Process on the enhancement of security cooperation and
the operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture in the region, co-organized with the
African Union. At yesterday’s summit, representatives
stressed their concern about the worsening of the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism in the
region, as well as the close links that terrorist armed
groups maintain with transnational organized crime,
in particular human trafficking, money laundering,
illicit arms trafficking and drugs. The cross-border
movement of terrorists and organized crime groups

S/PV.7351

has a direct impact on international peace and security,
and the potential to undermine the sovereignty and
territorial integrity and jeopardize domestic and
regional stability and economic development and fuels
conflicts. Terrorism and international organized crime
now feed each other in a despicable race where stability
and peace are the left overs.
The connection between terrorism and crossborder crime is particularly true in the Sahel region
with the threat expanding now into all of West Africa.
For example, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa, an offshoot of Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, is one of the best examples of this trend. The
link between terrorism and transnational organized
crime has become evident as terrorists groups have
increasingly exploited the pre-existing, informal or
formal trade routes, as well as the illicit markets to
generate resources from drugs and armed trafficking.
Many countries and regions in Africa run the risk of
becoming more destabilized and a ground for terrorist
recruitment, training and funding. Furthermore,
terrorist groups may gain control of strategic natural
resources, such as oil, uranium and diamonds in Africa.
The overlapping between terrorism and crossborder crime seriously complicates the Council’s
conflict prevention and resolution efforts and hamper
the United Nations and African Union peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. It increases the risk of
relapse, makes the protection of civilians difficult and
represents a real threat to the safety and security of
mission personnel. Obviously, all of that constitutes a
broad matter for discussions and has been extensively
dealt with by the United Nations, but today we are
focusing on the intersection between terrorism and
cross-border crime and how to make the best use of the
capacity of the United Nations, at the disposal of the
Security Council, in order to counter that threat.
As a critical pillar of national security, border
protection is a matter of national sovereign authority
and the responsibility of the State. Through the better
protection of their borders, States would prevent
the cross-border spillover of illicit trafficking and
movement from inside and outside of their territory, and
thereby contribute to international peace and security.
Mutual cooperation between States in this field can
be achieved only through a coherent and coordinated
approach that respects the basic principles of sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States.

14-7069029/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

Algeria is fully committed to regional cooperation
in fighting the destabilization caused by terrorist and
organized crime groups in the Sahel region. In agreement
with the Sahel countries, Algeria has consistently
advocated an approach that is geared towards targeted
and efficient action, based on ownership of the countries
of the region, aimed at combatting terrorism and crossborder criminality, while assuming responsibility for
security and stability inside their territory in keeping
with their international obligations. Algeria’s extensive
military deployment on its borders is part of the efforts
undertaken by my Government to ensure not only our
national security but also that of all our neighbours.
Within the countries of the Sahel, Algeria has
engaged in a concerted approach through many
cooperation mechanisms, such as the so-called
countries of the field or the working group on the
Sahel, co-chaired by Algeria and Canada under the
Global Counterterrorism Forum, and also with the Joint
Operational General Staff Committee — known by its
French acronym, CEMOC — the Fusion and Liaison
Unit and many other forums. We believe that such
forums make a great contribution to facilitating and
deepening the security cooperation among the countries
concerned through coordination and the strengthening
of border-control measures as well as through training,
equipment and intelligence-sharing.
Algeria’s efforts to combat terrorism and improve
regional and international awareness and cooperation
in that regard predates the manifestation of major acts
of international terrorism. My country has sought from
the beginning to strengthen efforts against terrorism at
the African level and, as a result, many instruments and
initiatives have emerged and today are playing a standard
role in enhancing the effectiveness of the African
response in this field. In that respect, I would recall
the establishment of the African Police Cooperation
Organization (AFRIPOL), adopted last June and aimed
at enhancing inter-State police cooperation so as to
address the various challenges related to transnational
crime. AFRIPOL should be fully operational next year.
Among the other initiatives to be pursued in
support of its member States, the African Union
called in a communiqué issued on 2 September for the
holding of a high-level meeting of member States on
the issue of the financing of terrorism, with a view to
identifying practical measures to address this problem
more effectively. My country has offered to host such a
high-level meeting.

30/62

19/12/2014

It is also worth noting the important work done
by the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, based in Algiers, which has made a crucial
contribution, inter alia, to preparing an African draft
model law to combat terrorism. The Centre is an
important partner of the United Nations entities in
charge of the fight against terrorism, including the
strengthening of African countries’ national capacities
and in coordinating and implementing subregional and
regional projects.
Today the vast majority of United Nations peace
operations are deployed in situations of domestic
political crisis, complicated by difficult humanitarian
and socioeconomic circumstances and exacerbated by
the presence of terrorist organizations that are prepared
to take advantage of any institutional vacuum or default.
Under this undesirable scenario, peaceful States could
become failed States.
The Secretary-General has noted in his report on
the progress made in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, there has
been little counter-terrorism expertise available to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions that operate in areas where terrorism
is often a core challenge, such as in the Sahel, and
asked Member States, when reviewing the Strategy,
to consider how they might provide expertise as part
of their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.
Accordingly, we believe that an overall assessment
of the United Nations must be addressed by the General
Assembly and the relevant United Nations bodies that
deal with the corresponding cross-cutting issues in a
holistic manner. In that regard, my country is ready
to cooperate and address this issue in its broader
framework within the General Assembly setting
and alongside the High-level Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I have the honour today
to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
First I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman and Ambassador António of the African Union
for their comprehensive briefings.
The Nordic countries stand firmly behind the
United Nations fight against terrorism and organized
criminal activities. We welcome today’s discussion

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

and the focus given by the Security Council to these
pressing issues.
The connection between terrorism and other forms
of criminal activity is a serious challenge to international
security. This was first recognized 13 years ago in
resolution 1373 (2001), but it is, unfortunately, still
true today. No country is immune to the effects of this
connection, whether it relates to terrorist acts, poverty
or the illicit trade in arms or drugs.
Terrorism and organized crime generate violence
against civilians. Violence is a universal challenge
to poverty eradication and sustainable development.
There are 1.5 billion people living in countries affected
by conflict, violence and fragility. Those countries
are furthest away from achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. It is estimated that by 2030, more
than 80 per cent of world poverty will be concentrated
in conflict-affected and fragile States. That implies that
violence is likely to be one of the most pressing poverty
issues ahead. Combating terrorism and organized crime
is crucial in order to eradicate poverty. The Nordic
countries are large donors of both humanitarian and
development aid, and we are advocating the inclusion
of a goal on peaceful, inclusive societies and freedom
from violence in the new post-2015 global development
agenda.
The trafficking of weapons fuels armed conflict
and armed violence, and organized crime or terrorist
groups in many cases provide the networks needed to
move this deadly commodity. The entry into force of
the Arms Trade Treaty later this month will add an
important new tool to combat this phenomenon.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant’s illicit
trade in historical, religious and cultural artifacts has
generated considerable income and must be countered.
The Nordic countries are fully behind UNESCO’s
efforts in combating this problem.
Trafficking in persons is one of the most heinous
and lucrative criminal activities globally. The funds
generated are often used to fund other forms of
organized crime, such as the smuggling of weapons or
drugs. Around 70 per cent of all victims of trafficking
are women and girls, who are trafficked primarily for
sexual exploitation.
The narrative of terrorism is that of hate, intolerance
and rejection of human rights, in particular women’s
human rights. Countering this narrative and creating
resilience is essential. The Nordic countries believe that

S/PV.7351

our strongest counter-narrative is a firm commitment
to democracy, human rights and equality. We consider
these values as end goals in themselves as well as key
drivers of economic and social development. They are
cornerstones of peaceful and inclusive societies where
no one should feel marginalized or be attracted to
violent extremism or organized crime.
Our response to the challenges that I just outlined
must be interconnected and mutually reinforcing.
Multilateral cooperation is essential. Local action is
needed on a global scale. The challenge lies in enabling
efficient coordination among local, regional and
international efforts. Therefore, the Nordic countries
welcome today’s debate and wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Republic of Chad for your timely
initiative.
The Nordic countries place great value on the
efforts of the United Nations in assisting States in
strengthening resilience against both terrorism and
organized criminal activities. We are strong supporters
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and other efforts to enhance States’ capacities
to counter terrorism within the rule of law, including the
protection of and full respect for human rights. We have
been active partners in and long-standing contributors
to the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), including its technical assistance in
the field. We support the efforts made by the United
Nations to explore additional ways to counter terrorism
and organized crime.
The Nordic countries recognize that cross-border
crime has a strategic impact on terrorist groups through
the weakening of State authority and State capacity.
Cross- border crime also strengthens terrorist groups
by increasing their access to illicit markets. To counter
those threats, the Council needs to combine different
types of peace operations, counter-terrorism bodies,
panels of experts and the other tools available, as well
as reach out to relevant institutions such as the UNODC
and INTERPOL. We also welcome further consideration
of a strategic review of the tools available to reduce the
strategic space that cross-border crime affords terrorist
groups, as proposed in the concept note (S/2014/869,
annex).
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Managing Director for Global and
Multilateral Issues of the European External Action
Service.

14-7069031/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Marinaki: I am speaking on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I would first like to thank Chad for organizing
this thematic debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime, which comes at such a critical and challenging
time. In that context, let me stress that the European
Union works in a coherent and comprehensive way
to tackle both terrorism and transnational organized
crime, and that we work very closely with the United
Nations and its agencies. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Téte
António, speaking on behalf of the African Union, for
their informative and thorough statements.
I would like to provide the Council with some
information on the European Union’s main efforts to
address issues of security, counter-terrorism and crossborder crime, all of them interlinked in a way that
reinforces their negative impact on countries and their
development and causes instability in many regions
worldwide. The crisis in Mali is an example of the
links between organized criminal gangs and terrorists.
The Sahel region’s security and development have
been hampered by terrorism, violent extremism and
transnational organized crime. There is also a new trend
in terrorism that attempts to control territories and act
like a State, as is the case with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and Boko Haram. We can cite
many other examples of connections between organized
crime and terrorism, starting with Al-Shabaab’s taxing
of piracy and charcoal-trading proceeds in Somalia
and the illegal trafficking in oil and cultural goods that
constitutes the main funding resource for ISIL and the
Al-Nusra Front. It is also widely believed that money
derived from poaching and wildlife trafficking is used
to fund terrorist purposes.
The European Union supports the implementation
of United Nations sanctions regimes, in particular that
under resolution 2170 (2014), aimed at cutting off ISIL’s
revenues. The recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force are also important in that context. In the
area of kidnapping for ransom, we welcome the work
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF), in
particular the Algiers Memorandum on Good Practices
on Preventing and Denying the Benefits of Kidnapping

32/62

19/12/2014

for Ransom by Terrorists and the final conclusions of
the Group of Eight summit at Lough Erne in 2013. In
June, based on resolution 2133 (2014), the European
Union adopted conclusions on kidnapping for ransom.
The European Union and its member States are
parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, which are milestones
in international cooperation on tackling organized
crime, particularly money-laundering, the smuggling
of migrants and the trafficking of human beings and
firearms. We welcome the citing of both Conventions
in specific cross-border organized crime cases, since
fighting corruption effectively is vital to ensuring good
governance and people’s trust in their Governments
and institutions.
The European Union is fully committed to
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
We support all countries in their efforts to implement
those instruments. It is also very important that we not
neglect other security threats, especially in Africa, and
we therefore welcome today’s adoption of resolution
2195 (2014), which highlights the importance of
addressing terrorism and organized crime.
I would like to reaffirm the European Union’s
commitment to promoting security and development,
particularly in Africa. As part of the implementation
of our strategy for the development and security of the
Sahel, we support countries in that region, especially
Mali, the Niger and Mauritania, in their counterterrorism efforts. We also support the countries of
West Africa in their efforts to tackle drug-related
transnational cross-border crime. In the Horn of
Africa, the European Union is a key supporter of the
African Union Mission in Somalia and is implementing
a comprehensive counter-terrorism and security
package that includes measures on law enforcement
and countering violent extremism, the financing of
terrorism and piracy. We work closely with other
actors, particularly the GCTF, which complements
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts. In that
framework, the European Union is a co-Chair, with
Turkey, of the GCTF’s Horn of Africa Working Group,
which promotes coordination between the international
community and countries in the region. The European
Union also funds a joint project, implemented since
March, of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on rule-of-law-compliance investigations
and prosecutions in the Maghreb region. We also
support many countries around the world in the areas
of conflict prevention and resolution, good governance,
the rule of law, the promotion of human rights and
education, since they form part of the European Union’s
development policies.
Regarding the enhancement of peace and security,
a critical opportunity now exists for the international
community to consider ways to support the post-2015
development agenda. Concrete progress in the areas
of security, justice, human rights and the rule of law
is crucial to achieving sustainable development. Joint
security and development efforts, especially those
aimed at countering violent extremism and preventing
conflict, need to be enhanced. It is our common
responsibility to ensure that the rule of law and respect
for international law, particularly human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law, are essential components of the
fight against terrorism and organized crime. At the
same time, we must continue to coordinate our shared
efforts with the United Nations by addressing both the
intersection of cross-border crime with terrorism and its
impact on conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that the European
Union is firmly committed to the call made today by
Under-Secretary-General Feltman that we not only
counter but also prevent terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): We would like to express
our appreciation for Chad’s initiative in organizing
this important debate, which enables us to reflect on
the challenges facing the international community in
combating terrorism. We would also like to pay tribute
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad for presiding
over the meeting and for his opening remarks, and to
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Ambassador Téte António, the
Permanent Observer of the African Union, for their
introductory statements.
Terrorism, in both its magnitude and its diversity,
is one of the gravest challenges not only to international
peace and security but also to human dignity. It has
affected every facet of our societies and national values.
It threatens the security and sovereignty of States, as
well as the rule of law, freedom and the development

S/PV.7351

aspects of our societies. We reiterate Egypt’s position
in condemning unequivocally all acts of terrorism in
all their forms and manifestations, irrespective of their
motivations or objectives and regardless of the nature
of their perpetrators, whether individuals, groups
or States. In that context, we denounce the utterly
despicable and incomprehensibly vicious attack on
defenceless children that took place in the Pakistani
city of Peshawar, as well as the recent terrorist siege
in Sydney. Those incidents demonstrate the importance
of the international community’s being unified against
terrorism. We need to offer positive solutions and
express resolve to eliminate the terrorist menace, which
targets Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
Cross-border illicit trafficking in drugs, arms,
humans and other illegal trade, goods and services is
fuelling terrorist activities across Africa and in other
parts of the world. These activities indeed increase the
space within which terrorists operate and weaken State
capacity and authority, while enhancing terrorist groups’
own capabilities and support and severely hampering
conflict resolution efforts. This is particularly evident
in the Sahel region, where cross-border smuggling has
exacerbated instability and affected conflict dynamics.
In that regard, we commend the regional cooperative
mechanisms in Africa, including the Nouakchott
Process on the enhancement of security cooperation
and the operationalization of the African Peace and
Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region,
the adoption of the action plan adopted by the first
regional ministerial meeting on border security held in
Tripoli in March 2012, and the creation of a regional
training centre to enhance border security during the
second regional ministerial meeting, which was held in
Rabat in November 2013.
The reality today is that we live in a world where
there is no region, country or people that remains
untouched by the destabilizing effects and negative
influence of cross-border crime and violent extremism.
We therefore believe that it is imperative to take
the following steps to deal with both threats on the
operational level.
First, we must exchange information on the
measures that Member States have taken to curb crossborder illicit drug trafficking, human smuggling and
trafficking, cybercrime, illegal migration, money
laundering and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

14-7069033/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

Secondly, Member States must exchange best
practices on fighting terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and provide bilateral assistance in
capacity-building to the most affected States, in
particular in areas related to countering violent
extremism and money laundering.
Thirdly, we must strengthen cooperation and
contacts among the relevant authorities of Member
States, including through promoting law enforcement
cooperation and exchange of information on legal,
judicial and criminal matters.
While recognizing the importance of States
working closely to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, including by preventing terrorists
from benefiting from transnational organized crime,
we reaffirm that States have the sovereign right, in
accordance with international law, to secure their
borders. Egypt emphasizes that respect for the principles
of sovereign equality, political independence, the
territorial integrity of all States and of non-intervention
in matters that are essentially within a State’s domestic
jurisdiction should be upheld.
Finally, we call for increasing the resources
allocated to the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other United Nations entities dedicated
to supporting the development and strengthening of
the capacities of national and regional institutions,
especially the African Union, in order to combat
the criminal-terrorist connection with transnational
organized crime, including law enforcement and
counter-terrorism agencies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, we wish to thank
the Chadian presidency for organizing today’s timely
open debate.
Turkey has long emphasized the link between
terrorism and such transnational organized crime as
drug trafficking, money laundering, human trafficking
and migrant smuggling. Today, terrorist organizations
continue to benefit and depend mainly upon such
crimes, which are cross-border in nature, as a source
of financing.
In that regard, Turkey supports United Nations
efforts to counter organized crime. Turkey is party to

34/62

19/12/2014

the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its three Protocols. We are
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and cooperating the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
and other United Nations entities. All the relevant
Security Council resolutions dealing with counterterrorism have been swiftly implemented in Turkey.
We welcomed resolution 2170 (2014) and co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014), which underlines the importance
of international cooperation in countering the foreign
terrorist fighters threat.
With regard to the threat emanating from Daesh
and the Al-Nusra Front, Turkey has been taking every
measure at our borders to counter increased attempts at
smuggling and, as appropriate, to deal with the changing
nature of the smuggling networks on the Syrian side.
However, I would emphasize that the threat from
Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front cannot be eliminated
with counter-financing measures alone. These terrorist
organizations have been able to strengthen and seize
territory because of the crisis in Syria, which has
become a magnet for foreign terrorist fighters, with
the regime continuing to target its own people and
taking advantage of the inaction of the international
community.
In that vein, we also welcome the initiative to focus
on foreign terrorist fighters in Africa. However, the
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon in Africa cannot
be taken into account in isolation. It is also pertinent
to focus on foreign terrorist fighters travelling from
North Africa to join Daesh. Foreign terrorist fighters
pose a serious threat to source, destination and transit
countries. The threat of foreign terrorist fighters starts
the moment these individuals depart from their source
countries.
In developing countries, especially in Africa,
where Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab have gained ground, one of the key
aspects to tackling terrorism bred by transborder crime
is capacity-building, given the increasingly complex
and evolving nature of the threat. That is why, as a
major contributor to capacity-building efforts in the
security sector around the world, Turkey welcomes
the resolution adopted today (resolution 2195 (2014)),
which stresses the need for more capacity-building.
Since 2008, nearly 4,500 participants from
14 African countries have taken part in training
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

programmes organized by the Turkish police. Our
relevant authorities regularly provide capacity-building
training programmes to countries of the Horn of Africa.
The Turkish International Academy against Drugs and
Organized Crime, established in cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has been
playing an important role in boosting regional efforts to
combat drug trafficking and organized crime.
We also support United Nations bodies’ capacitybuilding efforts to counter cross-border crime in the
framework of the fight against terrorism. Some of our
aforementioned programmes have been implemented
in partnership with the CTITF and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, and we welcome and
are ready to contribute to Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism projects in the Sahel region.
Given the nexus between development and security
and peace, and our commitment to assisting countries
in need of assistance and our belief that international
cooperation is crucial to effectively tackling terrorism
and transnational crime, our efforts geared at bridging
the gap in capacity-building will continue. At the second
Africa-Turkey summit held in Malabo in November
2014, we reiterated our desire to continue collaboration
in all areas of peace and security.
In conclusion, I would reiterate once again that
all terrorist organizations should be combated with
equal determination. Terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations must be condemned. As we strive to
counter terrorist and related crimes, we need to uphold
the respect for human rights for all and the rule of law
as fundamental bases for our endeavours.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s open
debate and for preparing the extensive concept note
(S/2014/869, annex) to guide us in our deliberations. We
also express our appreciation to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for his introductory remarks.
We would like today to share some concerns that
my delegation has with respect to the focus of this
debate. We have seen cases where there is criminality
and terrorism establishes itself to take advantage
thereof, or where terrorists draw on organized crime
to finance their activities. In this regard, we recognize
the potential linkages and interconnections between

S/PV.7351

terrorism and destabilizing factors such as transnational
organized crime and drug-trafficking. However, in the
concept note, all of these phenomena are addressed
together, ignoring that the interconnections between
them must be treated on a case-by-case basis and that
they vary from region to region.
Assuming that terrorism and transnational
organized crime are automatically linked is not only
inaccurate but also dangerous. Saying that there
is no country that is not affected by terrorism or
manifestations of transnational organized crime would
be to send a message that the agenda of the Security
Council covers all things, when in reality immediate
action by the Council is not necessarily warranted
because, quite simply, not all cross-border criminal
activity reaches the threshold to constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
Nor does the concept note do much to recognize the
particularities of each one of these phenomena, taking
into account that, for example, fighting terrorism
is quite different from fighting drug-trafficking or
organized criminal groups, not to mention the issue
of the cross-border movement of people. Nor do we
support new categorizations of terrorists according to
the type of criminal activity involved as resolution 2195
(2014), just adopted, seeks to do. It must be recalled
that a terrorist’s motivations are different from those
involved in transnational organized crime. We would
like to believe that when transnational organized crime
is addressed by the United Nations system, whether
by Council consideration or in a more general context,
such efforts would seek to step up cooperation among
Member States to combat this scourge. However,
by emphasizing coercive measures, controls and
regulations, we risk promoting a more defensive
approach by sovereign States.
These are some of our comments at the conceptual
level. In addition, we also have more specific comments
to make. First, we believe that this discussion can
contribute to our conflict-prevention efforts in
maintaining international peace and security allowing
us to fine-tune our responses to emerging threats and
challenges. Transnational organized crime and the
illicit trafficking in weapons, goods and people, like
terrorism, are common and shared responsibilities,
and we need to work together to prevent and combat
these phenomena. This is further justification for
strengthening international cooperation and providing
technical assistance, in particular to encourage and

14-7069035/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

facilitate the implementation of relevant conventions
and protocols.
Secondly, a wide range of existing strategies and
initiatives have been developed at the national, regional
and international levels, making it harder to identify
synergies and similarities. This is due not only to the
peculiar nature of each item, or the fact that each is
discussed in a different expert forum, but also to the
fact that each issue is governed by its own legal and
legislative context. We must adhere to the instruments
that are legally binding for States parties, in this
particular case the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and not establish new
obligations under the pretext of fighting terrorism.
Thirdly, different strategies are required to address
the specific threats posed by the different types of
phenomena, especially suitable strategies to reduce
the demand and supply of illicit drugs. Unless these
causes are addressed, the problem will be displaced
elsewhere or simply replaced by other illegal activities.
Governments must therefore strengthen the rule of law
in their countries so as to develop social antibodies
against transnational organized crime and break the
cycle of criminality and underdevelopment definitively.
Fourthly, strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States to combat these
phenomena is only one element, albeit an important
of, of the broader arsenal of measures to address this
issue. While we recognize that the United Nations
has a role to assist the affected States, this should be
implemented in accordance with existing mandates, at
the request of Member States and with full respect for
their sovereignty, under national ownership.
Finally, turning to resolution 2195 (2014), we
recognize the efforts of Council members to achieve
a balanced text and take into account the elements of
importance to the broader membership. Likewise, we
take note of the request for a report of the SecretaryGeneral on threats posed by this new category of
terrorist, who benefit from transnational organized
crime. We hope that the concerns raised today will
be taken into account and we stress the importance of
reports of the Secretary-General remaining within the
scope of the Security Council’s responsibilities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.

36/62

19/12/2014

Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Sir, for your comprehensive concept note (S/2014/869,
annex) and for having organized this open debate. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union for their informative briefings.
Terrorism must be condemned in all its forms
and manifestations. The repudiation of terrorism is
enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a guiding
principle of our foreign policy. Brazil is signatory to
14 international legal instruments against terrorism
negotiated under the auspices of the United Nations
and has been engaged in prevention domestically and
at the regional and subregional levels. The prevention
of and combat against terrorism must be undertaken
with due respect for the Charter of the United Nations,
international refugee and humanitarian law, as well as
human rights, including the right to privacy.
Brazil also recognizes the importance of preventing
and combating transnational organized crime. Brazil is
party to international and regional treaties related to
transnational organized crime, such as the Palermo
Convention, of 2000, and its additional protocols,
some of which were adopted by the General Assembly
through resolution 55/25.
It was a wise choice by the Security Council
to favour the concept of transnational organized
crime — consistent with the Palermo Convention
and previous decisions by this Council — over that
of cross-border crimes, which raises doubts about its
precise definition. Notwithstanding the importance
of combating terrorism and transnational organized
crime, it should be clear that they are different
problems, which require different remedies. While
terrorism is essentially fuelled by political and
ideological considerations, transnational organized
crime is motivated by the expectation of financial
gains. Aiming for distinct goals, terrorist groups and
criminal organizations usually operate differently and
through their own methods. Brazil therefore stresses
that there are no automatic or intrinsic linkages
between terrorism and transnational organized crime.
The interrelationship between them may obviously
arise under specific circumstances, but should in no
way be deemed universal.
It is also important to pay attention to the forum
in which these issues should be primarily discussed.
International terrorism as a threat to international

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

peace and security should be addressed in the Security
Council. Brazil is a staunch defender of the United
Nations centrality in the coordination of global efforts
against international terrorism. Organized crime, in
turn, is primarily a domestic public security issue.
Transnational organized crime requires coordinated
international action, pursuant to the framework
established by the Palermo Convention, its additional
protocols and other relevant international legal
instruments. It is more appropriately addressed as a
matter of enhanced International cooperation than as
an issue pertaining to collect security. In both cases,
the international community does well in emphasizing
prevention. Repressive measures and law enforcement
alone cannot offer a comprehensive strategy against
those crimes. They could actually be ineffective if not
coupled with efforts to tackle the structural factors and
root causes that lead to terrorism and transnational
organized crime, which include social and economic
exclusion.

S/PV.7351

commitment to bolster efforts to eliminate the scourge
of terrorism.
The threats looming over international peace and
security due to terrorism and transnational organized
crime could not have reached this magnitude or
become so dangerous were it not for the organic link
of terrorist groups, in terms of their interests, with
the Governments of certain States that have adopted
terrorism as an approach and even a tool of their
foreign policy. Therefore, it falls upon United Nations
Member States, together and individually, and relevant
bodies within the Organization and beyond it in the
international arena to intensify efforts and cooperation
internationally and regionally to combat terrorism and
crime and their masterminds.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country and to extend
our most sincere congratulations on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. We
would also like to thank you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for
convening this important debate.

The concept note (S/2014/869, annex) that you
have prepared, Mr. President, underscores the crisis
in Syria, where conflict has led to the growth in a
war economy, including trafficking in human beings,
weapons, drugs; taking hostages for ransom; and the
seizure of oil facilities. Revenue generated by such
activities has created incentives for some armed groups
to prolong the conflict and has increased their wealth,
significantly reducing our ability to compel them to
engage in peace talks. That is extremely significant, and
many Governments of Member States, whether in this
Council or outside it, continue to ignore the irrefutable
truth that this threat did not arise in a vacuum. It is rather
the fruit of the policies and practices of Governments,
of some States that have decided to fan the flames of
the crisis in Syria and continue it by providing their
support in various ways to armed terrorist groups. They
seek to erode the foundations of the Syrian State and its
institutions by using terrorism as a political weapon,
thereby impeding a peaceful political solution based on
inclusive national dialogue among Syrians under the
Syrian Government.

I take this opportunity to express my most heartfelt
condolences to the Government and people of Pakistan
and to the bereaved families whose members were
subjected to the odious terrorist attack that killed 141
students and wounded dozens of others. Those terrorist
attacks demonstrate the nature of the nihilistic ideology
of terrorists linked with Al-Qaida, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra
Front, Boko Haram, the Taliban, the Eastern Turkestan
movement, the Caucacus Emirate, Ansar al-Sharia,
the Al-Shabaab movement and, unfortunately, several
others. At the same time, that event strengthens our

On many occasions, we have spoken in the Council
about acts perpetrated by terrorists active in Syria, in
particular ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front, with regard to the
extraction of and trade in oil resources belonging to the
Syrian Arab Republic and the brotherly country of Iraq;
the pillaging of archaeological sites, the shared heritage
for humanity, and the sale of these archaeological
items; and the dismantling of hundreds of factories,
which are pillars of the Syrian economy, and their
transfer to Turkey. All that has occurred in addition to
the taking of hostages, the slavery and sale of women
and children, and other crimes that are abhorrent to

Brazil
reiterates
its
commitment
to
a
multidimensional response to the challenges posed by
terrorism and their possible circumstantial linkages to
transnational organized crime. We remain convinced
that we will succeed only if we join efforts on the basis
of shared values and enhanced multilateral cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

14-7069037/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

humanity. How has the Council responded? For several
years, three permanent members of the Council, before
the exacerbation of the threat and danger, stopped the
United Nations from taking even the smallest practical
measure to defeat terrorism, which has been invading
Syria, the Middle East and the world. For three years
or more the position of those States and others in the
Council was limited to shy condemnations.
Moreover, in April 2013 the European Union
authorized the purchase of stolen Syrian oil from what it
called opposition-controlled areas, in flagrant violation
of that same international law concerning which some
States of the Union have been ranting. This is robbery of
the Syrian people’s livelihood, the impact of which we
are seeing every day. Now the European Union has once
again imposed sanctions to ban the provision of fuel to
the Syrian Air Force. That is irresponsible behaviour;
it is also illegal and runs counter to the resolutions
of the International Civil Aviation Organization. It
does all this instead of working to seize looted Syrian
antiquities being smuggled to Europe vie Turkey.
Most members probably read several days ago the
statement by the former Deputy Director of the European
police, Europol, now head of the Belgian Federal Police
Council, published in The Times of London, to the
effect that Western dealers in archaeological artefacts
are now directly dealing with ISIL, whereas in the past
they had to use middlemen to buy looted archaeological
masterpieces stolen from the Middle East.
The adoption by the Council on 28 July 2014
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/14, which
was drafted by the Russian delegation, called for the
prohibition of all transactions in Syrian oil sales with
ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. That was a good first
step in countering the terrorism represented by these
two organizations and other entities and individuals
affiliated with Al-Qaida. This step was strengthened
by the Council’s adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014).
Nevertheless, ignoring the activities of those
Governments that support terrorism within and outside
the region will definitely undermine any possibility
of producing tangible results in countering terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Syrian oil and
archaeological artefacts are transported to their buyers
across our common borders with neighbouring States,
especially Turkey, at a time when armed foreign
terrorist fighters are being transported into Syria with
their weapons through the same routes by the Turkish
38/62

19/12/2014

Government, with the knowledge and complicity
of the intelligence services and senior officials of
Governments that sponsor terrorism, as well as their
partners in other States. That fact has been corroborated
by numerous reports published by the United Nations,
including the reports of the Panel of Experts on Libya,
which have presented cogent evidence of the complicity
of those States in transporting terrorists and arms from
Libya into Syria, Egypt and the Sahel region.
My delegation reiterates its appeal to the Security
Council to condemn States supporting terrorism and
to force them to cease their destructive practices, to
hold their regimes accountable, and compel them to
respect the relevant Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism, including resolutions 2167 (2014),
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 1989 (2011) 1540 (2004), 2133
(2014), 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). These resolutions
were all adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in order to ensure that the Governments
sponsoring terrorism in my country comply with them.
We have provided to the team tasked with the
analytical support for resolution 2178 (2014) a list of
and highly important information concerning foreign
individuals killed in Syria recently. These include
110 from Chechnya, the Caucasus and Dagestan and
other areas. We have also provided the list to the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). We will distribute it to Member States shortly.
I also call attention to an extremely important
report that appeared in Washington, D.C. recently.
It is entitled Qatar and Terror Finance, published in
two volunes. It outlines Qatari authorities’ support for
terrorism, not only in Syria, but throughout the world. I
present this information for the Council’s consideration
in the context of the debate on counter-terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is the first time that my delegation is addressing the
Security Council during the Chad’s presidency, I wish
you, Mr. President, and your delegation much success.
We appreciate the convening of this open debate and
the preparation of the concept note (see S/2014/869,
annex) to guide our discussions, as well as the briefings
given this morning.
The Security Council has been progressively
addressing the many manifestations of transnational
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

organized crime and, on this occasion, its relationship
with terrorism, highlighting the complexity of a topic
that does not permit out-of-context generalizations.
While we must recognize the potential of transnational
organized crime to undermine the stability and security
of States, it is equally important to underscore that its
manifestations and reach are not uniform everywhere in
the world. All States are affected in one way or another
by those criminal activities.
However, it is not in all circumstances that those
activities constitute a threat to international peace and
security and thus come under the Security Council’s
competence. Along those lines, the Council should avoid
simplifying a topic that because of its nature should
be addressed on a case-by-case basis, and eschew an
approach or the adoption of generalized measures that
do not fit specific contexts and do not take into account
the diversity of factors that make a situation a threat to
international peace and security.
As has been recognized on numerous occasions,
the criminal activities that we are referring to go
beyond the dimension of cross-border trafficking.
For that reason, eradicating them requires integrated,
comprehensive and balanced focuses and measures that
tackle all the links of those illicit activities, recognize
the sovereign rights and responsibilities of States,
and are in accordance with international obligations
accepted by States, including those related to respect
for human rights, the management and exploitation of
natural resources, border controls, or links between
terrorism and kidnapping for ransom.
Transnational organized crime and terrorism
are in some cases specifically linked. However, they
are different criminal activities, and the measures to
address them are regulated by specialized international
treaties that make up a broad legislative framework
and offer the legal tools to combat those matters.
Furthermore, the agreements reached in the General
Assembly bring together comprehensive concepts
that are widely accepted in the United Nations. They
facilitate the development of inclusive and balanced
strategies. The Organization as a whole should
concentrate its efforts on providing assistance that
States might need with the goal of achieving the
integral application of the obligations arising from
those agreements, strengthening capacities and
national institutions, bolstering effective cooperation
mechanisms, and augmenting the provision of technical

S/PV.7351

and financial resources, as well as the timely exchange
of information.
Those are some of the reasons that lead to deepening
the cooperation of the Security Council with other organs
of the United Nations system on a matter that, because
of its nature and global reach, requires concerted and
coordinated action by the different organs and entities
of the United Nations system, pursuant to the principles
of the Charter, in a framework of and respect for their
respective responsibilities and mandates, and with a
clear and objective division of labour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union (EU). Allow me to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
As we are all aware, there is a dangerous global
phenomenon that threatens the very existence of States
and human lives — the growing violence spread by
international terrorism. In light of the recent activities
of terrorist organizations, we welcome Chad’s initiative
in organizing this thematic debate.
Today’s resolution 2195 (2014) aims at fighting
the troubling link between terrorism and transnational
organized crime, with a particular focus on Africa.
Both issues are indeed deeply intertwined. Terrorist
groups need money and they need arms. In order to
procure those means, they rely heavily on cross-border
trafficking. Regional initiatives and enforcement
measures remain crucial to fight transnational
organized crime at the local level, and they need to be
pursued further. In that context, we highly commend
ongoing efforts to combat the illicit trade in drugs, a
major source of income for terrorist groups. Recently,
the West Africa Commission on Drugs presented
a cross-border analysis of that problem. The swift
implementation of its recommendations remains key.
Another important financial factor in the field of
transnational organized crime is wildlife trafficking.
Wildlife trafficking and poaching are growing at an
alarming rate, especially in Africa. Operations are
increasingly conducted on a large scale by transnational
organized criminal groups, often linked to terrorist
organizations. This threat requires an effective,
comprehensive and well-coordinated answer by the
international community, encompassing countries of

14-7069039/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

origin, transit and destination. As co-Chair of the Group
of Friends on Poaching and Illicit Wildlife Trafficking,
Germany continues to actively support efforts aimed
at addressing and combating wildlife crime, including
through a General Assembly resolution.
Besides drying up the funding of terrorist groups,
we also need to cut off their access to weapons. Illicit
arms that flow into North Africa, and the Sahel in
particular, pose a great danger, including to our own
security. Germany early focused on capacity-building
and securing stocks in Libya and the Sudan and is
extending its efforts to several other countries in
the Sahel region. We support regional arms control
cooperation initiatives like the Sub-regional Arms
Control Mechanism, which includes the Sudan, Libya,
Chad, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Over the past few years, we have
dedicated substantial funds to further projects in the
region and have increased funding again for 2015. We
support corresponding initiatives by the EU. Germany
will also pay particular attention to that issue within the
framework of its Group of Seven presidency.
Overall, Germany remains highly committed to
assist African States in their efforts to improve their
internal security architecture. Under its Peace and
Security in Africa programme, the German Foreign
Office has funded a variety of projects with a budget
of some $200 million over the past six years. Among
others, these projects were designed to further foster
African Union institution-building and police capacitybuilding in countries such as Burundi, Mauritania, the
Niger, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, South Sudan and Chad. We are convinced that
our current and future efforts will contribute to this
resolution’s purpose of fighting transnational organized
crime and terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I thank
you very much, Mr. President, for convening this very
important debate here in the Security Council.
Let me first thank my colleagues for their words
of sympathy and support for Pakistan. This debate
comes in the wake of the heinous and horrendous act
of terrorism in Peshawar, Pakistan, an act that has been
widely condemned by the international community.
Pakistan also condemns the perpetrators, facilitators

40/62

19/12/2014

and abettors of such acts of terrorism, including that of
16 December in Peshawar.
Here at the Security Council, let me convey this
message loud and clear: we will defeat terrorism.
Pakistan will prevail, no matter what. Our mourning
today will only morph into a stronger resolve to fight
back even harder. By killing our children, the terrorists
have attacked our heart. I assure you, Mr. President,
that Pakistan will go for their jugular. Allow me to share
the heroic acts performed, even during the cowardly
act of terrorism on 16 December, by the teachers, the
children and in particular the female principal of the
school. They all, instead of trying to save their own
lives, chose to stay back and help their peers and the
children. That is a testimony that makes me proud, and
I am proud to say that that is my nation and those are
my people. I am very proud to represent them here at
the United Nations.
Pakistan possesses an unyielding resolve to fight
terrorism. Our mind is very clear, our policy is on
the table, and we continue to undertake affirmative
action. After all, let me remind everyone that Pakistan
continues to spearhead the international war against
terrorism.
Let me now express the views of my delegation on
the subject under discussion today. We maintain a clear
distinction between cross-border crime and transnational
organized crime. We feel that not all transnational
organized crimes are cross-border in nature, and crossborder crimes may not be organized. Nevertheless, we
recognize that terrorists can take advantage of the lack
of effective border control measures and associated
criminal activities. We therefore fully subscribe to the
need for effective controls on transnational organized
crime and for effective border control mechanisms to
prevent the development of any linkages with terrorist
activities. We also acknowledge the complicated linkage
that may exist among terrorism, criminal activity and
effective border controls. We fully share the goals of
the international community to successfully address
them through appropriate national, bilateral, regional
and international measures.
Pakistan believes that an effective strategy to
achieve those goals must take into account the following
points. First, States bear the primary responsibility to
strengthen border controls and take effective measures
against terrorism and criminal activities. Secondly,
bilateral, regional and international cooperation,

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

including sharing of information, is important for
achieving the desired goals. Thirdly, strategies need to
be tailored to specific challenges presented by dynamics
and conditions peculiar to the region. Lastly, it is vital
to build the capacities and capabilities of States facing
those challenges.
Pakistan is fully aware of and responsive to the
challenges it faces with regard counter-terrorism and
terrorism’s conceivable linkage with transnational
organized crimes. Therefore, effective border control
measures continue to remain a major subject of our
bilateral cooperation with the relevant countries. We
have taken a number of initiatives to build regional
cooperation in controlling transnational organized
crime.
Pakistan reaffirms its commitment to counter
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We will
continue to cooperate with the international community
in addressing the challenges emanating from the
factors that complicate our fight against this scourge,
including transnational organized crime. We believe
that international measures taken in this regard must
respect national sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of States and should aim to avoid any duplication of
work undertaken by various United Nations agencies
and organizations. The international community
already possesses the will, the instruments and the
infrastructure to deal with terrorism and transnational
organized crime. What is needed is the effective
implementation by States of the relevant instruments
and meaningful cooperation within the United Nations
bodies and agencies, working within their specific
mandates.
To end, allow me to say that Pakistan mourns today,
but we shall, God willing, ensure the total annihilation
of terrorists and their twisted ideologies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the firm resolve expressed by Pakistan in response to
the atrocity in Peshawar, and I reiterate the comments
of sympathy and support that I expressed to the Council
three days ago in an earlier debate.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate. It is an important reminder to the Council and
the United Nations more generally that terrorism does
not sit in isolation from other threats. In many contexts,
terrorism and transnational organized crime are closely

S/PV.7351

linked. Funds provided by criminal enterprises are often
the lifeblood of terrorist operations, as is the supply of
weapons. We have seen that pernicious relationship in
West Africa, South-East Asia and elsewhere. To focus
solely on terrorist threats at the expense of the wider
context in which terrorists operate is not only outdated,
but downright dangerous. The most effective efforts to
counter terrorism are those that are well calibrated to
the contours of the particular threat.
This debate and the strategic review that has been
called for are opportunities to refocus our attention on
ensuring full implementation of existing foundational
tools on counter-terrorism, such as resolution 1373
(2001). Furthermore, we should take this opportunity
to ensure that the United Nations overall counterterrorism architecture, particularly its mechanisms
for providing or facilitating assistance, supports that
implementation in a way that genuinely responds to
contemporary terrorism challenges.
Once new trends are identified and new measures
are agreed, we need to monitor implementation and we
must be brutally honest in assessing the effectiveness
of what we have decided to do. The illicit activities that
help fund terrorism differ from country to country and
even between regions. So a one-size-fits-all approach
is simply never going to be effective. For example,
mineral and diamond smuggling have long been at the
heart of conflicts in Africa, although recently, cocaine
trafficking has increasingly been playing a role. By
contrast, as Germany emphasized a short time ago, in
Central Africa, cross-border wildlife poaching may be
an increasing factor in conflict dynamics.
A clear assessment of relevant risks and
vulnerabilities is a crucial step in any response,
particularly in conflict settings, but those assessments
must be ongoing and, as I said earlier, they must be
brutally honest. Bilateral and regional coordination and
information-sharing are also essential, as are integrated
national mechanisms for confronting those threats.
The United Nations must play its part by ensuring that
relevant entities, not least the Council’s subsidiary
bodies, take a coordinated and coherent approach to
dealing with those challenges.
National authorities, in particular police and
border control, are at the very front line of addressing
terrorist and transnational organized crime, but,
for many States — those most affected by those
phenomena — such institutions remain weak. The
international community needs to work bilaterally and

14-7069041/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

through appropriate forums to help strengthen relevant
national capabilities.
New Zealand welcomes the proposed strategic
review. We hope that it can shed light on how, and in
what circumstances, responses that address terrorism
and transnational organized crime can be mutually
reinforcing, and we hope that it will include concrete
options that the Council can consider. We look forward
to the opportunity, as a future member, to doing just
that. The review should be relevant to the United
Nations efforts across a number of areas, including
conflict resolution. New Zealand will therefore look
for connections between the review and others that are
currently ongoing, such as those on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to thank the Foreign
Minister of Chad for presiding over today’s debate.
Before I begin, I would like to say a few words
about the recent terrorist attacks in Pakistan and
Australia. The cowardly attacks on children in a school
and on innocent civilians in a coffee shop are a painful
reminder that no nation is immune to terrorism. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms those heinous
and senseless acts of violence. The thoughts and prayers
of the Israeli people are with the families of the victims
in Pakistan and Australia, and we pray for a speedy
recovery for all those who were injured.
I want to tell the Council about a small start-up
that emerged in our region just a few years ago. Like
any new enterprise, it secured funding, recruited talent
and acquired the equipment needed for its day-to-day
operations. The venture gained momentum and was
able to recruit more people, grow its revenue base and
acquire more sophisticated tools. Like many start-ups,
it turned to social media to amplify its messages and
gain greater prominence — that too fueled further
growth. It soon expanded its portfolio to deal in illicit
enterprises, including stealing and selling crude oil,
kidnapping, smuggling and trafficking in goods. Today,
that billion-dollar enterprise is a household name — the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), also known
as Daesh.
The meteoric rise of ISIS is just one example of
“terrorism 2.0”. Extremist groups are using every
tool and means at their disposal to further their
radical ideological goals and commit senseless acts
42/62

19/12/2014

of brutality. The haunting images of terrorism will
forever be in our minds — school children murdered
by the Taliban, journalists beheaded by ISIS, innocent
Christians massacred by al-Shabaab and the countless
innocent civilians who were victims of suicide attacks
perpetrated by Hizbullah and Hamas. In order to
effectively counter the threat posed by terrorists, the
international community must address every means by
which radical groups take root and grow. To confront
terrorism 2.0, we must prevent, preempt and undermine
terrorism. In other words, we must invest in counterterrorism 3.0 — a three-pronged approach to combating
and preventing terrorism.
First, we must cut off the supply lines that originate
with organized crime networks. Terrorist groups rely
on criminal networks to provide them with weaponry
and munitions. Hizbullah, for example, runs one of
the largest and most sophisticated global criminal
operations in the world. For years, it has funded
terrorism through criminal enterprises, including
narcotics trafficking and forging currency. In 2008,
German authorities arrested two Lebanese members
of Hizbullah carrying more than €8 million generated
from cocaine smuggling. In 2011, American authorities
uncovered an extensive Hizbullah narcotics-trafficking
and money-laundering scheme that was generating
as much as $200 million a month for the terrorist
organization.
In addition to raising funds through drug sales,
Hizbullah is deeply involved in the trafficking of
counterfeit and stolen currency and goods. In 2009, the
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation revealed
that a Hizbullah member tied to the Philadelphia
criminal underworld was trying to sell stolen cell
phones, laptops and cars. The international community
must develop a robust strategy to interrupt the flow of
funds from criminal enterprises to terrorist groups. By
severing the connection, we will cut the financial and
logistical lifeline that keeps terrorist groups afloat.
Secondly, the Security Council must address the
State sponsors of terrorism. The fact of the matter is
that some Member States in this Organization support,
harbour, finance, train and smuggle terrorists and
weapons in our region. Qatar is aggressively funding
the Taliban in Afghanistan, the Al-Nusra Front in
Syria, and Hamas in Gaza. In fact, in Gaza just a few
days ago, Hamas held a rally at which Abu Obeida, the
spokesman for the military wing of Hamas, publicly
thanked Qatar and Iran for their ongoing support.

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

In addition to financing Hamas, Iran is bankrolling
Hizbullah with up to $200 million a year to wage war
on its behalf. In the last two years alone, Hizbullah
operatives have been detained in Nigeria, Thailand
and Cyprus for plotting attacks on civilians. And at
the instruction of Iran, Hizbollah Secretary-General
Hassan Nasrallah publicly declared that his forces will
ensure the survival of Syria’s Al-Assad regime.
The international community can no longer ignore
or downplay the global threat posed by Hizbullah. Its
founding manifesto pledges loyalty to Iran’s supreme
leader, seeks the establishment of an Islamic regime
and calls for war against Israel and the West. Terrorist
groups will continue to undermine international peace
and security so long as State actors supply them with
weaponry, financing, training and safe havens. A stable
and prosperous Middle East will remain elusive until
the Security Council unmasks those rogue regimes and
compels them to end their support for terrorism.
Thirdly, the international community must broaden
and strengthen sanctions against terror groups. More
effective procedures are needed to bring individuals
involved in terrorist activities to justice. Mechanisms
must be put in place to freeze their financial assets
and prevent their movement through the territories of
Member States. Every democracy walks a fine line
between defending civil liberties and upholding the rule
of law. It is not easy, but we can never allow terrorist
groups to gain the upper hand.
The recent decision of the European Court of
Justice is an injustice to the victims of Hamas terror
attacks. Terrorism is a global problem, and all those
who stand for freedom must make a continuous effort
to fight it. Terrorism will not retreat on its own. It
cannot be stopped by embracing moderates or making
concessions. Complacency breeds catastrophe and we
will all bear the consequences. For the sake of our
children, our nations and our common future, we must
stand shoulder to shoulder and hold to account all those
who support and engage in terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): As I begin my
statement, allow me to express the joy and satisfaction
of Mali upon seeing Chad, a brotherly country, presiding
over the Security Council’s work for the month of
December. Chad is today relentless in its search for
peace and security in the Sahel and in the region. We

S/PV.7351

in Mali are deeply grateful to Chad and bow before the
memory of the courageous Chadians who have fallen on
the battlefield in the north of the country. I would also
like to thank Australia for its outstanding leadership of
the Security Council’s work over the past month.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2195 (2014). We thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his briefing and endorse the statement
made by the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Mr. Téte António.
Everyone agrees that terrorism is today the
primary threat to peace, security and stability in the
world. Almost every day, images of a reality marked by
the raw trauma of terrorist attacks carried out around
the world — as was the case on Tuesday in a school in
Peshawar, Pakistan, where 132 innocent school children
died — remind us that the monster of terrorism is far
from being defeated. Mali, like all other countries
victims of terrorism, has paid and, unfortunately,
continues to pay a high price for terrorism following the
occupation of its northern regions by terrorist armed
groups. In this Chamber, among the most symbolic
forums of all, I condemn in the strongest terms those
heinous acts, which can never be justified, and express
my sincere condolences and the sympathy of the people
and the Government of Mali to all the victims of
terrorism around the world.
With regard to the specific topic of today’s debate,
I would like to share with the Council the approach
taken by the Government of Mali to the fight against
terrorism and cross-border crime. Indeed, in Mali, the
authorities have always understood the importance of
preventing violent extremism and combatting terrorism.
Our holistic approach, which was inspired by other
international initiatives, addresses not only with the
response to the terrorist threat, but also all other related
issues, such as drug trafficking, arms trafficking and
hostage-taking, that constitute its lifeline.
The Government of Mali has adopted to this end a
strategy and clear measures that combine development
efforts and the fight against poverty and a repressive
arsenal. At the national level, we adopted a law on
23 July 2008 on the suppression of terrorism and crossborder crime, and a law dated 30 December 2010 on
combatting the financing of terrorism. Mali has also
signed and ratified the majority of universal legal
instruments for counter-terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

14-7069043/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

At the regional level, the Nouakchott Process is
an incentive that has allowed important measures
to be taken in order to address the rising wave of
terrorism in the Sahel. The first summit of the Process
held in Nouakchott on 17 and 18 December made it
possible for important decisions to be taken aimed at
operationalizing the organization to tackle terrorism
and cross-border crime. I take this opportunity to recall
the words of the President of the Republic of Mali,
His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, at the
International Forum on Peace and Security in Africa,
which was held from 15 to 16 December in Dakar:
“As long as the problem in southern Libya remains
unresolved, there will be no peace in our region”.
Furthermore, in February, Burkina Faso, Mali,
Mauritania and Chad established in Nouakchott
the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel. It is a body for the
coordination of development and security policies
in our shared space so as to fill the security gaps of
our individual States. The G5-Sahel summit is taking
place today, 19 December, in Nouakchott, and Heads
of State and Government of that organization will take
important decisions on the topic of our meeting today.
In the fight against terrorism, in particular with
regard to the fight against violent extremism, we
must stress the advantages of dialogue and mutual
understanding. We must fight against the allure of
intolerance. That is the why the other approach of
the Government of Mali is based on the fight against
the indoctrination of young people and even the
elderly. Indeed, today more than ever, it is crucial that
statements for peace replace hate speech. In that regard,
I should like to express the gratitude of the Government
of Mali to His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco
for the training of 500 Malian imams in Morocco. This
important initiative of His Majesty, which also applies
to other countries, allows the values of Islam — namely,
peace, tolerance and the acceptance of difference — to
be conveyed and spread. Promoting a moderate and
authentic Islam is a tangible response to extremism.
The values of true Islam have served as sources of
motivation for religious leaders and communities in the
northern regions of Mali in order to staunchly oppose
the armed terrorist groups.
Today, in the north of my country, it is hard to
distinguish between terrorist groups and armed groups,
and that is the heart of the problem. The Government
of Mali remains convinced that solving the crisis in
the north requires a political solution, which is also

44/62

19/12/2014

the easiest way to combat terrorism and transnational
organized crime, so as to separate terrorists and armed
groups. It is in this spirit that the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States and the Heads of State and Government
of the Nouakchott Process, who met on 15 December
in Accra and on 17 and 18 December in Nouakchott,
reiterated their commitment to the sovereignty of the
Republic of Mali, its territorial integrity, the unified
nature — and I stress the unified nature — and
Republican format of the Malian State. They also
reiterated their call on all armed groups in northern
Mali, signatories of the Ouagadougou Agreement of
18 June 2013, to distance themselves from terrorist
groups. They welcomed the results achieved in the
context of the inter-Malian peace talks, which began
in Algiers in July, with the support of international
mediation and conducted by Algeria, and called upon
Malian parties to conclude a peace agreement when the
talks resume in January 2015 on the basis of the drafts
submitted to the parties by the mediation.
It is now up to the Security Council, as stipulated
in resolutions 2100 (2013) and 2164 (2014), adopted
under Chapter VII, to require armed groups that have
signed the Ouagadougou Agreement of 18 June 2013
to distance themselves from terrorist groups. We invite
members of the Security Council that are able to bring
the necessary pressure to bear to bring the leaders of
the armed movements to personally commit to the
Algiers process as it resumes next January, so as to
conclude a comprehensive and final peace agreement
for the Republic of Mali as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we reiterate the appeal made
to the Security Council by the heads of State
and Government of the Nouakchott Process to
urgently undertake every measure necessary to
strengthen MINUSMA’s capacities, so as to enable
it to effectively fulfil its mandate. The leaders of the
Nouakchott Process expressed their full readiness, in
consultation with the United Nations, to contribute
to the strengthening of MINUSMA, in particular
through the establishment — based on the model of
the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — an intervention force of
contributing countries to be deployed in the northern
part of Mali, within MINUSMA and with robust means
and rules of engagement, so as to contribute to the fight
against terrorist armed groups and criminal groups.

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for having convened today’s open debate and
for the informative concept paper (S/2014/869, annex)
on this very important subject. I also wish to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General of the
Department of Political Affairs, and the representative
of the African Union for their respective briefings.
We join other speakers in expressing condolences
and sympathy to the Government and the people of
Pakistan as well as to the bereaved families of the
victims of the recent terrorist attack on the school in
Peshawar. Malaysia strongly condemns the attack and
the senseless killing of schoolchildren, and we would
like to express our support for and solidarity with
Pakistan and its people in these difficult times.
Terrorism and cross-border crime constitute a grave
threat to global stability, peace and security. It is evident
that terrorism, including its links with cross-border
crimes such as money-laundering, arms trafficking,
trafficking in illicit drugs, people-smuggling,
kidnapping and piracy forms part of a complex set of
new security challenges to the international community,
which have to be addressed urgently in all aspects and
in all forums.
We note with concern that there is growing evidence
that the presence of terrorist groups involved in crossborder crime tends to complicate the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly in the areas of conflict prevention and
resolution. As highlighted in the concept paper, there
have been many instances in which the involvement of
terrorist groups in cross-border crime contributes to
undermining the authority of States, their security and
stability, governance, social and economic development
and the rule of law. There are also indications that in
some instances, terrorist groups make large profits
from their involvement in cross-border crimes such as
trafficking in arms and illicit drugs, and kidnapping.
In this regard, we concur with the proposal that
there is a need to look at the strategic impact of the
intersection of terrorism and cross-border crime. It
is evident that cross-border crime can weaken State
authority and its military and policing capability.
Cross-border crime can also embolden terrorist groups
and make them formidable rivals to the State. As such,
we share the view that there is a need for the United

S/PV.7351

Nations to consider looking at all the tools available to
it to reduce and ultimately eliminate the strategic space
that cross-border crime affords terrorist groups.
The proposed measures could, however, perhaps be
built on the existing resources and the commendable
work already being done, including the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate’s analytical
expertise and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force’s capacity-building expertise. More broadly,
the effort should also include the relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and United Nations
field missions, so that the combined United Nations
response would be stronger and more integrated. With
such a holistic and synchronized approach, the United
Nations has the potential to deliver truly impactful
support to the regions and countries most vulnerable to
the threat of terrorism and cross-border crime.
Malaysia fully supports the four pillars of the
approach of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy: addressing the conditions that
spread terrorism, preventing and combating terrorism,
counter-terrorism capacity-building, and respecting
human rights and the rule of law. It is indeed crucial
to address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism and cross-border crime, which include, among
others, poverty; violations of human rights; political
exclusion; and socioeconomic marginalization.
Groups and individuals in vulnerable and povertystricken environments serve as potential recruits for
radicalization. Extremists often take advantage of the
situation resulting from poverty and marginalization
to foster the conditions that enable them to carry out
their violent actions. The international community
must therefore redouble its efforts to bring the fruits of
balanced and sustainable socioeconomic development
to areas where such development is lacking.
Malaysia condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We reaffirm the need to combat by all
means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts and crossborder crime. In the wake of the rampant advance
of terror and violent extremist groups–in terms of
capturing both actual territory and intellectual or
ideological space–Malaysia co-sponsored resolution
2178 (2014) last September. In doing so, Malaysia
sought to lend its support to galvanizing international
action to combat terrorism in general and the scourge of
foreign terrorist fighters in particular.

14-7069045/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

While we acknowledge the sovereign prerogative
of Member States in securing their borders, we wish to
stress the crucial role of the United Nations in leading
and coordinating the effort to address the challenges
of terrorism and cross-border crime. In this regard, we
believe that the relevant entities of the United Nations
system, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Programme and INTERPOL
should enhance their collaboration so as to prevent
terrorist groups from benefiting from cross-border
crime. It is also important for the Peacebuilding
Commission and other relevant international
organizations to support the development and
strengthening of the capacities of national and regional
institutions to prevent, investigate, prosecute, judge
and punish those responsible for cross-border crimes.
We are also of the view that it is imperative for
Member States, regional organizations and the relevant
international organizations to enhance cooperation and
strategies and build their capacity to secure their borders
against terrorism and cross-border crime. This can be
done through cooperation in the form of exchanges of
information, capacity-building, technology transfer
and confidence-building measures.
In conclusion, Malaysia fully shares the spirit and
the sentiment that underlie the convening of this open
debate on terrorism and cross-border crime. Malaysia
will continue to give its full support and pledge its
cooperation to combat terrorism and cross-border crime
for mutual benefit among the countries and citizens of
the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Minami (Japan): Mr. President, at the outset
I would like to express my appreciation to you for
holding today’s open debate on terrorism and crossborder crime and the impact it has on international
peace and security, with a special focus on Africa. I am
also grateful for the detailed concept paper (S/2014/869,
annex) prepared by Chad on this issue.
Japan highly values this cross-cutting initiative to
have not only operational discussions on specific issues
such as terrorism, trafficking and cross-border crime,
but also multidimensional and strategic discussions,
keeping in mind a broader perspective on conflict
prevention and resolution.

46/62

19/12/2014

Japan has been taking the initiative to hold
the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) for more than 20 years, with the
consistent theme of social and economic development
in Africa. One of the main pillars of the TICAD process
has been the consolidation of peace and stability
as a prerequisite for development, in the context of
coping with the so-called root causes of conflicts and
avoiding the recurrence of conflicts by enhancing good
governance. In order to boost that process, Japan held a
workshop in Tokyo last month on regional cooperation
in criminal justice for counter-terrorism in North Africa
and the Sahel, with participants from the countries of
the region. In ways such as those we have consistently
advocated the importance of establishing peace and
security from a much broader perspective, in order to
promote development in Africa.
Japan supports the idea that the Security Council
should be engaged in strategic and cross-cutting
discussions, as well as in specific and operational ones,
keeping in mind the broader perspective of conflict
prevention and resolution. For example, we are of the
view that discussions should review the possible links
that activities on the ground, such as peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, could have
with other specific United Nations operations. Such
an approach would enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations actions generally, thus
maximizing our efforts. We therefore support the idea
of conducting a strategic review, as suggested in the
concept note (see S/2014/869, annex), and we would
hope that it would be practical and productive rather
than conceptual, thus enabling us to make a concrete
difference on the ground.
In that context, I would like to inform the Council
about a concrete project that my Government is
undertaking on the ground and that could stand as a
good example of a project with a multidimensional and
cross-cutting effect. Controlling borders in Africa,
especially in the Sahel region, is not an easy task for
anyone; owing to the presence of the Sahara Desert,
it resembles trying to control a border at sea, creating
a problem that goes beyond border countries’ lack of
capacity, which is a factor that we should take into
consideration. Japan has been promoting the concept in
Africa of a one-stop border post, aimed at eliminating
cumbersome daily border procedures through an
efficient high-technology system that encompasses all
border procedures, such as customs, immigration and
vehicle clearance.
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

The idea is to promote trade by shortening the time
needed for goods to cross the border, by enabling all
the necessary procedures to be done at the same time
at a one-stop border post, instead of stopping twice on
each side for exit and entry. Adapting local systems
to a globalized market has indeed made a difference.
It turns out that improving procedures at borders has
a much broader effect. Measures reinforcing border
procedures can have a positive impact on the fight
against trafficking in drugs, firearms and persons, the
transfer of terrorists, and terrorist financing, while
the reverse can also be true, so that measures against
terrorism and cross-border crime produce a positive
effect by promoting trade and investment.
While it is true that we should tackle and take
operational measures on the issues in question one by
one, it is also true that we should try to implement such
specific measures from a more cross-cutting, bird’seye view, in order to maximize the effectiveness and
efficiency of our efforts. I believe that taking a broader
perspective through our one-stop-border-post project is
a good example of such an approach, and Japan hopes
that that way of thinking will be mainstreamed in future
Council discussions.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan’s
resolve to fight any problem that could undermine
international peace and security, including terrorism
and cross-border crime. As a responsible member of
the United Nations, we will continue to play an active
role in discussing more effective and efficient ways
to fight such problems together with the international
community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We would
first like to congratulate Chad on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and to thank
the delegation of Chad for holding this important open
debate on combating terrorism and on the relationship
between terrorism and cross-border organized crime.
I would also like to thank Australia for its successful
conduct of the business of the Council last month. We
also congratulate the delegation of Chad on today’s
adoption of resolution 2195 (2014).
Today’s meeting focuses on the threatening
phenomenon of the mushrooming spread of terrorism,
which cooperates with organized criminal networks,
which themselves thrive in direct proportion to

S/PV.7351

increased terrorist activities. They are interdependent.
There has been a change in the nature of terrorism and
its connection to organized crime. Both are conducted
across borders, and both constitute threats to the security
and stability of peoples. Both undermine economic
and social development. Both help to deplete States’
resources. Both undermine democratic governance.
They have brought about many humanitarian crises and
made it difficult to deliver humanitarian assistance to
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Iraq is a case in point; we are a country that is suffering
deeply from the effects of those scourges.
The report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities (S/2014/815) indicates that, according to media
reports, the Islamic State in Syria and the Levant (ISIL)
is the wealthiest terrorist organization in the world. Its
strength and funding are derived from criminal means
and activities that intimidate and terrorize people
through kidnapping, extortion, robbery, the smuggling
of valuable historical artefacts and trafficking in women
and children, as well as the control of oilfields in Iraq
and Syria. The smuggling of oil and Iraqi artefacts, along
with the trafficking in persons and human organs, are
ISIL’s most important sources of funding. ISIS benefits
from existing smuggling networks in the region. Weak
border controls, owing to the Syrian crisis, and ISIL’s
control of Iraqi cities and territories close to the Syrian
border have both contributed to establishing increasing
numbers of such organized criminal networks, which
move freely across the territories concerned and traffic
in archaeological artefacts. We urge States Members of
the United Nations to remain committed to complying
with resolution 1483 (2003), particularly paragraph 7,
which states that
“all Member States shall take appropriate steps to
facilitate the safe return to Iraqi institutions of Iraqi
cultural property and other items of archaeological,
historical, cultural, rare scientific, and religious
importance illegally removed”.
The ISIL terrorist organization exploits areas under
its control in Iraq and Syria by looting, smuggling and
trading in valuable artefacts in order to fund its terrorist
activities. It relies on a network of Iraqi intermediaries,
both Arab and Kurdish, as well as networks in the
neighbouring countries of Syria, Lebanon and Turkey,

14-7069047/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

to transfer oil, gas and artefacts to countries in Europe
and other regions.
The terrorist organizations, intermediaries and
States that make up this complicated web and illegally
and illegitimately purchase the Iraqi property that I
just referred to are not bound under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, and thus they threatens
international peace and security. The Security Council
should take decisive action to end such activities. It
should blacklist the companies and individuals that
deal with such partisan entities. There should be
accountability in accordance with international law and
international legal frameworks.
Implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014) would limit the spread of terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Transnational
organized crime supports a lifeline of financial
resources for terrorist organizations. International
and regional cooperation and implementation of those
two resolutions are crucial, especially in the areas of
security, intelligence, border control and capacitybuilding. Iraq is a glaring example of a country
suffering from trafficking of its cultural and religious
patrimony. We therefore support the adoption of a bold
and firm resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter.
We agree that there is a connection between terrorism
and transnational organized crime, particularly since
we suffer from both phenomena.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Mr. President,
I would first like to express my appreciation for your
initiative in organizing this important open debate on
terrorism and cross-border crime, with a special focus
on the African continent.
I align myself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union.
In view of time constraints, I will deliver an
abridged version of my statement, the full version of
which will be available via Twitter.
This week the world was shocked by brutal terrorist
events in Australia, Pakistan and Yemen. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands condemns these atrocious attacks
in the strongest terms. These events remind us of how
acts of terrorism can randomly target innocent civilians
and how they constitute a threat to peace and security
everywhere. These terrorist acts show that terrorism

48/62

19/12/2014

is one of the biggest challenges of our time. Terrorism
needs to be addressed globally, and all countries should
make efforts to that end. In order for these efforts to be
constructive, we need to remain firmly committed to the
universal principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The Government of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply committed to combating all
forms of terrorism. Together with Morocco, we chair
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum’s new Working
Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters. This week, the
inaugural meeting of the Working Group was convened
in Marrakesh, Morocco. We pay tribute to the efforts
of the Government of Morocco in this field. In view of
our close cooperation, Mr. President, we thank you for
having the Permanent Representative of Morocco and
me speak in succession today.
In our view, the United Nations plays a key role in
the international efforts to combat terrorism. This role is
threefold: first, to facilitate cooperation among States;
secondly, to mainstream preventive and protective
measures across the United Nations agenda, including
development; and thirdly, to go after the means of
financing terrorist groups, their leaders and affiliated
persons. The United Nations sanctions regime is, of
course, a crucial tool for this purpose.
The increasing links between terrorist groups
and cross-border crime are of grave concern to
the international community. We are concerned
that criminal activities are an important financing
mechanism for terrorist groups, particularly in certain
regions of Africa. The proliferation of arms as a result
of the destabilization of Libya has strengthened and
emboldened these terrorist groups, and they threaten
regional peace and security. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands takes this threat very seriously, and we
therefore have a large contingent in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. As I said earlier this week, we treasure our
cooperation with Chad in the field in Mali.
In the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, a special
Horn of Africa Working Group addresses both regional
stability and specific issues in the Sahel. It is important
that more States make use of this Working Group
to focus to a greater extent on the specific regional
dimensions of terrorism in that part of Africa. As I
mentioned previously, countering transborder crime is
a key element in that work.

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

We need to collect more empirical data on the
links between transnational organized crime and
terrorism. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) is well equipped to do this, and its
transnational organized crime assessment for West
Africa is a prime example. We also suggest making
more intensive use of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime for combating
cross-border crime on the African continent.
The impact of these crimes is felt by countries
in the region. And it is also felt in Europe, which is
a frequent destination for trafficking in persons and
drugs. The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes it is
crucial to forge new partnerships between European and
African countries to combat the destabilizing effects of
transnational criminal activities. Through the UNODC,
the Government of the Netherlands supports affected
Governments in data collection and capacity-building
for law enforcement agencies. On 21 January 2015,
our Mission in New York will host an event to discuss
the broader adverse effects of transnational organized
crime on the sustainable development of countries. We
strongly welcome the participation of African States.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a partner for
peace, justice and development. We therefore cooperate
intensively with multilateral and bilateral counterparts
on both transnational organized crime and counterterrorism efforts. We seek to build strategic partnerships
for a joint response, promoting peace, justice and
development, and we strongly welcome suggestions by
countries in the affected regions for ways to cooperate
further.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of the Kingdom of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country’s successful presidency of the Security
Council during the month of December, and especially
on the pertinence of the thematic choice for the debate,
namely, threats to international peace and security:
terrorism and cross-border crime.
The Kingdom of Morocco takes this opportunity
to reiterate its firm condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms, stressing that nothing can justify a terrorist
act. Therefore, following the Taliban terrorist attack
perpetrated at a school in Peshawar, His Majesty King
Mohammed VI sent a message of condolence and
sympathy to the President of Pakistan, His Excellency

S/PV.7351

Mr. Mamnoon Hussain, and through him, to the people
of Pakistan, in which he condemned these despicable
acts in the strongest terms, stressing that terrorism is
banned by the precepts of our tolerant Islamic religion
and rejected by heavenly religions, the principles of
humanity and democratic values that hallow the right
to life as the supreme principle of human rights.
We also condemn in the strongest terms the
abduction in northern Nigeria of women and children
as well as the killing of several dozens of them by the
terrorist group Boko Haram. We reiterate our solidarity
with the Government and the people of Nigeria.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2195 (2014), which will help to consolidate the relevant
instruments and resolutions in the fight against
terrorism, as well as those relating to cross-border
crime.
The last decade has seen a resurgence of terrorist
acts coupled with a increase in the power of crossborder crime, threatening the stability, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. Networks of terrorists and
criminals who cooperate and are active in trafficking
of all kinds — weapons, human beings, drugs and
so on — spare no effort to weave links for criminal
purposes. Our continent, Africa, is no exception,
unfortunately, and the Sahelo-Maghreb region has not
escaped this scourge.
The fact is that as this danger is studied and
analysed, the link between drug trafficking, crossborder crime, armed groups, separatist movements,
tiny terrorist groups and the financing of terrorism
is increasingly confirmed. Drug-traffickers and arms
dealers have joined the ranks of Al-Qaida and Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). These criminal
networks are intertwined and support each other, but
they are also globalizing, thereby increasing their
abilities to destabilize, massacre and commit atrocities.
They threaten peace and security not only in the African
region, and especially in the Sahel-Maghreb region, but
also at the international level.
The Kingdom of Morocco was among the first States
to alert the international community to these dangerous
connections between traffickers, armed groups and
terrorists in the Sahel, calling for vigilance and joint
efforts at the subregional, regional and international
levels. Our concerns grew from the discovery of
the connections between terrorism, trafficking in
drugs, weapons and human beings, and the taking of

14-7069049/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

hostages — innocent tourists, aid workers and even
United Nations officials. My country then called for
concerted preventative action by the States of the Sahel
and Maghreb region to curb the already-visible adverse
effects of such activities.
Events in northern Mali and the serious infringement
of its territorial integrity, the expansion of the terrorist
group Boko Haram, whose influence is spreading in the
Sahel-Saharan region, and the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and criminals have only confirmed our fears
and shown that the threat of instability is not merely
hypothetical but immediate and real, with adverse
consequences for our entire region. Morocco’s concerns
therefore led to our call for concerted action by the
States of the Sahel-Sahara and Maghreb region to fight
such transnational crime and terrorism together.
To tackle the phenomena of terrorism and crossborder crime, my country has developed its own
national strategy based around security governance,
the implementation of a legal framework, the fight
against social insecurity and the reform of the
religious sector. Moreover, we have contributed to
international efforts — within the United Nations,
as part of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
through fruitful and active cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force — as
well as at the regional and subregional levels, through
cooperation and exchange of expertise in various
fields with allied African countries, and through
South-South and triangular cooperation. We have also
contributed to international initiatives and discussions
in the fight against terrorism, including the Global
Counterterrorism Forum.
Terrorism and cross-border crime feed on a
complex set of interdependent political, economic and
social challenges that must be met by strengthening
good governance, sustainable development, promoting
and upholding respect for human rights, and investment
in human capital through appropriate education and
training to immunize individuals against crime,
extremism and terrorism. That is why my country
believes that the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel requires both the
ownership of each Member State of the region and the
support of the international community.
It is also essential to strengthen border security
in the Sahel-Maghreb region to cut off transnational
50/62

19/12/2014

threats and prevent the free movement of terrorists and
traffickers in arms, human beings and drugs so as to
stop this surge of terrorism in the region. It is with this
objective that the Kingdom of Morocco hosted several
meetings and conferences, including the ministerial
conference on cooperation on border control in the
Sahel and Maghreb, held in Rabat in November 2013,
which culminated in the Rabat Declaration, calling for
concrete steps to improve border security. On 28 and
29 October 2014, Morocco organized, again in Rabat,
the Regional Conference of the Geneva Declaration on
Armed Violence and Development in the Middle East
and North Africa region, under the theme “Ending
armed violence for peace and development”, with the
aim of emphasizing the crucial need for subregional
cooperation.
In the context of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum Foreign Terrorist Fighters initiative, The
Hague–Marrakech Memorandum on Good Practices
for a More Effective Response to the Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Phenomenon was adopted, as my colleague the
Dutch Ambassador just mentioned. Morocco co-chairs
the Working Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters with
the Netherlands and held a meeting on this subject on
15 and 16 Marrakech, which adopted a vigorous and
ambitious plan of action to counter foreign terrorism.
In conclusion, because terrorism and crossborder crime are blind to religion, to nationality and
to borders, the international community must equip
itself with a comprehensive strategy for mobilization
and cooperation at all levels. The fight against these
twenty-first century scourges must be the ever-vigilant
daily task of all of us until they are totally eradicated.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Niger.
Mr. Boureima (Niger): I am taking the floor on
behalf of the four States members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and Benin.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Chadian
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December 2014 for having convened this important
open debate on terrorism and cross-border crime, under
the agenda of threats against international peace and
security, in general, and those relating to terrorism and
cross-border crime, in particular. We thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feldman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing on the very informative report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

system to help States and subregional and regional
entities in Africa in fighting terrorism (S/2014/9), as
well as Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer
of the African Union, for his comprehensive briefing.
The presence among us today of high-level
representatives, including the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Chad, Nigeria, Luxembourg and Libya,
the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Argentina and
the Director General for Foreign Policy of Chile, is
eloquent testimony of the importance of the topic under
discussion as well as of the need to take appropriate
action.
As made clear in the concept note (S/2014/869,
annex) usefully provided by the Chadian presidency to
the participants in today’s debate and the report of the
Secretary-General, there can be no doubt that terrorism
and cross-border crime are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. Therefore, the connection between the
two phenomena is not without negative consequences
on subregional, regional and international conflictprevention and resolution efforts, including those of the
Security Council as the body primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. This also raises the issue, as the concept
note rightly underscores, of determining whether the
tools at the Security Council’s disposal to achieve its
objectives remain appropriate for the situation on the
ground.
In this regard, the States members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and Benin — whose populations
have for several years suffered serious and frequent
attacks against peace and security, including acts
of terrorism — believe that, while we appreciate
the multifaceted support provided to our efforts by
bilateral and multilateral partners alike, it would be
very desirable to carry out an in-depth analysis of the
situation. This would allow a more appropriate strategy
to be designed. Such reflection is all the more needed
now that the United Nations itself is preparing to review
its peacekeeping operations in 2015 so as to adapt them
to current realities. To that end, it has already put in
place a High-level Panel, chaired by Mr. José RamosHorta, former President of Timor-Leste and Nobel Peace
Laureate. Furthermore, the concept note prepared for
this debate contains elements that can serve as paths
to follow.
We fully endorse the arguments put forward by
the presidency in the concept note, according to which

S/PV.7351

cross-border organized crime has enlarged the field
of operation of terrorist groups to the detriment of the
capacities and authority of the States in which they
operate, seriously inhibiting conflict resolution efforts
because they are often found in troubled areas. In the
region covered by the Lake Chad Basin Commission and
Benin, the terrorist activities of Boko Haram, probably
in connection with other similar groups, are not only
undermining peace and security throughout the entire
region and beyond by expanding their activities, but
are also making serious inroads into the very stability
of the countries of the region. Indeed, in addition to
the horrific abductions of 300 young students from
Chibok, Boko Haram has also caused thousands of
people, especially women and children, to flee their
homes and seek refuge in neighbouring countries. The
humanitarian situation created as a result cries out to
our collective conscience and, given the urgency of the
situation, cannot be allowed to continue.
To that end, the States members of the Lake Chad
Basin and Benin appeal to the entire international
community, particularly the Security Council, for a
response commensurate the threat to the subregion
from the conjunction of the phenomena of terrorism
and transnational organized crime, so that this threat
may be forever halted and eradicated from the region.
Certainly, the partners at the Paris conference on
security in Nigeria, held in May, and at the Follow-up
Ministerial Conference on Security in Nigeria, held in
London in June, expressed their solidarity and pledged
assistance to the countries of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Benin, which have since decided to
pool their efforts. Since then, they have taken significant
measures to create a centralized intelligence unit and a
multinational joint special forces unit that have yet to
be made operational.
With the unanimous adoption of resolution 2195
(2014), we place great hope that it will be usefully
implemented to effectively fight these two scourges
of our subregion and elsewhere, especially when the
Secretary-General reports on the issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me begin by once again
expressing appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate to discuss the intersection
between terrorism and cross-border crime in Africa
and to take a broad look at its implications for regional
and international peace and security.

14-7069051/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and Ambassador Téte António for their comprehensive
and lucid briefings. Ethiopia fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the African Union,
which extensively covered all the salient issues, and
therefore my remarks will be brief. Ambassador
António’s statement was indeed very comprehensive.
There is no need to repeat what he said.
The link between terrorism and cross-border crime
has been a matter of real concern for us in Africa, and its
ramifications for the peace and security of our continent
cannot be overemphasized. Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaeda in
the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haran and others groups
have expanded their terrorist and criminal activities
beyond the confines of national boundaries, and various
regions of Africa are already suffering the impact of
these negative developments. It is not always easy to
make a clear distinction between terrorist activities that
affect a whole region and other forms of cross-border
crimes, because no doubt they feed on each other.
In our region in particular, Al-Shabaab is posing
threats not only to Somalia but also to the wider
region. That terrorist group has been benefitting from
piracy, ransom, the illicit charcoal trade and taxes to
finance its outrageous terrorist and criminal activities.
Although Al-Shabaab has been significantly weakened
by the joint military operation of the Somali National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia, it has
nonetheless expanded its activities beyond the Somali
borders. It has been launching a series of asymmetrical
attacks in neighbouring countries. Of course, we all
recall the barbaric Westgate Mall attack last year by
Al-Shabaab in Nairobi that claimed the lives of many
innocent civilians. The group has also been threatening
to launch similar attacks in Ethiopia, and no country of
the region is immune to the danger.
The meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council, held at the level of Heads of State and
Government in September, noted the regional dimension
of terrorism, particularly in northern Africa, the Sahel
region, central and eastern Africa. Accordingly, it
expressed its serious concern over the increasing
terrorist and other criminal activities of extremist
groups across national boundaries. That is why it has
called for practical and action-oriented cooperation at
the regional level, building on the experiences of the
Nouakchott Process and other similar initiatives to
combat terrorism and cross-border crime, including

52/62

19/12/2014

drug trafficking, illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, and others.
The exchange of information and intelligence, the
enhancement of border security, the establishment of
regular mechanisms for cooperation and the sharing of
experiences and best practices are indeed very critical
to dealing with the threat of terrorism and cross-border
crime at the regional level. That is what we are trying
to do in our subregion, and we are fully committed
to continuing to build on our experience to fight the
menace of terrorism and related crimes in all their
aspects.
At the level of the Council, we believe that the
issue needs to be given greater attention than it has
hitherto enjoyed. As clearly explained in the concept
note (S/2014/869, annex), there is a need to reflect
on the existing strategies and available tools so as to
enhance efforts to address the nexus between terrorism
and cross-border crime. In that regard, we believe
that it is imperative for the United Nations and its
relevant bodies to assess their cooperation with various
regions and identify gaps with a view to devising an
appropriate strategy to provide the necessary assistance
to build their capacity in addressing this challenge,
thereby reducing the ability of terrorist groups to take
advantage of cross-border crimes.
There is no doubt that, insofar as our region is
concerned, there is a critical need to ensure that decisions
taken by the Council are effectively implemented. Here,
the illegal charcoal trade comes to mind immediately.
In that spirit, we support the recommendations outlined
in the concept note and look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on United Nations efforts to address
the threat of terrorists benefiting from cross-border
crime in affected regions, including Africa. That is
why we have also sponsored resolution 2195 (2014), and
welcome its unanimous adoption by the Council. The
real challenge lies with the effective implementation
of the resolution, which requires enhanced cooperation
and coordination on the part of Member States and
other stakeholders at all levels. I hope that we will all
rise to the challenge.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic State of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic State of Iran): Let me begin
by expressing my appreciation to the presidency of
Chad for convening this debate on the theme “Threats
to international peace and security: terrorism and

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

cross-border crime”. I also thank the Secretariat and
the observer of the African Union for their briefings.
The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, including
State terrorism. We firmly believe that resort to
indiscriminate violence and acts of terrorism, whether
by terrorist groups or by State military forces, as well
as the killing and injuring of civilians and generating
terror and intimidation among the public, constitute
criminal acts that cannot be justified in any way. My
country has long been a target of terrorism, and we
are fully aware of the grave consequences of acts of
terrorism for the victims, their families and targeted
societies at large.
Terrorism has long adversely affected the daily
lives of many nations, including mine, and continues
to jeopardize the safety, security and general wellbeing of increasing numbers of people around the
world. Despite all the efforts made on various fronts,
we are far from uprooting that menace. The threat of
terrorism continues to affect our societies. For decades,
a number of causes and factors has led or contributed to
terrorism under special circumstances. While nothing
can justify terrorist acts against innocent people,
national Governments and the international community
should do their utmost to uproot causes that can create
breeding grounds for terrorists.
Moreover, terrorism has unfortunately occasionally
been manipulated and transformed into a tool used
for political leverage against others. Some have not
hesitated to work with terrorists whenever they see it
benefit their narrowly defined geopolitical interests.
We must indeed reject the functional approach to
terrorism. While it is often repeated that all forms of
terrorism must be condemned by all States, in fact
some States are inconsistent in their approach towards
terrorism. Those States accord preferential treatment
to those terrorist groups that are aligned with their
short-sighted political interests. While we reiterate the
importance and need of concluding a comprehensive
legal instrument to combat international terrorism, the
international community must strengthen its efforts
to develop such a comprehensive instrument, which
has been under consideration for several years. In
that context, we believe that a consensual definition
of terrorism will strengthen international cooperation
against terrorism and end ambiguities concerning that
term that are subject to abuse.

S/PV.7351

Today, the violent extremism largely embodied
by the Takfiri groups, enshrined in their dangerous
ideologies and manifested in their abhorrent brutality
and shocking savagery is chief among the threats to
peace and security in the Middle East and beyond. We
utterly reject stereotypes that attach the name of Islam
to bloody and violent acts committed by such despicable
groups as Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Jabhat al-Nusra, the Taliban, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and the like. Those groups are nothing more
than terrorist organizations that have emerged from
chaos and the assistance rendered to them over the
past decade. They have now found breeding grounds,
fabricated a new false cause and turned into a monster
that is even threatening their creators.
Unfortunately, terrorism in our region has also
developed into an abhorrent cross-border phenomenon.
Therefore we need the engagement of all regional States
and international actors to deny extremists access to
funds, recruits and other resources they use to spread
terror across the region and beyond. That should include
resolute actions to end moral and financial support for
extremists. The nexus created between terrorists and
drug traffickers is also of great importance in the fight
against terrorism.
During the past few years, my Government has done
everything in its power to fight the extremist groups in
the region. As a first step, it has secured its border to
prevent any movement to or from the areas controlled
by those groups. In many cases, Iranian officials have
stopped and apprehended individuals who have tried
to use Iranian territory to cross over or send material
assistance to terrorists. We continue our fight against
terrorism with resolution and determination. All
members of the international community have the same
responsibility to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
In our fight against terrorism, we cannot and should
not ignore the need to fight State terrorism. The Israeli
regime is one such State that has an unparalleled,
perverse record of employing terrorism as a means
to further its aims. Israel was founded on the basis of
activities conducted by such terrorist organizations as
Haganah, the Irgun, the Stern Gang and similar groups
that aimed at expelling the indigenous people from the
land they sought to occupy.
Since then, that regime has never stopped employing
terrorism to terrify the inhabitants of the lands it

14-7069053/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

occupies and the peoples of the region. The assassination
of innocent individuals has been its favoured tool for
terrorizing peoples through all phases of its existence.
The continued occupation of other peoples’ lands by
that regime and its periodic aggressions to support it
lies at the heart of the current situation in the region.
There should be no doubt that such Israeli policies are
the most important factor creating a space for such
terrorists groups as ISIS, Al-Qaida and Jabhat al-Nusra
in the region.
Finally, let me conclude by reiterating that
Hizbullah is part and parcel of Lebanese political life.
It is a political party by itself, and is represented in the
Lebanese Parliament and Cabinet. Malignant rhetoric
has not tarnished and never will tarnish its image
and its contribution to the cause of the people in our
region, namely, to resist the Israeli regime’s continued
aggression.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish to begin by thanking your country,
Chad, and your Foreign Minister for convening this open
debate on terrorism and transnational organized crime.
In particular, we wish to thank you for the initiative
of submitting an important and very comprehensive
resolution — the first on this topic, the content of which
Spain fully endorses.
I also offer our deep condolences to Pakistan and
the victims of heinous terrorist attack on a school
in Peshawar, and to express Spain’s solidarity and
willingness to continue working to end the violence and
scourge of terrorism.
I note the reference made this morning by the
Foreign Minister of Luxembourg to the consequences of
such crime on children. Terrorist tactics clearly have a
disproportionate impact on them. In this sense, I believe
it righ to condemn the recruitment and use of children,
especially in the context of suicide attacks. Children
associated with extremist groups should be treated
primarily as victims. Their detention for association,
or sometimes under the assumption of their association
with extremist groups, is certainly worrisme because
they may be exposed to degrading and inhuman
treatment. It is important to be very careful to respect
international standards of juvenile justice.
Unfortunately,
terrorism
has
increasingly
demonstrated its global character and the need to fight it
54/62

19/12/2014

through international cooperation. This requirement is
even more graphically evident in connection with crossborder crime. Here, capacity-building is particularly
important because such crime specifically targets
State structures, thereby weakening the principal
actor in the fight against terrorism. Besides being the
principal agent on the front line against terrorism,
the State is also a principal actor in guaranteeing the
human rights of its people, and must never abandon
respect for those rights and the rule of law in its efforts
to address both terrorism and organized crime. State
institutional quality is therefore essential in firmly
meeting the challenges in the field of criminal justice
and in imposing the rule of law against attacks that
may not only strike the law itself but also the officials
responsible for enforcing it.
Even if terrorists do not directly engage in crossborder crime, their connections are obvious, and often
benefit from the proceeds of crime, immediately or
through transit fees, extorsion or paid protection of
criminals. As stated in the concept note (S/2014/869,
annex) accompanying resolution 2195 (2014), this
scenario enables terrorists to replace the State in
various places and functions.
Since 2012, Spain has signed various bilateral
agreements to combat organized crime, including
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Its
agreements of recent years with Côte D’Ivoire, Moldova,
Panama and Uzbekistan complement the network
of bilateral counter-terrorism cooperation of Spain
with various countries of the Sahel and North Africa.
Beyond the bilateral environment, however, Spain’s
national security strategy considers cooperation to be
indispensable in the multilateral arena as an effective
and legitimate framework for combattng terrorism and
transnational crime, including prevention, capacitybuilding and the due treatment of victims. This effort
is ongoing. Just a few minutes ago, the Spanish police
detained three young people who had intended to fly
to Syria to join the Islamic State. We work on this
every day, in solidarity and coordination, to meet the
challenges under discussion today.
In the framework of the United Nations, we
consider it essential to maintain an ongoing and
committed cooperation in the framework of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and the
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism (UNCCT).

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

Under-Secretary-General Feltman this morning
summarized the main instruments that the CTED, the
CTITF and the UNCCT use in the broad context of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida, the Sahel and other regions of Africa
or Central Asia. Mr, Feltman also referred to the role of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with
which Spain signed a memorandum of understanding
last year to provide technical assistance for projects to
prevent international terrorism and combat corruption,
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime.
In a statement which Spain fully endorses, the
observer of the European Union has described the
Union’s main activities in the fight against cross-border
crime. Here, I will simply note that Spain participates
very directly in the implementation of its counterterrorism programme for the Western Sahel, and the
civilian mission EUCAP Sahel Niger, dedicated to
strengthening the capacities of the Niger in the fight
against terrorism and organized crime.
In the context of resolution 2195 (2014), it is also
necessary to strengthen cooperation, particularly with
Africa. Spain does so in projects with the African
Union and the African Centre for Studies and Research
on Terrorism with respect to the continental capacitybuilding for preventing and combating terrorism, to
which we have devoted more than $1 million, and to
the Serendi centre in Somalia for rehabiliating former
fighters of Al-Shabaab, for which we have earmarked
€1 million.
Terrorism is a criminal phenomenon that requires
long-term action and unflagging attention. States
face the challenge of being faster than terrorists and
criminals in using technological advances to create
more effective cooperation networks than they do.
Initiatives such as that presented today by Chad and
the resolution adopted today by the Security Council
show the need for constantly updating and adapting our
response to terrorism, which increasingly regenerates
itself and assumes new and diverse forms. I therefore
commend you, Sir, for your country’s initiative and
offer my gratitude to the members of the Security
Council.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Chadian presidency for organizing this
timely debate.

S/PV.7351

(spoke in English)
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the European Union and would like to add a few
remarks in its national capacity.
The recent attacks in Pakistan and Yemen are yet
another terrible reminder of how terrorism threatens
international peace and security. We are deeply
concerned by the growing ties between terrorism and
organized crime, from trafficking in human beings,
drugs and arms to kidnapping. Criminal associations
and some terrorist groups use the same illegal
instruments and channels, starting with corruption.
These threats transcend the borders of individual
States and require a multidimensional approach — and
not only the military option — that addresses the root
causes. We therefore need to strengthen Government
institutions, the rule of law, governance, border control,
arms control and control of financial flows. We also
need to promote socioeconomic development, youth
employment, respect for human rights, and the fight
against poverty and corruption.
We reiterate the need for a comprehensive,
coordinated strategy at the global and regional levels.
Is such a strategy is to be applied, individual States, the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations,
and civil society must all work together. At the same time,
it is critical to concretely apply international measures
aimed at preventing and reducing terrorism and
criminal activities. Starting with full implementation of
the Palermo Convention and its Protocols, particularly
the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by
Land, Sea and Air. This is the only universal legal
instrument dedicated to this crime. It seeks to prevent
and counter trafficking in migrants, protect their rights,
and strengthen cooperation between Member States.
This commitment was reiterated forcefully at the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly in the omnibus
resolution on organized crime, of which Italy was the
main sponsor again this year. It is in this perspective
that we recall the support our country lent to the
resolution on countering organized crime proposed by
the African Union and adopted yesterday.
My country has expressed its commitment to
fighting the terrorist threat by contributing to the birth
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, participating
in the main international and regional initiatives, and
fully implementing the sanction regimes and resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). Italy is also engaged in

14-7069055/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

countering the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Libya, Syria and Iraq.
We encourage dialogue and cooperation among
countries of different cultures and religious traditions in
countering terrorism. Italy also believes that combating
terrorism, violent extremism and criminality cannot
be independent of efforts to resolve political and
institutional crises in the attempt to bring peace to
countries torn apart by violent conflicts, and to improve
socioeconomic conditions in less developed regions.
In West Africa and the Sahel, Italy has implemented
complete sets of programmes in the fields of the rule of
law, institution-building, and training. Teams of Italian
officers have supported projects to build the capacity
of law-enforcement agencies in Guinea-Bissau, Mali,
Sierra Leone, Senegal and Nigeria. Italy has also
promoted customized police-training programmes on
border-control techniques and trained African officials
at border postings in Italy.
With regard to initiatives to break up the marriage
of convenience between criminal networks and terrorist
organizations, the Italian anti-Mafia bureau signed
a memorandum of understanding with its Nigerian
partner on countering trafficking in human beings and
the related illegal financial income. All these technical
assistance programmes are encompassed in the broader
framework of development cooperation activities that
Italy continues to carry on in several countries of West
Africa and the Sahel region. New joint initiatives are
focused on the fight against trafficking in migrants in
all its aspects.
Today’s debate rightly focuses on connections
between countering organized crime and countering
terrorism. Its outcomes can provide a useful
instrument for better coordinating the initiatives that
the international community is called on to enact to
address all forms of terrorism and transnational crime.
Italy will continue to contribute to these initiatives with
strong commitment.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the start
of this solemn exercise, allow me to express my great
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, assume such enthusiasm the
lofty and esteemed responsibility of President of the
Security Council, and to reaffirm on this occasion the
support of the Senegalese delegation.

56/62

19/12/2014

The theme that brings us together today — “Threats
to peace and international security: terrorism and
cross-border crime” — beyond its timeliness as an
urgently pressing issue, deserves our full attention
because of the particularly harmful nature of two
phenomena that transcend borders. Indeed, while
terrorism inexorably feeds on fanaticism and erroneous
ideological convictions, transnational organized crime
is the bedrock of the mafia activities that cynically seek
to destabilize States and the subsequent annihilation of
human societies.
I wish to commend the relevance and high quality
of the briefings made this morning by Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
Need I recall that terrorism, by its very
foundations, objectives and manifestations, has caused
the international community untold suffering, most
recently through the hateful criminal attack in Peshawar,
Pakistan, which my country condemns with all its force.
It is important in this respect to highlight and welcome
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 68/276,
on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review and the relevance of the four pillars
that constitute its main framework. We also welcome
the adoption this morning of resolution 2195 (2014), the
first of its kind to be adopted under Chadian auspices,
on the item with which we are seized today.
This unanimous momentum in the ongoing fight
against terrorism has led terrorist organizations to
seek other sources of funding, including transnational
organized crime. Its threefold security, economic and
social impact is a scourge that seriously undermines
the foundations upon which our States are based.
We therefore welcome the resolute response of the
international community to transnational organized
crime. This has resulted in the strengthening of the
international legal framework through the adoption of
the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, and the
Palermo Convention and its three Protocols, as well
as the strengthening of the operational capacities of
States, as reflected, inter alia, by the West Africa Coast
Initiative, which, in partnership with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has assisted the countries
of the West African subregion in the fight against drug
trafficking since 2009.

14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

As is clear from the consideration of the various
reports submitted to the Security Council, terrorism
exploits cross-border organized crime in many ways. In
this respect, the illicit trade in coal by the Al-Shabaab
militia in Somalia; the seizure of oil tankers by the
Islamic State or the Al-Nusra Front; and drug trafficking
by the Taliban or the abductions and ransom demands
conducted by several terrorist groups, including Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida, eloquently illustrate this fact.
I recall that Senegal supports the call of the Security
Council in its resolution 2133 (2014) of 27 January 2014,
requiring States to consider ways to prevent terrorists
from committing kidnappings or from benefitting
directly or indirectly from ransom, and to ensure that
hostages are released unharmed.
In this connection, I vigorously condemn the
numerous abuses of terrorist groups throughout the
world, especially those in the African continent, where
narco-terrorist groups seek to establish international
terrorist havens. That was the explicit purpose behind
the convening on 15 and 16 December, in Dakar, the
International Forum on Peace and Security in Africa,
with the aim of formulating concrete proposals
commensurate with the security challenges posed by
terrorism, organized crime and the traffic in humans
and weapons.
In the same vein, I note the convening in
Nouakchott on 18 December of the first summit of
countries participating in the process of strengthening
security cooperation and the operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture in the SaheloSaharan region. The highly significant results achieved
at the summit clearly demonstrate the high priority
attached by the African continent to the key issue of
the fight against terrorism within the framework of a
comprehensive strategy to ensure peace and security,
the sine qua non of development.
Let us make no mistake. Tis strategy against
terrorism and transnational organized crime should,
even at the risk of being ineffective, be inclusive and
participatory. It should, in fact, lead States and peoples,
in a gesture of solidarity, to take owbership of the cause
of the fight against these two scourges by promoting a
genuine awakening of consciousness, especially among
young people. It is therefore in our interests to promote
a true culture of peace — the indispensable vehicle for
dialogue among civilizations and peoples.

S/PV.7351

In the light of all this, the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime, while they are
the primary responsibility of States, should be at
the heart of peacekeeping activities and guided by
a truly preventive strategy. I would indeed like to
convey Senegal’s unshakeable will to work with other
stakeholders to build societies free from the yoke of
terrorism and transnational organized crime, as they
would be founded on the ideals of peace and justice and
guided by sustainable development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the delegation of Chad for taking the initiative to
organize this important debate on the them “Threats to
international peace and security: terrorism and crossborder crime”. I also wish to thank the presidency of
the Security Council for the concept note (S/2014/869,
annex) prepared for the purpose of this debate. We
share most the views and ideas contained in it.
In fact, there are many complex links between
transnational organized crime and terrorism, which
in turn pose a significant threat to regional and
international peace and security. This trend is becoming
clearer, notably in Africa, with the threat expanding
from the Sahel to its neighbouring regions. The terrorist
groups in the region are increasingly turning back to
existing informal trade routes and black and illicit
markets, including for the exchange of arms and drug
trafficking, to generate more funds and bolster their
capacities and geographic reach, as stated in various
United Nations and African Union reports.
As terrorism and transnational organized crime
transcend national boundaries, the effective prevention
and combatting of these threats require a renewed and
firm commitment, primarily at the national level. In this
context, Tunisia has ratified the relevant international
conventions, including 14 international instruments
against terrorism; the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime of 2000 and the
protocols thereto; and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption of 2003. A new draft anti-terrorist
law is under consideration by the legislative body. This
draft criminalizes acts of support for, the incitement
of, training for, the recruitment for, the glorification of,
the attempt to commit and complicity in terrorist acts.
In the same vein, an anti-terrorism judicial pole has
been inaugurated, on 16 December, bringing together

14-7069057/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

investigating judges, the indictment division and the
prosecutor, as well as judges who have already been
tasked with terrorist cases. On the security level, a
national counter-terrorism and organized crime pole
has also been put in place with the aim of addressing
this phenomenon based on a comprehensive security
approach.
Tunisia has additionally concluded a number of
bilateral agreements on counter-terrorism operations,
including with neighbouring States. These bilateral
agreements have focused, in particular, on assessing
terrorist threats, eliminating the sources of terrorist
funding and obtaining available information on
terrorists’ plans. It is also working on the development
of national electronic identification documents and
biometric passports by 2016.
Moreover, we are still strengthening our regional
cooperation with the Council of Arab Ministers of
the Interior, as well as through cooperation with the
relevant institutions, including the United Nations
counter-terrorism entities. I would like, in this regard,
to seize this opportunity to express my country’s
gratitude to the level of cooperation with the United
Nations counter-terrorism entities, in particular with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
with a view of further strengthening our national
legislation and judicial system to address the complex
related challenges.
By their very nature, complex links and dynamics
and the seriousness of their threats, countering
transnational organized crime and terrorism in the
affected regions, including in Africa, requires efficient
and effective national measures, but most of also
concerted actions by countries of the region, as well as
enhanced international cooperation by the international
community as a whole, building on the principle of
national ownership.
Renewed international action is indeed required
to ensure that terrorist groups do not receive any form
of financial or material support. For instance, there
are promising African-led initiatives, such as the
Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security
cooperation, and the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan
region, the African Mechanism for Police Cooperation
and the Tripoli Plan of Action of 2012, which
demonstrate the full commitment of African countries
to work closely together to address the challenges
58/62

19/12/2014

facing the region. Those initiatives need to be further
supported by international partners, as highlighted by
the communiqué of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union issued in a recent meeting, held
on 2 September, on the prevention and combatting of
terrorism and violent extremism in Africa.
Efforts need also to be redoubled with a view to
reinforcing the capacities of the national authorities of
the region to effectively police and control their borders,
curb illicit arms and goods, and deny terrorists safe
havens, as well as to strengthen the national judicial
systems to effectively prevent and prosecute terrorists
benefitting from transnational crime. Greater assistance
should be provided to the countries of the region with
a view to helping them to devise comprehensive and
integrated national strategies to counter terrorism,
transnational organized crime and illicit trafficking,
including the mechanisms for their implementation.
This is indeed a shared responsibility for the sake of
common interest.
Finally we consider that the United Nations is at
the heart of international cooperation against terrorism
and transnational organized crime. We are thus looking
forward to the report of the Secretary-General, as
mandated by resolution 2195 (2014), adopted today, and
in particular its recommendation to reduce the negative
impacts of terrorists benefitting from transnational
organized crime.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nyago (Uganda): Uganda profoundly
appreciates Chad’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
presiding over this relevant open debate. We also
appreciate the statement of Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, and indeed
that of Ambassador Téte António delivered on behalf
of the African Union, which Uganda fully subscribes
to. The participation in this open debate of the Foreign
Ministers of Nigeria, Luxembourg and Argentina and of
Chile’s Director General for Foreign Policy illustrates
its crucial nature.
Uganda once again presents its condolences to
Pakistan, Nigeria, Kenya and Australia for the senseless
terrorist killings that they have experienced this month,
in addition to the recent victims of the rabid Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham.
Uganda is committed to the fight against terror
within its borders and the region. Uganda thanks you,
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. President, for a theme well selected, as, for Africa,
it has an added poignant relevance, bearing in mind the
worrying contemporary situation on our continent. The
theme is relevant because currently 20 African countries
are afflicted by terrorism, the majority of which are
in the Horn, East and Central Africa, in addition to
the Sahel and the western and northern parts of our
continent. Additionally, Africa, most unfortunately,
humanitarianosts at least two dozen United States State
Department-listed terrorist organizations.
The experience of organized, systematized terror
and terrorism is not new to the African continent. It was
clearly manifest in the transatlantic and trans-Sahara
slave trades, in addition to the equally nefarious East
African slave trade. This form of systematized and
organized terror and terrorism affected the lives of
millions of our people and resulted in acute societal
dislocations whose negative consequences still afflict
us today.
If we are to sincerely appreciate the reasons why
terrorism is prevalent in Africa, then it would be insincere
if we were to ignore the legacy of colonialism on the
continent. For, of the 20 or so African countries that
are affected by terrorism, at least half are landlocked,
and, in the main, landlocked African countries tend to
be the most underdeveloped and have the lowest global
human development indices. This is due in part to the
extremely high costs of trade they routinely encounter,
that is, when legitimately trading within themselves, or
when engaged in regional cross-border trade or, indeed,
that of the broader international type.
The Balkanization of the African continent, within
the context of its having fragile States and political
structures, is another factor that fuel the unfortunate
thriving of terrorism. Indeed, this unhealthy
cocktail — being Balkanized, landlocked, poor and
with stateless geopolitical entities — unfortunately
encourages opportunistic terror groups with an enabling
environment to thrive in, and I have in mind here,
among others, terror groups as the Allied Democratic
Front, the Lord’s Resistance Army, Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and Al-Shabaab.
Terrorism-driven intra- and cross-border trade
is devastating our continent. Take the example of the
elephant population of Garamba National Park, in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
the 1970s, it was estimated that there were up to 20,000
elephants roaming freely in this vast, exceedingly
beautiful nature reserve. However, today, 40 years

S/PV.7351

later, more than 90 per cent of those animals have been
indiscriminately slaughtered for illicit trading, namely,
but not only, by the Lord’s Resistance Army and other
criminal networks. This is indeed a devastating loss not
only for the Democratic Republic of the Congo but for
all of humankind.
For this body, together with the broader international
community, to definitely solve the menacing challenges
of terrorism in Africa, we must seriously consider
providing the following interventions: support the
ongoing regional integration efforts, as, for instance,
with the East African Community, the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States, among others,
for those bodies would facilitate the required process
of creating viable States, economies and regional
legitimate trade. Indeed, the international community
must assist these efforts towards regional integration
through support for the construction of our physical
infrastructure such as roads, rail transport and airports.
Such intervention would enable the blossoming of
legitimate internal regional cross-border and broader
international trade, hence supplanting the terror-driven
illicit trade.
The political will to create viable State structures
through well-conceptualized Marshall plans in
situations of weak States or statelessness, in such
countries as, for instance, Somalia, Libya, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, is also required.
There is also a need for the international community
to ensure that illegitimate trade such as poaching and
poached commodities such as ivory and illegally mined
minerals is also severely constrained.
All of this must be done in a spirit of enlightened
self-interest. For, as the unfortunate examples of Osama
bin Laden and Al-Qaida, and currently the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, clearly illustrates to us all, we ignore
the growing terror threats in Africa at our own peril.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Mr. President, let me
join my colleagues in thanking you for organizing this
open debate.
Recurring acts of terrorism have posed one of the
greatest threats to international peace and security in
recent years. Millions of people, including women and
children, have become innocent victims of terror in our
times. We strongly condemn the unimaginably barbaric

14-7069059/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

act of terrorism targeting innocent schoolchildren in
Pakistan this week that claimed 141 innocent lives,
mostly children. Such senseless, despicable acts of
terror, as our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, rightly
observed, only enhance our resolve to fight this scourge
in a united manner, with a stronger commitment and
sincerity.
The effective countering of terrorism is a collective
endeavour. Because of the advent of technology,
terrorism and terrorist threats continue to evolve and
manifest themselves differently in different parts of
the world. Responses to terrorism need to reflect this
reality and be able to adapt constantly.
International efforts to combat terrorism must
involve addressing the root causes of terrorism.
In the process of identifying its root causes,
terrorism should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. Addressing
marginalization, poverty, social exclusion and racial,
cultural and religious discrimination must be part of
the strategies to counter terrorism.
It also needs to be recognized that terrorism cannot
be defeated solely by coercive measures. We have
to engage in soft diplomacy and impart awareness,
quality education, eliminate inequalities and work
with marginalized groups of society as an effective
strategy. Similarly, inculcating tolerance, promoting a
culture of peace and dialogue among civilizations, and
interfaith and intercultural understanding are among
the most important pathways to promote cooperation
among societies and nations and to successfully combat
terrorism. To have sustainable, long-term peace and
stability, Bangladesh has been promoting a culture of
peace and trying to inculcate a mindset of tolerance,
a mindset of love and respect for others, irrespective
of ethnicity, culture, caste, religion or colour, free of
hatred and intolerance. This cannot be done only by
the Government; all institutions and organizations,
in particular the media, teachers, community leaders,
schools, parents, authors, writers, poets and singers,
non-governmental organizations, civil society and
religious leaders have to take the lead to create a
mindset of tolerance and understanding.
The nexus between terrorist networks, non-State
actors and transnational criminals poses newer
challenges to State apparatuses and traditional lines
of national defence. They compel us to devise more
innovative, well-coordinated and near-impenetrable
strategies to ensure cross-border controls against the
60/62

19/12/2014

illicit movement of terrorists and criminals and the
transfer of weapons, ammunition and their means of
production and delivery. To be sure, the nexus between
terrorists and criminals has been greatly facilitated
by the advent and misuse of information technology
and easy access to weapons. The Internet has become
a fertile breeding ground for terrorist activities.
Subversive uses of the Internet must be identified and
obstructed. The financing of terrorism through the Web
must be halted and the online nexus of terrorist and
other organized criminal entities, including through the
use of social media, must be dismantled.
Bangladesh’s position on terrorism is consistent.
We denounce it in all its forms and manifestations,
no matter why, how or where it is carried out.
Bangladesh maintains a policy of zero tolerance for all
forms of terrorism, including financing of terrorism,
radicalization and violent extremism, both nationally
and internationally. Bangladesh, as a matter of principle,
does not allow its territory to be used by any terrorist
individual, group or entity against any State or people.
We have taken commendable initiatives to end crossborder crimes and terrorism, as well as cross-border
financing of terrorism and extremism. In addition, it
is imperative that the cross-border trafficking of illegal
weapons and ammunition be stopped in order to reduce
their supply to terrorists or terrorist networks. It is
essential that weapons producers correctly identify
every item produced, including arms and ammunition.
We recommend that the media name the producers of
killer weapons when they report on terrorist acts of
killing.
Bangladesh also maintains a strong legal,
regulatory and institutional regime countering
terrorism, including through statutory orders and by
enacting laws on anti-terrorism and the prevention
of money-laundering, as well as by implementing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
Security Council resolutions on combating terrorism
and financing terrorism, including resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 2178 (2014), and
their successor resolutions.
We believe that all national, regional and
international actions against terrorism should be
conform to relevant international human rights and
humanitarian laws. We are committed to working closely
with United Nations counter-terrorism bodies and their
international partners, including at the regional level,
in order to achieve greater international cooperation
14-70690

19/12/2014

Threats to international peace and security

on information-sharing and capacity-building so as to
address terrorist threats to peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this thematic
debate on terrorism and cross-border crime, which
comes at such a critical and challenging time.
Ukraine welcomes today’s adoption of resolution
2195 (2014), on the linkages between transnational and
organized crime and terrorism. Unfortunately, almost
every day we are learning, to our deep sorrow, of
new victims of the terrorist attacks that are occurring
in every corner of the world. That global evil can be
eliminated only through coordinated and decisive
measures on the part of the international community.
Ukraine is deeply concerned about the activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist entities associated with Al-Qaida,
and the negative impact of their presence, their violent,
extremist ideology and the threat that they pose to the
stability of the entire region. Ukraine condemns the
terrorist attacks committed by Boko Haram in Nigeria,
causing hundreds of deaths and injuries, and I would
like to take this opportunity to express my nation’s
condolences to the victims of the latest terrorist attacks
in Nigeria and Pakistan.
Ukraine shares the Security Council’s position
that terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations,
constitutes one of the most serious threats there is to
international peace and stability, and that any act of
terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of its
motivation and whenever or wherever it is committed.
Ukraine supports the central role the United Nations
plays in global efforts aimed at suppressing international
terrorism and promoting international cooperation
in the area. The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
continues to be central to addressing the evolving
trends of the terrorism phenomenon in an integrated
and balanced way. Ukraine is a party to about 20
multilateral conventions and protocols relating to
counter-terrorism. Its Government is actively engaged
in cooperation on counter-terrorism with many
international and regional organizations, including
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and the
Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering, as
well as the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development-GUAM.

S/PV.7351

Unfortunately, the problem of terrorism has
recently involved my country as well. As the Council
may know, the Government of Ukraine has been
conducting a counter-terrorism operation in the eastern
part of the country since March. It is simply incredible
that terrorism has emerged in a country where United
Nations experts assessed the threat of terrorism as
low just a few months before the Russian Federation’s
occupation of Crimea and the establishment of the
Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s
Republic terrorist organizations. As it has turned out,
foreign factors may have encouraged this evil to grow
rapidly. The situation in the world in general, and in my
country in particular, has shown that the international
community must redouble its efforts in the fight against
terror.
Ukraine is extremely concerned about the flagrant
violations of international counter-terrorism treaties
by various States. The Russian Federation continues
to flout its international obligations concerning
terrorism. In particular, it has completely ignored its
obligations under the 1999 International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and
the 1997 International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings. As the situation in Ukraine has
clearly shown, terrorism can be used as a means of
hidden aggression against a sovereign State. We call on
the international community to continue to take decisive
action aimed at combating State-sponsored terrorism
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its
members.
Without adherence to international treaties and
genuine cooperation on the part of all States parties,
any international counter-terrorism efforts, including
those of the Security Council, will be in vain. For
our part, I would like to once again underline that
Ukraine will remain committed to cooperating at the
international, regional and subregional levels with the
goal of making the global environment completely
intolerant of terrorism and its supporters.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to make a further
statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Today’s discussion has once again
demonstrated that our Ukrainian colleagues, as ever,
see terrorists, threats of terrorism and transnational
organized crime in places where other members of
the international community do not. We believe that

14-7069061/62

S/PV.7351

Threats to international peace and security

Ukraine’s abuse of the topic of today’s discussion
undermines the chances for creating a united Ukrainian
society. We once again call on the Ukrainian delegation
to consider that, and instead of using the Council for
propagandistic slogans and statements, to focus all
their efforts on contributing constructively to our
discussion of the very topical issue under discussion

62/62

19/12/2014

here today, that of combating terrorism and its links to
cross-border organized crime.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more speakers inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

14-70690
