S/2004/222*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 March 2004
English
Original: French

Letter dated 17 March 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you, herewith, the text of a communication
dated 2 March 2004 I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi Annan

* Reissued for technical reasons.

04-27678 (E)* 190304 310304

*0427678*

S/2004/222

Annex
Letter dated 2 March 2004 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on ISAF operations covering the period from 12 November 2003 to
12 February 2004. I would appreciate your making this report available to the
Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

S/2004/222

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
1.
This report covers the period from 12 November 2003 to 12 February 2004. As
at 10 February, the total strength of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) was 6,264, including 233 troops from 11 non-NATO countries.
2.
Minister Hikmet Cetin assumed his duties as NATO Senior Civil
Representative in Afghanistan on 25 January 2004. He will be responsible for
carrying forward the political-military aspects of the Alliance’s assistance to the
Afghan Transitional Authority in fulfilling the commitments under the Bonn
Agreement.

Status of partner/non-NATO contributing countries
3.
As at 10 February, a total of 19 NATO countries and 11 non-NATO countries
are contributing to the ISAF mission.

Security
4.
The security situation in Kabul and its environs (Kabul area of operations) is
characterized as generally calm, but not stable. On 27 and 28 January 2004, two
suicide attacks occurred against Canadian and United Kingdom ISAF patrols, which
resulted in the deaths of one Canadian and one British soldier; six other ISAF
soldiers were severely wounded. Numerous warnings continue to be received.
Nevertheless, ISAF has continued to execute its framework security tasks in
association with the Afghan National Army and the Kabul City Police.
5.
ISAF assumed responsibility for the operations of the German provincial
reconstruction team in Konduz on 30 December 2003. The security situation in the
Konduz area of operations is assessed as calm, but not stable. Although the
Opposition Militia Forces have no organized presence there, the area is nonetheless
of interest to them since it is at the centre of narcotics production. The local
infrastructure is fragile, the police have limited authority, and factional/tribal
frictions continue to undermine security. Execution of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration in Konduz, as one of the pilot projects, has led to no significant
increase in tension.

Support to the Afghan Transitional Authority and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
A.

Support to the Bonn Agreement process
6.

ISAF assistance to the Bonn Agreement process includes:

(a) The Constitutional Loya Jirga was conducted by the Afghan Transitional
Authority from 14 December 2003 to 4 January 2004. ISAF provided second-tier
security support and also took a lead in planning by coordinating a quick reaction
force to respond to any security incidents, an extensive search and explosive

3

S/2004/222

ordnance clearance of the site, and information operations for the event. ISAF also
provided standby emergency medical services.
(b) On 30 December 2003, ISAF took the first step in expanding its
supporting role to the Afghan Transitional Authority by taking responsibility for the
provincial reconstruction team in Konduz. This will facilitate the expansion of the
influence of the Afghan Transitional Authority into provinces beyond the capital.
(c) ISAF has been supporting the voter registration process in Kabul since its
start on 1 December 2003, with second-tier security support provided on request,
within its means and capabilities.
(d) ISAF shares the general concern whether the registration process will be
sufficiently advanced in time for elections in June 2004. ISAF has nonetheless
contributed to the planning process. The exact role of ISAF and the nature of the
security assistance required, based on the proposed operation plan of the Joint
Election Management Body, remain to be determined, taking into account the
primary role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the Afghan Transitional Authority in the organization and safety of the election
process.
B.

Support to security sector reform
7.
With the addition of Herat and Jalalabad, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process now comprises eight pilot projects.
(a) The ISAF-assisted disarmament, demobilization and reintegration pilot
project in Kabul was completed on 29 January 2004, with 1,797 Afghan Militia
Force soldiers formally disarmed. Discussions are currently under way between the
Afghan Ministry of Defence and the staff of ISAF headquarters to assess how best to
maintain the momentum created by the pilot project so that a smooth transition can
be achieved to the more substantial disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
campaign proper.
(b) Pilot projects are ongoing in Konduz and Gardez; preparations for the
launch of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in Mazar-e-Sharif are well
under way, and planning for the Bamian programme has started. The pilot
programme in Kandahar is currently scheduled to begin at the end of February.
(c) Although the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
makes provision for heavy weapons, it does not target them specifically. ISAF has
initiated a heavy weapons cantonment programme to secure heavy weapons from
Kabul city and its environs. Planned and executed in close cooperation with the
Afghan Ministry of Defence, and gaining broad support, this is a confidencebuilding measure aimed at both internal and external audiences and will improve the
security situation in Kabul. An agreement was signed between ISAF and the Afghan
Ministry of Defence on 12 January and the heavy weapons cantonment started
officially in Kabul on 15 January with the first convoy movement of heavy weapons.
The next heavy weapons cantonment project began on 10 February. Heavy weapons
cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes
continue to run in parallel and are mutually supporting.
8.
ISAF continued to support Afghan National Army training through the
provision of mobile training teams, focusing on training for artillery, explosive

4

S/2004/222

ordnance disposal and medical care. Embedded training teams and a “mentor”
programme will assist the leadership and professional development of Afghan
National Army headquarters and counterpart units. Further training opportunities are
under consideration.
9.
Enhancing the capability and authority of the Afghan national police force
remains critical to extending both the rule of law and the authority of the central
government. In Kabul, ISAF continues to contribute to the German-led police
development programme through joint patrolling and assisting with an internal
organizational review of the Kabul City Police. ISAF has also provided basic police
and weapon training to the Border Police at Kabul International Airport.
10. The Joint Security Coordination Centre established under ISAF direction on 22
September 2003 continues to enjoy modest success in encouraging the disparate
agencies of the Afghan Transitional Authority in Kabul to coordinate on security
matters. The order formalizing the Centre’s status combined with the aggressive lead
of ISAF in bringing the various Afghan Transitional Authority organizations
together promises an improvement in both coordination and security operations led
by the Authority within Kabul.
11. ISAF supported the United Kingdom-led counter narcotics programme with
accommodation and close protection for the teams engaged in training the Afghan
Transitional Authority counter-narcotics forces in Kabul.
12. Judicial reform, essential for the establishment of the rule of law, is critically
linked to the Bonn Agreement pillars, particularly for police training and counter
narcotics. Additionally, ISAF continues to work closely with the Afghan
Transitional Authority ministries to identify and address issues that impact directly
upon the rule of law.

Attacks against ISAF and ISAF operational activities
13. There have been nine attacks on ISAF since 11 November 2003. Five of the
attacks, which included rockets and improvised explosive devices, occurred in
December 2003 with no fatalities. Three attacks occurred in January 2004;
explosions south of the Kabul International Airport and in Kandahar, and two
suicide attacks near the Canadian Camp Julien and the United Kingdom Camp
Souter killed 17 Afghans and two ISAF soldiers. On 3 February, there were two
explosions from rockets launched from the south-eastern part of Kabul. No
casualties or damage were sustained.
14. Germany, as lead nation, has continued to run the Kabul International Airport
since NATO took over the ISAF operation. The airport is used primarily by military
or international community contracted aircraft. Currently, commercial use of the
airport is limited to the Afghan national carrier. A common approach of the
international community with respect to the airport’s rehabilitation is crucial. In
order to expedite this process, NATO will contribute to a framework document
created by the International Civil Aviation Organization for the rehabilitation of the
airport. In a next step, the Afghan authorities’ approval for the framework will be
sought. A transition plan for the airport has been developed to ensure a phased
transition from Germany to NATO. The transition began on 11 February and is
schedule to be complete by June 2004.

5

S/2004/222

Outlook
15. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1510 (2003), and as approved by the
North Atlantic Council, planning continues on ISAF expansion that will support and
strengthen the ability of the Afghan Transitional Authority to provide a more secure
environment for its people and for its governmental processes. ISAF has continued
to fulfil its mandate to assist the Afghan Transitional Authority in the provision of
security in mandated areas of operation. There is a risk that the security environment
will deteriorate in localized areas, particularly in conjunction with the preparations
for and conduct of elections planned for summer 2004. Security in both the Kabul
and Konduz areas of operation is expected to improve in the medium and long term.
ISAF remains active in security sector reform, in its support to the Afghan National
Army and the Afghan Transitional Authority security agencies. Following the
success of the Constitutional Loya Jirga, ISAF assistance to the Afghan Transitional
Authority with the Bonn Agreement process is now focused on the forthcoming
elections programme.

6
