VIII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

502 (VI). Regulation, limitation and balanced reduction of all armed forces
and all armaments; international control of atomic energy (11 January 1952)
( items 66 and 16) .................................................. .

1

503 (VJ). Methods which might be used to maintain and strengthen international
peace and security in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the
Charter ( 12 January 1952) (item 18) ............................... ..

2

504 (VI). Measures to combat the threat of a new world war and to strengthen
peace and friendship among the nations (19 January 1952) (item 67) ..... .

4

SOS (VI). Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of China
and to the peace of the Far East, resulting from Soviet violations of the
Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of 14 August 1945 and from
Soviet violations of the Charter of the United Nations ( 1 February 1952)
(item 23) ......................................................... .

4

506 (VI). Admission of new Members, including the right of candidate States
to present proof of the conditions required under Article 4 of the Charter
(1 February 1952) (item 60) ........................................ .
502 (VI). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all arma•
ments; international control of atomic energy

must include all kinds of armed forces and armaments,
must be accepted by all nations whose military resources
are such that their failure to accept would endanger
the system, and must include safeguards that will ensure the compliance of all such nations,
Noting the recommendation 1 of the Committee of
Twelve established by resolution 496 (V) that the
General Assembly should establish a new commission
to carry forward the tasks originally assigned to the
Atomic Energy Commission and the Commission for
Conventional i\rmaments,
1. t:·stablishcs under the Security Council a Disarmament Commission. This Commission shall have
the same membership as the Atomic Energy Commission and the Commission for Conventional Armaments, and shall function under the rules of procedure
of the Atomic Energy Commission with such modifications as the Commission shall deem necessary;
2. f)is.1·olvcs the Atomic Energy Commission and
recon1111e11<ls to the Security Council that it dissolve the
C01nmission for Conventional Armaments;
3. Directs the Disarmament Commission to prepa re prnposals to he embo<iied in a draft treaty ( or
treaties) for the regulation, limitation and balanced reduct ion uf all armed forces and all armaments, for the

The General Assembly,
Moved by anxiety at the general lack of confidence
plaguing the world and leading to the burden of increasing armaments and the fear of war,
Desiring to lift from the peoples of the world this
burden and this fear, and thus to liberate new energies
and resources for positive programmes of reconstruction and development,
Reaffirming its desire that the United ?\rations develop an effective collective security system to maintain
the peace and that the armed forces and armaments of
the world he progre~sively reduced in accordance with
the Purpos<'s and Principles uf the Charter,
Relieving that a necessarv means to thi~ end is the
development by the Unitt:<i'Nations of comprehensive
and co-ordinated plans, under international control.
for the reg-ulation, limitation and balanced reduction
of all armed forces and all armaments, for the elimination of all major weapons adaptable to mass de<struction, and for the effective international control of
atomic energy to ensme the prohibition uf atomic
weapons and the u~e of atomic energy for peaceful
purposes only,
Recognizing that '.l genuine system for disarmament

1
Sec ( l J]icial Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Amzc.ic.,. ;,gcnda items fh and 16, document A/1922.

1

2

General Assembly-Sixth Session

elimination of all major weapons adaptable to mass
destruction, and for effective international control of
atomic energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic
weapons and the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes only. The Commission shall be guided by the
following principles:
(a) In a system of guaranteed disarmament there
must be progressive disclosure and verification on a
continuing basis of all armed• forces-including paramilitary, security and police forces-and all armaments
including atomic;
( l,) Such verification must be based on effective
international inspection to ensure the adequacy and accuracy of the information disclosed; this inspection to
be carried out in accordance with the decisions of the
international control organ ( or organs) to be established;
(c) The Commission shall be ready to consider any
proposals or plans for control that may be put forward
involving either conventional armaments or atomic
energy. Unless a better or no less effective system is
devised, the United Nations plan for the international
control of atomic energy and the prohibition of atomic
weapons should continue to serve as the basis for the
international control of atomic energy to ensure the
prohibition of atomic weapons and the use of atomic
energy for peaceful purposes only;
(d) There must be an adequate system of safeguards to ensure observance of the disarmament programme, so as to provide for the prompt detection of
violations while at the same time causing the minimum
degree of interference in the internal life of each
country;
( e) The treaty ( or treaties) shall specifically be
open to all States for signature and ratification or adherence. The treaty ( or treaties) shall provide what
States must become parties thereto before the treaty
( or treaties) shall enter into force;
4. Directs the Commission, when preparing the proposals referred to in the preceding paragraph, to formulate plans for the establishment, within the framework
of the Security Council, of an international control organ (or organs) to ensure the implementation of the
treaty ( or treaties). The functions and powers of the
control organ ( or organs) shall be defined in the treaty
which establishes it;
5. Directs the Commission, in preparing the proposals referred to in paragraph 3 above, to consider
from the outset plans for progressive and continuing
disclosure and verification, the implementation of
which is recognized as a first and indispensable step in
carrying out the disarmament programme envisaged in
the present resolution;
6. Directs the Commission, in working out plans
for the regulation, limitation and balanced reduction
of all armed forces and all armaments:
(a) To determine how over-all limits and restrictions on all armed forces and all armaments can be
ea ku la ted and fixed;
( b) To consider methods acconlin~ to which States
can agree by negotiation among themselves, under the
auspices of the Commission, concerning the determination of the over-all limits and restrictions referred to
in suh-paragraph (a) above and the allocation within

their respective national military establishments of the
permitted national armed forces and armaments;
7. Directs the Commission to commence its work
not later than thirty days from the adoption of the
present resolution and to report periodically, for information to the Security Council and to the General
Assembly; or to the Members of the United Nations
\vhen the General Assembly is not in session. The Commission shall submit its first report not later than 1
June 1952;
8. Declares that a conference of all States should
be convened to consider the proposals for a draft treaty
(or treaties) prepared by the Commission as soon as
the work of the Commission shall have progrl'ssed to
a point where in the judgrnent of the Commission any
part of its programme is ready for submission to governments;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to convene such
a conference when so advised by the Commission;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish such
experts, staff and facilities as the Commission may consider necessary for the effective accomplishment of the
purposes of the present resolution.
358th plenary meeting,
11 January 1952.

503 (VI). Methods which might be used to main•
tain and strengthen international peace and
security in accordance with the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter
A

The General Assembly,
Reaffenning that it is one of the foremost Purposes
of the Pnited Nations to "take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace and for the suppression of acts of aggression
or other breaches of the peace",
Recognizing that the establishment of an effective
collective security system is in harmony with other
United Nations Purposes and Principles as embodied
in the Charter, in particular those relating to the pacific
settlement of disputes, which must be fulfilled if an
enduring peace is to be secured,
Reaffirming its desire, as expressed in its resolution
377 A (V) entitled "Uniting for peace", to ensure that
the United Nations has at its disposal means for maintaining international peace and security pending the
conclusion of agreements provided for in Article 43
of the Charter,
Recognizing that the ability and readiness of States
to contribute armed forces and other assistance and
facilities in support of United Nations collective action
are essential to an effective security system,
Ha,z,in_q rcrcived the report~ of tiw Collective Measures Committee rendered in acr11rdancc with paragraph
J l of resolution 377 A (V),
2

Ibid., Si.i-th Session, Suppic111rnt No. 13.
