S/2020/554

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 June 2020
Original: English

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 51 of Security Council
resolution 2502 (2019), covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 17 March 2020 to 16 June 2020. It covers progress made in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) since my report of
18 March 2020 (S/2020/214); provides an overview of political developments,
including progress towards the strengthening of State institutions and key governance
and security reforms; and outlines progress in adjustments to the Mission’s priorities,
posture and presence, as well as the pursuit of its comprehensive approach to the
protection of civilians. The report also provides information on progress made
towards the progressive transfer of tasks to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations country team and other relevant
stakeholders, and on the implementation of the measures taken to improve the
Mission’s performance. In addition, the report covers the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) on the delivery of the tasks mandated in Security Council
resolution 2502 (2019).

II. Political developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by the dynamics of the coalition between the
Cap pour le changement and the Front commun pour le Congo, against the backdrop
of efforts to contain the impact of COVID-19 in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the detention of the Chief of Staff of the President on embezzlement
charges. Diplomatic activities were also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, with
major regional meetings, such as the tenth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, postponed.
3.
On 24 March, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the President, Félix
Tshisekedi, declared a public health state of emergency, which was subsequently
validated by the Constitutional Court and repeatedly renewed by the National
Assembly and the Senate. This was preceded by the announcement, on 18 March, of
other preventive measures and the creation of a national solidarity fund to mobilize

20-07645 (E)

220620

*2007645*

S/2020/554

funds to address the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19. The fund is overseen by a
management committee made up of 12 members, including 2 women. On 21 April,
President Tshisekedi received the former President, Joseph Kabila, to discuss ongoing
efforts to address the pandemic, and called for national cohesion and unity. The First
Lady, Denise Nyakeru Tshisekedi, voiced concerns about an increase in domestic
violence due to confinement measures related to COVID-19.
4.
Tensions within the coalition between the Cap pour le changement and the Front
commun pour le Congo persisted. On 25 May, a majority of National Assembly
deputies voted to remove the First Vice-President, Jean-Marc Kabund of the Union
pour la démocratie et le progrès social, drawing public criticism from the Union ’s
leadership.
5.
The Prime Minister, Sylvestre Ilunga Ilukamba, held several meetings to discuss
macroeconomic stability in the context of COVID-19, with export earnings having
dropped significantly and the price of basic commodities and food supplies
fluctuating in major cities. In addition, on the initiative of the President, on 18 April,
an emergency food programme was set up in Kinshasa to facilitate the access of the
population to affordable food. On 29 April, the central bank was instructed to take
measures to stabilize the national currency. The Prime Minister also asked that
measures be taken to keep public expenditure within the limits of the revenues
generated by the Government.
6.
The Chief of Staff, Vital Kamerhe, leader of the Union pour la nation congolaise,
was detained on 8 April following investigations into alleged financial impropriety in
the management of the President’s 100-day programme. He was subsequently charged
with the embezzlement of about $51.2 million, which he denies. A majority of the
16 National Assembly deputies from the Union pour la nation congolaise released a
statement in which they deplored what they called the arbitrary arrest and detention
of their party leader. Some civil society organizations welcomed his arrest as a
milestone in the fight against corruption. On 26 May, the President of the Tribunal de
Grande Instance of Kinshasa, who was presiding over the trial passed away. The
authorities launched an investigation to clarify the causes of death.
7.
In Haut-Katanga and Lualaba Provinces, following the latest escape of Gédéon
Kyungu Mutanga from his house arrest in Lubumbashi on 28 March, security forces
killed 43 members of his Mai-Mai Kata Katanga militia. While the situation calmed
down in the following days, Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga, who has been previously
sentenced for crimes against humanity, remains at large.
8.
Since mid-March, a long-standing border dispute between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Zambia has flared up, with reports of a build-up of troops
from both nations around Moba territory, Tanganyika Province, and the killing of
several Congolese soldiers in sporadic clashes with Zambian soldiers. The two States
have reiterated their willingness to find a solution to the tensions, through diplomacy.
Mr. Tshisekedi and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, Joseph Malanji, met
on 25 March in Kinshasa. Both Governments later called on the Southern African
Development Community to help to mediate the issue, with the latter agreeing to
dispatch a technical team. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo, Jean-Claude
Gakosso, visited Kinshasa, Lusaka and Harare, where he encouraged the Presidents
of the two countries to resolve border disputes peacefully.
9.
My Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
participated in several meetings with the presidential task force and the Minister of
Health to discuss ways to support the national COVID-19 response. She also
participated, together with key members of the diplomatic and donor communities, in
a meeting convened by President Tshisekedi to discuss the domestic socioeconomic
impact of the virus. With a view to finding sustainable solutions to the security
2/17

20-07645

S/2020/554

situation in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu and support a peaceful political process,
she pursued her good offices with national and provincial authorities, noting the
importance of heeding the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. So far, no
armed group in the Democratic Republic of Congo has adhered to that call.

III. Security situation
North Kivu Province
10. The level of violence in Beni territory and adjacent areas in Ituri Province
remained of grave concern. The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continued to pose a
significant security threat, having moved to the west of Beni territory and into
southern Ituri, where the presence of State security forces is limited. During the
reporting period, suspected ADF combatants carried out nearly 30 attacks, in which
at least 89 civilians were killed, including 18 women, 1 girl and 14 persons whose
age and gender could not be confirmed. New patterns of attacks, including looting,
abductions and ambushes on patrols of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) indicated that ADF were regrouping, potentially
with the intention of regaining control of positions lost to FARDC. ADF attacks
resulted in at least 45 FARDC casualties, with MONUSCO evacuating 37 wounded
soldiers. The continued attacks prompted renewed calls for self-defence initiatives,
revitalizing support for local Mai-Mai groups fighting ADF in north-western Beni
territory.
11. Attacks attributed to the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
increased in Nyiragongo and Rutshuru territories, with at least 21 civilians killed. In
response, on 13 April, FARDC launched operations against the group, resulting in a
number of civilian casualties and displacement, as well as retaliatory attacks by the
group, with MONUSCO documenting at least seven casualties and the destruction of
over 100 houses. On 24 April, suspected elements of the FDLR-Forces combattantes
abacunguzi ambushed and killed 13 rangers of the Institut congolais pour la
conservation de la nature and four civilians in the Virunga National Park.
12. The conflict between the Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové (NDC-R) and the
Nyatura coalition with FDLR and the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain (APCLS) continued to create insecurity in Masisi and Rutshuru territories
and resulted in the further expansion of the area controlled by NDC -R. There were
nearly 200 separate incidents of clashes and exactions by these groups, during which
over 160 civilians were killed. Among the armed groups active in the area, NDC -R
fighters committed the greatest number of human rights violations, including conflict related sexual violence. In response, the Military Prosecutor of North Kivu issued an
arrest warrant for the NDC-R leader, Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, which has not been
executed to date.
South Kivu and Maniema Provinces
13. In South Kivu, renewed violence along ethnic lines broke out in the wider
Minembwe area, with over 30 civilians killed since the beginning of the year. In
Bijombo, clashes between local Twigwaneho militias and Mai-Mai fighters have
occurred on a weekly basis, triggering several MONUSCO interventions. In late
April, FARDC clashed with Mai-Mai groups for several consecutive days in the
Minembwe area, resulting in multiple casualties. An estimated 130,000 people remain
internally displaced, with few prospects of returning in the near future owing to th e
unstable security situation.

20-07645

3/17

S/2020/554

14. In Kalehe territory, there was renewed activity of combatants of the Conseil
national pour le renouveau et la démocratie, who had previously been scattered during
FARDC operations in December 2019. A group of nearly 100 Conseil combatants was
also reported in the Ruzizi Plain area in Uvira territory. The protracted insecurity
affecting Fizi, Mwenga and Uvira territories has required FARDC to concentrate their
forces there, leaving a vacuum that has enabled Raia Mutomboki group s to move
more freely in Kalehe, Mwenga, Shabunda and Walungu territories.
15. The security situation also deteriorated in the border area of South Kivu,
Maniema and Tanganyika Provinces owing to activity of Twa militias and Mai-Mai
Apa Na Pale. Following a reported surge in sexual violence committed by these
groups, MONUSCO deployed a temporary base as a deterrent. Mai-Mai Malaika
activity in Kabambare territory, Maniema Province, also continued to cause forced
displacement.
Ituri Province
16. The security situation deteriorated markedly in Djugu and Mahagi territories, as
groups of assailants associated with the Walendu community, including the
Coopérative pour le développement du Congo, intensified attacks against civilians
and security forces. From March to May, at least 333 civilians, including 70 women
and 61 children, were killed, and an estimated 300,000 people have been displaced
since the beginning of the year. There are indications that the assailants specifically
targeted the Wahema and other communities with a view to permanently displacing
them from their homes. State security forces and MONUSCO were also attacked. On
17 May, the MONUSCO temporary base in Roe, which is protecting over 20,000
internally displaced persons, came under attack, but successfully repelled the
assailants. In March, FARDC launched targeted operations in eastern Djugu territory,
resulting in the deaths or arrest of some of the leaders of the assailants. FARDC
suffered about 40 casualties. The groups of assailants have splintered and become less
cohesive since the loss of several of their leading figures, but the intensity of the
attacks has not decreased.
17. In southern Irumu territory, the security situation has continued to improve since
the signing of the peace agreement with the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri
(FRPI) in February. Despite delays in the implementation of the demobilization
process, due mainly to COVID-19, the FRPI leadership has reaffirmed its
commitment to the process. A degree of insecurity has nevertheless persisted, with
fringe elements of the group continuing to carry out sporadic exactions against the
local population.
Tanganyika Province
18. Intercommunal conflict in Nyunzu territory remained a source of concern, with
clashes between Twa and Bantu militias resulting in over 100 civilian deaths since
the beginning of the year. Reconciliation efforts have been hampered by disputes over
control of resources, including land and artisanal mining sites. From 1 to 22 April,
FARDC launched a series of operations against Twa militias and succeeded in
dislodging them from more populated areas. The continued presence of Mai-Mai Apa
Na Pale fighters in the area also contributed to insecurity, given the limited presence
of security forces in the province.
Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces
19. The security situation in Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces remained largely
stable despite the persistence of local political rivalries and intercommunity tensions.

4/17

20-07645

S/2020/554

IV. Human rights situation
20. In the first quarter of 2020, MONUSCO documented and verified 1,973 human
rights violations and abuses across the country. While violations committed by State
agents decreased, those attributed to armed groups and militias increased markedly.
Of greatest concern was the spike in extrajudicial or summary killings, with at least
730 civilians, including 148 women, killed during the first quarter of 2020, of whom
657 were killed by armed groups. At least 254 women and 67 children were victims
of conflict-related sexual violence, including 250 by armed groups, in particular
FDLR, and 71 by State agents, in particular FARDC. The vast majority of these
incidents were documented in North Kivu and South Kivu Provinces.
21. Several human rights violations by State agents were documented in the context
of COVID-19 preventive measures, including those put in place under the state of
emergency. These included the extrajudicial killing of four individuals, violations of
the right to physical integrity of 79 people, including 3 women, the arbitrary arrest
and illegal detention of 64 people, including 12 women, and 20 violations of the right
to property.
22. In Kongo Central Province, on 24 April, during an operation to detain Zacharie
Badiengila alias Ne Muanda Nsemi, the separatist leader of the Bundu Dia Kongo
movement, who had previously used inflammatory language against non-native
residents of the province, 31 of his followers were killed and 40 injured. There were
concerns regarding the disproportionate use of force by State agents during these
operations.

V. Humanitarian situation
23. The humanitarian situation remained concerning, with an estimated 25.6 million
people in need of assistance and 5.5 million individuals being internally displaced.
Significant recent developments affecting the humanitarian situation included a surge
in displacement in Ituri, severe flooding across several eastern provinces, the
re-emergence of the Ebola virus disease and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
24. Insecurity and armed group violence caused significant protection concerns and
humanitarian challenges in the country’s eastern provinces. In Ituri, the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) received more than 100 allegations of serious
child rights violations, such as rape, killing and maiming, attacks on schools as well
as on health centres, during which large stocks of vaccines and parts of the cold chain
were destroyed. On 20 May, the Governor of Ituri, Jean Bamanisa Saïdi, called for
national and international solidarity with his province in view of the looming
humanitarian crisis. In the Minembwe and Mikenge areas of South Kivu Province, an
estimated 131,500 people are still internally displaced, with no prospects of return
owing to the unstable security situation. Despite access and resource challenges,
humanitarian actors continued to provide a multisectoral response to the affected
population.
25. Heavy rains in March and April led to deadly flooding in several eastern
provinces, destroying homes, farmlands and crucial infrastructure. Transport
networks throughout the affected provinces were severely impacted, further limiting
humanitarian access to people in need, including internally displaced persons and
refugees. MONUSCO supported an assistance mission by a Congolese ministerial
delegation that was conducted at the request of President Tshisekedi. In Uvira, South
Kivu, a MONUSCO rescue team extracted approximately 1,500 people from flooded
areas and provided them with emergency rations.

20-07645

5/17

S/2020/554

COVID-19
26. The Democratic Republic of the Congo registered its first confirmed case of
COVID-19 on 10 March. The caseload has since progressively increased to more than
4,500 cases. Kinshasa has been the epicentre and has accounted for the majority of
cases. In response, and building on capacities acquired in the management of Ebola
outbreaks, the Ministry of Health and its partners have focused on improving
surveillance systems, contact tracing, diagnostic capacities and the management of
cases in intensive care. However, there is still a need to further improve capabilities
for the rapid and decentralized detection, diagnosis, isolation and treatment of
COVID-19 cases. A $135-million national multisectoral humanitarian response plan
for COVID-19 was published on 18 April as an addendum to the 2020 humanitarian
response plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The plan includes health
and water, sanitation and hygiene activities and livelihood and protection support to
reduce the impact of COVID-19.
27. COVID-19 preventive measures resulted in additional challenges to
humanitarian access. Engagement with relevant authorities has been ongoing at the
national and provincial levels to facilitate critical humanitarian action, including
through the partial opening of airspace for humanitarian flights, with appropriate
preventive measures. The increased allocation of limited resources and expertise to
the pandemic response has also increased vulnerability to other public health issues.
For example, the reported reduction in vaccination rates throughout the country in the
context of the pandemic, coupled with limited cold chain systems and low coverage
and stock supply, could leave children at an increased risk of diseases such as polio,
measles and yellow fever.
28. MONUSCO supported the Congolese authorities in developing procedures and
policies to manage the implementation of COVID-19 response measures, as well as
security and air transport for the movement of materials. A distance learning
programme was launched by the Mission’s Radio Okapi as a joint initiative with the
Ministry of Education and UNICEF to allow 22 million primary school pupils to
continue their education with a daily two-hour programme, which is rebroadcast by
over 40 radio stations across the country.
29. MONUSCO also shared expertise on contact tracing and geolocation
identification with the Government’s COVID-19 response command centre, helping
to trace over 4,000 COVID-19 contacts in Kinshasa. The Mission took measures to
support the national police in safe and effective law enforcement in the context of
COVID-19. The Mission also helped prison and judicial institutions to limit the
spread of COVID-19, resulting in the authorities releasing 2,667 prisoners and the
development of contingency plans. In a joint project with the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the Mission provided preventive equipment and sanitary supplies,
prefabricated containers to serve as isolation and quarantine units, a vehicle for
ambulance services and food supplies for inmates.
30. As part of community engagement activities, MONUSCO helped local
authorities and other partners to sensitize hundreds of individuals, including over
200 women, on COVID-19 facts. In Beni, North Kivu, a network of women began to
produce protective masks with the technical support of MONUSCO, producing from
1,000 to 2,000 masks per day. Similar initiatives also took place in Goma, where a
MONUSCO quick impact project supported a women’s network in producing face
masks and hand sanitizer.

6/17

20-07645

S/2020/554

Ebola virus disease
31. On 10 April, a new case of the Ebola virus disease was reported in Beni, North
Kivu, after a period of nearly two months without new infections. This triggered a
renewed wave of community mistrust, as well as some protests by members of the
public who doubted the veracity of the new case. Subsequently, six more cases were
reported in the same area. Following successful containment measures, the 42 -day
count for declaring the end of the outbreak was restarted on 14 May. On 1 June, a new
Ebola outbreak was detected in the west of the country, in Mbandaka, Équateur
Province. The World Health Organization has staff in the area to support the response.
In addition, while the current Ebola response plan was extended until the end of
September 2020, approximately 1,170 Ebola survivors are still in need of health care,
biomedical surveillance, psychosocial care and assistance in order to be reintegrated
into their communities.

VI. Protection of civilians
A.

Mission strategies and political processes
32. MONUSCO initiated a review and update of its comprehensive, targeted
strategies for the protection of civilians in order to incorporate recent lessons learned
and to reflect changes in the situation on the ground. In line with Action for
Peacekeeping priorities, the strategies are centred on the primacy of advancing lasting
political solutions to conflict.
33. The strategy for Ituri focuses on ending violence and creating conditions for the
durable return of internally displaced persons by reducing the flow of w eapons,
restoring State authority and the rule of law, and addressing the most critical root
causes of persisting conflicts. The strategy for the Beni area in North Kivu aims to
address the ADF threat through a combination of military pressure, community
isolation and disruption of recruitment, trafficking and logistical support networks,
while also seeking a sustainable solution for the demobilization of Mai-Mai groups
operating in the area. Meanwhile, the strategy for Tanganyika focuses on establishing
a safe and secure environment in all parts of the province to enable the safe return of
internally displaced persons, with a view to creating the conditions necessary for the
Mission’s eventual withdrawal from the province. MONUSCO engaged with the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region to
strengthen the regional element of the strategies, including the persistent illegal
trafficking of natural resources. Similar comprehensive tailored strategies are being
developed for other conflict-affected regions where MONUSCO is present.
34. MONUSCO continued to support regional efforts towards enhanced security
cooperation under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. Consultations between the Office
of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator Offices in Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda and MONUSCO regarding
resource mobilization to support non-military measures against foreign armed groups
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo have been ongoing.
35. Integrated approaches to the protection of civilians have been key. For example,
joint mobile teams for the protection of civilians composed of military, police and
civilian components visited each field office in order to strengthen and standardize
the implementation of mission-wide protection mechanisms and tools. MONUSCO
also continued to focus on delivering its protection of civilians mandate in a genderresponsive manner. To this end, the Mission conducted a mapping of high-risk areas
for women and girls in connection with armed conflict, sexual and gender-based

20-07645

7/17

S/2020/554

violence and other human rights violations in South Kivu and North Kivu as an
analytical tool for adapting protective measures. In response to the challenges
presented by COVID-19, the Mission adapted its working methods in order to
maintain most of its operational capacity for the protection of civilians, while
implementing mitigation measures such as social distancing when engaging with
local communities.

B.

Field-level responses
36. MONUSCO reinforced its troop presence in Ituri Province in response to the
severe deterioration of the security situation. Four temporary bases, three in Djugu
territory and one at the border between Djugu and Mahagi territories, helped to protect
civilians, including internally displaced persons, by allowing more frequent and
robust patrolling. Additional peacekeepers and armoured personnel carriers were
deployed from the force reserve in Goma and the special forces in Beni. During the
reporting period, five attacks against the MONUSCO force were carried out by armed
assailants, resulting in the injury of one peacekeeper. On 17 May, MONUSCO was
successful in interrupting a major attack by combatants of the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo in Ndjala, 20 km south-east of Djugu.
37. MONUSCO supported FARDC operations in Djugu and Mahagi territories with
logistical assistance, the provision of intelligence, reconnaissance flight s and the
evacuation of wounded soldiers. In addition, daily joint aerial patrols have been
conducted with FARDC, and fuel and rations have been provided to help to keep the
vital national highway to Uganda open, which is of crucial importance given the
restrictions on flights owing to COVID-19. Through outreach and advocacy,
including on Radio Okapi, MONUSCO called on the local population to distance
itself from the assailants, while discouraging the communities targeted by the
violence from creating their own self-defence groups in order to maintain the
necessary space for future dialogue efforts.
38. As ADF attacks moved northwards towards Ituri, the Mission increased its
presence and visibility through the deployment of a temporary base in Mamove,
which enabled increased patrolling and more effective community-based early
warning systems. In addition, to enhance the operational capacity of the Intervention
Brigade of the force, in line with one of the key recommendations of the report of
Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz on challenges relating to the
protection of civilians in the Beni area, the Mission worked on improving
coordination with FARDC. This led to a tangible improvement in intelligence-sharing
and more effective activation of the Mission’s quick reaction forces, which
successfully repelled suspected ADF elements on several occasions. MONUSCO has
also shared intelligence derived from its aerial surveillance system for monitoring
armed group movements, enabling more targeted FARDC operations with a reduced
impact on the civilian population and a lower risk of collateral damage.
39. Community engagement has remained a cornerstone of the Mission’s response
to suspected ADF attacks and to violence committed by Mai-Mai groups in the Beni
area. MONUSCO has encouraged young people to dissociate themselves from armed
groups, advocated the release of children, undertaken community engagement
regarding attacks on Ebola treatment teams and facilitated meetings of civil society,
religious leaders, business representatives and local authorities to raise awareness of
the re-emergence of Ebola.
40. In the Masisi and Rutshuru territories of North Kivu, as armed group activity
intensified, MONUSCO increased day and night patrols by nearly 30 per cent
compared with the preceding three months. The Mission also worked with local

8/17

20-07645

S/2020/554

authorities and civil society actors to enhance community-based early warning
systems. Following the resumption of FARDC operations against FDLR, the Mission
supported FARDC by sharing intelligence, including to reduce the impact of military
operations on civilians. Joint patrols with the national police were also increased as
part of the strategy to reduce insecurity in Goma and its outskirts.
41. In South Kivu, MONUSCO continued to provide protection and assistance to
the local population, as well as to more than 3,000 internally displaced persons
gathered in informal settlements around its bases in Bijombo and Mikenge. In this
context, eight exchanges of fire between MONUSCO troops and armed elements were
recorded. On 28 May, the MONUSCO temporary base in Mikenge, which protect s
hundreds of internally displaced persons, was attacked by about 100 Mai -Mai
elements before being repelled, injuring two peacekeepers and five internally
displaced persons. MONUSCO also supported the deployment of 100 FARDC special
forces soldiers to reinforce the brigade operating in the area and provided it with
additional ammunition and equipment. MONUSCO further strengthened early
warning systems, including through the provision of logistical support to re-establish
cellular networks, where necessary. Lastly, the Mission facilitated dialogue among
the five major ethnic groups in the area, with a view to creating momentum for the
implementation of a ceasefire agreement signed by representatives of the different
armed groups in March.
42. In Tanganyika Province, MONUSCO supported the deployment of a mediation
team by the provincial authorities to reduce tensions between the Twa and Bantu
communities, resulting in the identification of trust-building measures. MONUSCO
also increased patrols to mining areas where there had been an increase in armed
group incursions. In addition, MONUSCO provided protection for 2,250 recently
returned internally displaced persons in Kalemie territory. In Maniema Province,
MONUSCO deployed a temporary base to Lubichako in March, which contributed to
a decline in the activity of armed groups and a significant reduction in reports of rape
and other forms of sexual violence perpetrated by armed elements in the area. The
base also provided escorts for humanitarian actors.

VII. Stabilization and the strengthening of State institutions
A.

Stabilization and root causes of conflict
43. Efforts to address the root causes of conflict focused on facilitating
intercommunal dialogue and conflict resolution mechanisms. Three projects, financed
by the Stabilization Coherence Fund administered by MONUSCO, were launched in
Ituri to support former FRPI combatants, while a project on democratic dialogue was
launched in Djugu territory. In Kasai Province, MONUSCO supported authorities and
communities in producing a community mapping ahead of a planned dialogue process
to address the root causes of intercommunal violence in the province. Most activities
related to stabilization projects in North Kivu were paused until the lifting of
restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
44. The illegal exploitation of natural resources remained a major source of conflict
and instability in the eastern provinces. In response, MONUSCO continued to take
actions to reduce rent-seeking by armed actors and to support civilian control over
supply chains. For example, in the Beni area, North Kivu, an extensive mapping of
34 mining sites was completed, which included an analysis of supply chains, upstream
actors and site legality. The Mission provided technical support for the development
of a monitoring system aimed at strengthening civilian control over the extraction and
trade of gold in order to increase legitimate economic activity while reducing illicit

20-07645

9/17

S/2020/554

income for armed actors. MONUSCO also supported the development of a four-year
project to improve security and human rights in conflict-affected mining areas in Ituri
and South Kivu.

B.

Security sector and justice system reform
45. Contributing to Action for Peacekeeping commitments to support lasting and
nationally owned solutions to insecurity, MONUSCO continued to pursue a cross pillar approach to security sector reform, leveraging its good offices and technical
expertise to help national authorities to tackle conflict drivers and pursue long -term
institutional transformation. Several meetings on security sector reform were held
with the Chief of the General Command of the Military Schools in early March, after
a visit to the Military Academy and other military schools in Kananga, followed by
visits to military schools in Kitona and Banana.
46. As a result of COVID-19 restrictions, and at the request of the Congolese
authorities, subsequent capacity-building and engagement activities were temporarily
put on hold until the situation allowed for their resumption. Among the activities
paused owing to COVID-19 were the weekly meetings with the General Defence Staff
of FARDC and monthly security sector reform coordination meetings with defence
attachés and other representatives of international and bilateral partners.
47. MONUSCO continued to provide technical and logistical assistance for the
investigation and prosecution of grave human rights violations, including support for
military court appeal hearings in Beni and Butembo in March that had been pending
since 2016. As a result, 52 convictions of members of FARDC and the national police
were upheld, which included 22 charges of rape of minors. The Mission also provided
technical support to the prosecution in the preparation of cases against the 29
individuals accused of attacking Ebola treatment centres in Biakato, Ituri Province.
48. Regarding the corrections system, the current prison population in the area
covered by MONUSCO totalled 22,000, more than three times the official capacity.
Despite efforts to help coordinate the provision of food and essential services, at least
62 individuals died in detention during the first quarter of the year, mainly owing to
a lack of access to appropriate medical care but also as a result of ill -treatment. In
addition, over 190 inmates escaped from detention centres across the country. An
unconfirmed number of COVID-19 cases have been recorded at the Ndolo military
prison in Kinshasa and the Makala prison, which are both operating significantly
beyond capacity, despite prevention efforts supported by MONUSCO.
49. MONUSCO continued to support the Congolese authorities in the
implementation and monitoring of the national mine action strategy and the national
action plan for the control and management of small arms and light weapons. Through
the programme implemented by the Mine Action Service, MONUSCO further
increased the capacity of the national security forces in conflict-affected areas to
manage their weapons and ammunition, notably through the installation of
infrastructure upgrades and weapons storage for 956 weapons, as well as the
continued provision of training.

C.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
50. At the national level, MONUSCO continued to support the Government in
streamlining disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes. The Mission
also provided technical and logistical support to provincial initiatives, in response to
increasing demand from armed groups looking to surrender. In North Kivu, 12 armed

10/17

20-07645

S/2020/554

groups in Lubero territory announced their desire to surrender and disarm. In South
Kivu, MONUSCO supported authorities and FARDC with the disarmament of
120 Mai-Mai Maheshe combatants.
51. In the context of the FRPI peace process, MONUSCO supported the development
of an operational plan for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
completed the construction of disarmament and demobilization camps. Despite some
delays caused by COVID-19, an important milestone was reached with the handover
of the disarmament site in Karatsi and the demobilization site in Kazana to the Ituri
provincial authorities on 11 May. The Mission continued to support the sustainability
of the peace process through community violence reduction initiatives that support
road rehabilitation and help to provide temporary employment opportunities and
psychosocial support to both former combatants and community members.
52. A total of 28 Congolese ex-combatants were demobilized by MONUSCO and a
total of 33 children formerly associated with armed groups were received and handed
over to child protection partners for reunification with their families. A total of
21 Rwandan ex-combatants and 19 dependants were also processed, but they could
not be repatriated owing to the COVID-19 pandemic.

VIII. Women and peace and security
53. MONUSCO continued to advance the implementation of tasks under the women
and peace and security agenda through targeted engagement with national, provincial
and local authorities, advocating for increased space for the representation and
participation of women, including in decision-making processes related to
COVID-19. The Mission also enhanced efforts to support community-based conflict
prevention and reconciliation structures led by women, which contributed to ensuring
a gender-inclusive response to protection challenges, including new risk patterns in
the context of COVID-19. Over 80 women benefited from these initiatives.
54. Public advocacy also continued to be an important tool for promoting an active
role for women in conflict resolution, including the monitoring of the implementation
of peace agreements. In Ituri Province, following persistent attacks by assailants, the
network of women’s organizations in Ituri issued a joint declaration calling on all
stakeholders to take concrete action to end the violence, address insecurity in the
province and promote a protective environment for women and girls.

IX. Child protection and sexual violence in conflict
55. MONUSCO verified 836 grave violations against children A total of 83 children
(34 girls and 49 boys) were reportedly killed or maimed, including 55 children killed
by armed assailants in Djugu territory. In addition, 62 girls were raped or subjected
to other forms of sexual violence; 16 of the rapes were committed by FARDC soldiers.
At least 525 children (175 girls and 350 boys) escaped or were separated from armed
groups. This includes 354 children associated with Kamuina Nsapu, who had
self-demobilized in 2019 and whose status was retroactively verified during the
reporting period.
56. The commanders of the APCLS-Janvier and Mai-Mai Maheshe armed groups,
operating in Masisi territory, North Kivu, and Walungu territory, South Kivu,
respectively, signed unilateral declarations and road maps in which they committed
themselves to ending and preventing child recruitment and other grave violations of
child rights, bringing the number of armed groups that have formally made such
declarations to 31. As a direct result of the dialogue with these commanders,
20-07645

11/17

S/2020/554

51 children were released. New recruitment of children by armed groups stood at
26 children to date in 2020.
57. Reporting on conflict-related sexual violence was significantly constrained by
insecurity and restrictions owing to COVID-19. However, available data suggests that
armed groups were responsible for around 80 per cent of reported cases of conflictrelated sexual violence. North Kivu represented a hotspot due to clashes between
NDC-R and the APCLS and Nyatura coalition resulting in serious human rights
abuses. Intercommunity violence contributed to an increase of sexual violence in
South Kivu, Maniema and Tanganyika, where Twa majority militias perpetrated gang
rapes of women, often while they were working in their fields. Sexual violence
perpetrated by FARDC also continued to be documented in North Kivu, particularly
in the context of military operations against ADF in the Beni and Butembo areas.

X. Exit strategy
58. The articulation of a joint strategy with the Government, including a set of
measurable benchmarks to facilitate the progressive transition of MONUSCO,
remained a key priority for the Mission. A broad understanding of key aspects of the
process has been reached with the Congolese authorities at the political level,
including the need for a multi-pronged transition process tailored to situations in:
(a) areas affected by structured armed conflict perpetrated by armed groups and
intercommunal violence; (b) areas affected predominantly by local armed groups and
intercommunity violence; and (c) areas moving to a state of post-conflict. However,
the focus on the national COVID-19 response has made it more difficult to engage in
a sustained dialogue on the transition. While progress on the development of the joint
strategy has therefore been slower than anticipated, preparatory work has continued
in order to ensure that detailed discussions with government counterparts can resume
apace, once circumstances allow.
59. In Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces, opportunities for increased cooperation
between MONUSCO and the United Nations country team have been further
explored, with a focus on identifying interventions that are aligned with the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, as well as national
priorities for vulnerability reduction. Agriculture and human capital development
received particular attention in terms of their potential for enhancing economic
development and social cohesion, while reducing the risk of new conflicts. This will
help to create a more favourable environment for the planned withdrawal of the
MONUSCO force component from the area, once the current freeze on troop
movements due to COVID-19 has been lifted.

XI. Mission effectiveness
A.

Mission performance
Assessment of the force and police components
60. In line with Action for Peacekeeping commitments, MONUSCO strove to
ensure a high level of performance by taking necessary measures in response to issues
identified during previous structured assessments. In addition, 11 out of 42 force units
were newly evaluated, with 5 units assessed as “excellent” and 6 as “satisfactory”.
The main performance gaps identified were related to environmental action plans,
perimeter defence, anti-riot capabilities, anti-ambush preparedness, medical
evacuation and mortar drills. The Mission has taken measures to address these issues

12/17

20-07645

S/2020/554

and will also continue to make assessments during predeployment verification visits
as part of the rotation processes.
61. The MONUSCO police component undertook evaluations of its six formed
police units, all of which were rated as “satisfactory”. The Mission encouraged policecontributing countries to increase the proportion of female personnel in formed police
units, which currently stands at 12.9 per cent, as well as to increase the proportion of
women in command positions by at least 25 per cent by the end of 2020. Individual
police officers (28.8 per cent of whom are women) were also evaluated to identify
and address performance gaps. Remedial actions included the redeployment of
individual police officers to positions better suited to their skill sets and expertise,
and targeted training sessions on criminal intelligence gathering, sexual and genderbased violence, crowd control, forensics and investigations for 366 police officers.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on mandate implementation
62. To address the challenges faced in the context of COVID-19, a “One United
Nations” task force bringing together the Mission and the United Nations country
team was established to ensure a coherent response. The task force developed a
COVID-19 contingency plan, with emphasis placed on the capacities of the United
Nations system and its humanitarian partners to stay and deliver on their mandates to
the extent possible. The continuation of essential and critical functions i s based on
the three broad principles of preventing United Nations activities from contributing
to the transmission of the disease, protecting staff from becoming infected and
ensuring business continuity.
63. Owing to restrictions of movement into and within the country in the context of
COVID-19, only United Nations special flights in support of the protection of
civilians, necessary cargo or other essential operations have taken place. The Mission
also temporarily suspended all activities involving large groups of people. Following
the suspension of rotations, repatriations and deployments of uniformed personnel
through 30 June, MONUSCO deferred 14 planned rotations. This has had an impact
on the new force and police generation processes mandated in resolution 2502 (2019)
and the implementation of some of the recommendations of General Dos Santos Cruz.
The Mission had to suspend environmental, contingent-owned equipment and
property control inspections, as well as aviation safety field assessments and field
audit visits.
64. To ensure the safety of United Nations personnel, the medical capabilities of all
duty stations were assessed and enhancements were made where possible, including
the setting up or identification of 60 available isolation beds in nine locations by the
Mission and the United Nations country team. The Mission, with the support of and
in-kind contributions from UNICEF and the United Nations Office for Project
Services, has also been setting up a “One United Nations” COVID-19 medical facility
in Kinshasa, which is expected to accommodate United Nations personnel once all
the equipment and qualified personnel are available. A total of 46 MONUSCO
personnel have tested positive (23 international personnel from the civilian and police
components and 23 national staff). One MONUSCO national staff in Bukavu died as
the result of COVID-19.

B.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
65. Between 1 March and 31 May, two allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
involving members of military contingents were recorded. Both allegations were
referred to the relevant troop-contributing countries. A total of 10 other allegations of
serious misconduct were recorded and are under investigation.

20-07645

13/17

S/2020/554

66. MONUSCO continued to implement robust preventive measures against
misconduct, albeit at a limited scale owing to COVID-19. These measures included
training for personnel, risk assessments and deterrent patrols by military police to
enforce existing curfews and out-of-bounds areas. Consistent with relevant
COVID-19 protocols, outreach initiatives to promote the United Nations zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse were conducted through local radio
stations and text messages.

XII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
67. Ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel and facilities
remained a priority, in line with Action for Peacekeeping commitments. A total of
87 incidents against United Nations personnel and facilities were recorded, including
9 incidents related to armed conflict, 27 to crime, 25 to civil unrest and 26 to hazards.
Of the personnel affected, 10 were international staff (8 men and 2 women) and
33 national staff (28 men and 5 women). Also seven incidents affecting the Ebola
response and three incidents related to COVID-19 mitigation measures were
recorded. These figures represent a decrease of 49 per cent compared with the
previous reporting period.
68. On 30 May, Trésor Mputu Kankonde, who has been accused of involvement in
the murder of Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp in 2017, was arrested by Congolese
authorities near Kananga. This development marks important progress in the
investigation of this serious criminal act committed against United Nations personnel
and serves to advance the Action for Peacekeeping commitment to bring the
perpetrators of such crimes to justice.

XIII. Observations
69. The political situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained
largely stable but is still fragile. The leaders of the country’s governing coalition have
demonstrated their continued commitment to resolving their differences
constructively in order to preserve what has become the cornerstone of the country ’s
stabilization over the past year. It is vital that dialogue remain the primary way to
resolve differences and that all stakeholders continue to take advantage of this unique
window of opportunity to forge ahead with the governance, security and
socioeconomic reforms required for the achievement of lasting peace and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am encouraged that the vast
majority of the numerous territories of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are free
of armed conflict. This is a testament to the deep commitment to the peaceful
resolution of disputes that exists at all levels in Congolese society.
70. I am deeply concerned by the serious deterioration of the security situation in
Ituri Province, where a surge in violence deliberately targeting certain communities
has caused mass displacement and serious human rights violations that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has warned may amount
to crimes against humanity. This violence has inflicted a particularly heavy toll on
women and children. Parts of South Kivu Province have also seen an alarming
resurgence in violence along ethnic lines. Eliminating the threat posed by armed
militias in these contexts will require a comprehensive approach that goes bey ond
military intervention and seeks to address the root causes of recurring cycles of
intercommunal violence, including access to land and competition for political power
and economic resources. To this end, MONUSCO will continue to support the
Congolese authorities in their efforts to protect civilians by neutralizing the threat
14/17

20-07645

S/2020/554

posed by armed groups and ensuring that perpetrators of serious crimes are brought
to justice, while providing mediation support to help to address the underlying drivers
of conflict.
71. ADF continues to pose a serious threat to civilians in the Beni area despite
ongoing military pressure. Broadening the response to address the funding streams of
the group and ensuring accountability for perpetrators of the violence will be vital i n
responding to this threat. I commend the shared commitment of the Congolese
security forces and MONUSCO to strengthening their cooperation, in particular in
the area of intelligence, where the Mission possesses specific assets. Further
deepening this partnership, on the basis of mutual trust and a common will to protect
the civilian population from harm, is key to tackling ADF.
72. Notwithstanding the ongoing violence in the eastern provinces, the participation
by some armed groups in disarmament and demobilization processes in North and
South Kivu is a positive sign. In this context, I commend the Congolese authorities
for their proactive approach in favour of the community-based demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. Going forward, I call on the Government to take
into account the importance of a national policy framework for a well -managed
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process that draws on lessons learned
from the past to ensure sustainable demobilization and community-based
reintegration into society.
73. I remain fully committed to enhancing the ability of MONUSCO to deliver on
its mandate to protect civilians. The timely implementation of the relevant provisions
of Security Council resolution 2502 (2019) and the recommendations of Lieutenant
General dos Santos Cruz continue to be of key importance in this regard. In the spirit
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, I count on the full cooperation of all
stakeholders, including troop- and police-contributing countries, to help to bring
about the envisaged improvements to the MONUSCO force, including the
Intervention Brigade, and urge Member States to ensure that the Mission has the
resources necessary to carry out its mandated tasks.
74. Sustained reform efforts remain essential to enabling the Congolese security
forces to discharge their responsibilities more effectively, in accordance with human
rights obligations. Renewed commitment at the political level and the enactment of
relevant legislation will be key in this regard. The strengthening of the military and
police by ensuring that they are properly organized, resourced, trained and vetted are
other important milestones. Further strengthening the logistical capacity of FARDC,
including in terms of mobility and the availability of barracks, allowing the armed
forces to maintain their presence in areas affected by conflict, also remains a critical
challenge.
75. I remain concerned by recent reports of human rights violations, including cases
of sexual and gender-based violence, perpetrated by Congolese security forces. I
welcome the steps taken by the Congolese military justice authorities to prosecute
perpetrators of serious crimes committed by members of FARDC and the national
police, which is crucial to building trust and confidence in the country ’s security
forces. Early and credible investigations by national authorities into these violations
and the payment of reparations to victims of sexual violence are critical to ensure
accountability. I also welcome the progress made in the arrests of those allegedly
involved in the killing of Ms. Catalán and Mr. Sharp in 2017. The progressive
strengthening of civilian justice institutions, in particular their independence and
capacity to process serious crimes, is also a critical component of efforts to address
the root causes of violence in the areas of the country still affected by armed conflict
and to build the foundations for lasting peace and security in the provinces
transitioning to a post-conflict phase.
20-07645

15/17

S/2020/554

76. Regional cooperation is key for the long-term stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My Special Representative and my Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes Region are working hand-in-hand on non-military measures to promote
the voluntary disarmament of foreign armed groups and disrupt their recruitment and
supply lines. MONUSCO will continue to support the efforts of President Tshisekedi
to improve the political climate in the Great Lakes region, in cooperation with my
Special Envoy. I welcome the determination of the Southern African Development
Community to support the peaceful settlement of the border dispute between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia and call on both States to resolve their
differences through dialogue, with the support of the region.
77. The COVID-19 pandemic has presented the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with yet another historic challenge. I commend the Congolese Government for taking
swift and decisive action to limit the spread of the virus. As elsewhere, the COVID-19
pandemic has had a significant socioeconomic impact, further complicating efforts to
address the political, developmental and humanitarian challenges facing the country.
In this context, it is all the more important that the country’s political forces unite
around a common response to the virus, setting aside partisan interests and individual
ambitions for the good of the Congolese people. The re-emergence of the Ebola virus
disease in two separate locations presented the country with additional public health
challenges, even as these challenges were rapidly addressed by response teams.
Against this background, I renew my call on armed groups to lay down their weapons
so that efforts to combat these public health challenges can continue unimpeded. I
welcome the swift and concerted response of the international partners of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the country at this critical time and call
on them to further support the country’s humanitarian response plan, which remains
severely underfunded. MONUSCO and the United Nations country team will
continue to support the response efforts of the Congolese authorities while ensuring
the continued implementation of their core mandated tasks.
78. The elaboration of a joint strategy for the phased and responsible handover of
responsibilities from MONUSCO to the Congolese Government, with support from
the United Nations country team, remains essential to preserving the hard-won
stability gains of the past two decades. MONUSCO will continue its strategic
dialogue with the Government to ensure that the Mission’s drawdown and exit are
carefully sequenced, conditions-based and undertaken in accordance with agreed
benchmarks. In this regard, I renew my call on the Government to approach this
process as a matter of national priority and articulate clear positions informed by the
overarching interests of the Congolese people.
79. Lastly, I wish to thank my Special Representative, Leila Zerrougui, for her
steadfast leadership and dedication, as well as all MONUSCO personnel, the United
Nations country team, the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region
and the troop- and police-contributing countries for their commitment to the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also commend regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and non-governmental organizations
for their continued support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and encourage
them to remain engaged, especially during this difficult time.

16/17

20-07645

20-07645

S/2020/554

17/17
