S/PV.9024

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9024th meeting

Thursday, 28 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodword. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Ravindran
Ms. O’Sullivan
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-33296 (E)
*2233296*

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

for certain action, so that the Office can also be held to
account, and I can also make sure that it does better in
terms of moving things forward.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Prosecutor Khan.
Mr. Khan: I thank you, Madam President, once
again for the opportunity to brief the Security Council
for the second time in relation to the Libya matter. I
had the opportunity earlier this morning to sit down
with the Permanent Representative of Libya to discuss
matters arising from the situation.
In my most recent briefing (see S/PV.8911), I set out
a hope and a plan that I would review comprehensively
the evidence and the Libya situation to give some
greater clarity to the members of the Security Council
and try to work as effectively as possible to discharge
the very serious and very necessary responsibilities
that the Council placed on my Office in 2011 by way of
resolution 1970 (2011). This is the twenty-third report
that the Office has presented to the Council.
I have to emphasize what is mentioned in the report
and what I said on the first occasion. Those situations
referred to by the Security Council cannot become
never-ending stories. They need to move forward, and
we need to ensure justice. It may be the case that the old
adage, “Justice delayed is justice denied”, is not correct;
maybe justice delayed still can be arrived at. But
certainly victims and survivors have every right to see
that their lives, their hopes and their suffering are looked
at thoroughly, and if there is criminal responsibility,
that it be brought before an independent court.
It is my view, with the greatest of respect, that
the new report put forward is a good attempt to try to
identify and articulate benchmarks for the first time in
an Office of the Prosecutor report in terms of timelines
2/17

28/04/2022

The stocktaking exercise has shown that some
significant progress has been made. There is a renewed
investigative strategy that provides a framework. But
the plan for renewed action of a more dynamic and
more impactful investigation is perhaps best articulated
in some key principles that underpin my overall vision
for the work of my Office.
The first principle is prioritization. I have said to the
Security Council before that I will prioritize referrals
made by the Council to my Office. That is not an abstract
principle. That requires greater resources, greater skills
and greater urgency because of the responsibility that
this organ has for maintaining international peace and
security. That promise of greater prioritization has
already been given effect to in these past few months
by additional resources and additional staff.
At the same time, I highlighted an increased need to
focus on a number of areas. For the purpose of today’s
briefing, I will identify financial investigations and
tracking in relation to the Libya situation, as well as
focusing on sexual and gender-based crimes and crimes
against and affecting children.
The other aspect is an ever more acute realization
that harnessing technology is absolutely vital. The
massive data sets that are the hallmark of the kind
of crimes that are within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) require us to utilize
in an integrated fashion the latest technology that is
available — artificial intelligence, machine-learning
tools, translation platforms that allow mass data to
be effectively translated before a more cost-intensive
exercise of human review is carried out. All that will
allow us to accelerate our action.
I think that it is not an exaggeration to say that,
when we start seeing some of that, and the timelines are
listed in the report, it will have the potential, I hope, to
have a profound effect on investigations.
In very simple terms, the types of evidence — video,
audio, statements, medical, the whole variety of
electronic data — need to be rendered more malleable
and more accessible to investigators and analysts and
then, ultimately, presented, as necessary and where
relevant, to a court of law.
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

The second principle is empowering victims and
witnesses. The Hague is distant from the majority
of its situations. It is distant from Libya, and it is
blindingly obvious, in my respectful view, that armslength investigations are not the most effective. We
need to work shoulder to shoulder and hand in hand
with victims, survivors and affected communities. We
also need to embrace and, wherever possible, work
with States. I think that once we work in that way with
victims, survivors and States, we will have a better
and more accurate compass that will help us navigate
a path towards the truth, separating truth from fiction,
actually finding out why certain things happened and,
where necessary, ensuring that cases are brought that
independent judges can establish.
Linked to that is something that is critical, and
I hope that we will have the support of Libya as
well. Something that, I think, is necessary in all our
situations is a field presence. We need to be more on
the ground, learning, listening and being able to access
the undercurrents of a situation so that we are not the
least informed person or group in a situation. We need
to be absolutely alive to the realities of the moment
in which different narratives take place, and we need
to be able to effectively separate those narratives. We
have already identified some putative witnesses who,
we think, would be accessible to the Office by way of
having a closer field presence.
Linked to that, we will partner with the Registrar
of the Court — we have an outstanding Registrar
of the International Criminal Court — and work
in collaboration with him and his Office to devise a
more effective outreach strategy because it is critical
that victims and survivors know what is happening.
Here we are some years from 2011, and I think that,
collectively, we can do a better job in communicating
with those who are victims and survivors and in
managing expectations, but also, within the confines
of confidential criminal investigations, in improving
communications and hearing from them regarding what
their concerns are. Their views and concerns can be
presented to the Court, but we also have a responsibility
to listen more effectively.
Regarding victims and survivors, I think that there
is a great deal that could be said, but, in this forum,
if I may, I will simply take this opportunity to thank
them for their outstanding steadfastness and for their
patience. I hope that we will do better. I hope that we
will accelerate our work. But I think that it is really

S/PV.9024

outstanding that the victims and survivors everywhere
whom I have actually seen, not just in Libya, despite
having lost almost everything in many cases, have
the remarkable belief, sometimes in the face of what
they see, that justice will not be an illusion but can
be rendered something that is effective, solid and
meaningful to their lives.
The third pillar, quite obviously, is better and closer
engagement with the Libyan authorities. I am trying to
ensure that, and I have set out in the report — and we also
had very good discussions today with His Excellency
the Ambassador of Libya — how we can partner with
Libya and improve our lines of communication. It is
not a favour of the prosecution. The clear foundation
of the Rome Statute is built on complementarity and
that justice is best done at home. Only when a State is
unwilling or unable does the Court come into play. I
therefore really want to look at ways in which we can
assist technically, as well as improve communications
regarding what is needed and what the gaps are, to help
national proceedings take the strain of responsibility
ever more effectively. Wherever any national authority,
any authority at all, is willing to step up the office, we
would be very delighted and pleased to support that
rather than cling to a particular case. I look forward to
exploring such options. But a corollary of that is also
the case that if a situation or a country is not willing
or is not able, I cannot be derelict in my non-derogable
obligations to act in accordance with the Rome Statute
and, in that process, to investigate incriminating and
exculpatory evidence equally.
Further to that, in the next reporting period I am
hoping both to have high-level interactions with the
Libyan authorities and to create a more systematic
and structured approach to working-level discussions
between my Office and the Libyan authorities so
that we can move things forward. I hope that a new
memorandum of understanding can be devised over the
next reporting period.
I had hoped to go to Libya during this reporting
period, but, with a number of issues — not only
schedules and logistics but also the elections — I took
advice, and it was not possible. However, I hope that
in the coming reporting period I will be able to go to
Libya and move things forward more effectively with
its assistance.
We have already had discussions at a technical
level regarding helping the Libyan authorities, as

22-332963/17

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

well as having the capacity in terms of forensics and
mass graves and moving that forward. It was raised
by the Ambassador and Permanent Representative
this morning. I also followed up on that, and those
discussions have in fact taken place. The assistance of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya is also
extremely important. In the past two weeks, my deputy
spoke with the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Libya, Ms. Stephanie Williams, and I think that we
will try to work, respecting the different mandates,
with the United Nations, where possible, so that we can
do a better job.
Obviously, we cannot view the objectives of the ICC
as bringing everything to The Hague. I have repeatedly
said that the ICC is a court of last resort. That is common
ground. The Hague should be a city of last resort. But
we need to find more creative, imaginative and effective
methods to get evidence to courtrooms, wherever they
are. For me, it really does not matter if there is the ICC
flag behind a judge or if it is a domestic flag. In fact,
very often, the latter is preferable. This is part of what I
described as “redefining success”. It is a way of us not
being beneficiaries of information that we receive from
States or that we collect from our own investigations.
Rather, it is a renewed impetus to try to receive
evidence and use it for our own cases, but also to give it
to national authorities to use, assess and narrow what is
far too frequently an impunity gap.
We have already had some concrete examples of
effectiveness in that regard. I mentioned this point in my
last briefing when I touched upon the migration issue
and mentioned our partnership with the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom, the European Union Agency for
Law Enforcement Cooperation and Italy, and the fact
that the Kingdom of the Netherlands has managed to
bring cases for crimes linked to the migration issue. We
need to look at ways of widening that and feeding more
information to national authorities.
The idea that somehow the ICC is an apex criminal
court is not a sound one. In my view, it is far better to
view it as a hub, with every national authority being
a spoke in a system that allows the wheel of justice
to move more effectively and overcome the bumps
that exist in every jurisdiction. This two-way street
of us getting evidence, conducting investigations and
analysing the evidence with technological tools and
experts in the Office — using it but also sharing it — is
one that will give value for money. It is one that is going
4/17

28/04/2022

to be effective. And ultimately, it will be more effective
for victims and survivors.
The binding reality is that in these types of crimes
we simply cannot act alone. It is often hubris to think
that the ICC or any national authority can act alone
when the crimes that seem to have taken place could
constitute either genocide or crimes against humanity or
war crimes. Structures are broken and cannot operate.
Witness protection has become a real issue in so many
parts of the world. The way to improve and bend the
arc towards justice is by working together, as well as by
independently and effectively testing evidence received
from any source, trying to make sure that evidence is
reliable, with the many tried and tested forensic means
to do that, and if we do so, we can fulfil our mandate
with ever greater efficiency.
The twenty-third report is perhaps characterized
by a number of things, but what I have tried to do
and what I will always endeavour to do to the best of
my abilities, however limited, is to be candid. There
are challenges: the political and security situation in
Libya with which the Libyan authorities are dealing
is difficult, dynamic and challenging. This of course
has implications for investigations, but there are always
various means — with good will and imagination — of
trying to make sure that things move forward effectively.
I have tried to be transparent in the report. I
have set benchmarks. I will continue to set more
benchmarks, so that hopefully we can ensure that the
important responsibility given by the Security Council
in resolution 1970 (2011) is fulfilled, and, even more
importantly, that the victims and the survivors are not
an afterthought, that we put them centre stage and make
sure that their rights are properly and fully vindicated
to the best of our abilities.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Khan for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico thanks the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court and his team for presenting
the twenty-third report, pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), on the situation in Libya, and for the frank,
direct and clear briefing he has just made.
We of course support the strategy set out in the
report, which establishes research goals for the short
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

term. We underline the importance, as the Prosecutor
said again and again, of putting victims at the centre
of the investigations and at the centre of the Office of
the Prosecutor’s concerns. To this end, it is essential
that there be ever closer collaboration with survivors,
their families and the witnesses of the crimes allegedly
committed that fall within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. And of course, it is
essential to improve cooperation with third States.
It is of course essential to strengthen cooperation
with national courts based on the principle of
complementarity, which is something that the Office
of the Prosecutor has been promoting systematically
since Mr. Khan assumed his high responsibility, and
this is truly commendable. I would like to underline the
admiration we have for the work done so far.
With regard to the progress made in the investigation
of the case before us, Mexico is very concerned about the
crimes committed against migrants and refugees, which
according to the report could amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We are also concerned about
the situation prevailing in detention centres, some of
which are even operating clandestinely.
We emphasize these two aspects because they
involve people who are seriously vulnerable. In this
regard, we acknowledge the cooperation of national
authorities and the European Union Agency for Law
Enforcement Cooperation in support of investigations
into crimes against migrants, without forgetting the
need to provide psychological support to witnesses and
survivors of atrocities that could, as I said, constitute
crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court.
We know that the current political situation
imposes great security challenges, which affects, as
the Prosecutor just said, the investigative work on the
ground. We reiterate our call to the Libyan authorities
and all relevant actors to cooperate and facilitate the
work of the staff of the Office of the Prosecutor, in
particular for the proper collection of evidence and
proof, which requires conditions for the ability to
move freely and safely throughout Libyan territory.
Similarly, it is essential that the arrest warrants issued
by the International Criminal Court are complied with.
Mexico looks forward to possible new arrest warrants
for crimes committed between 2014 and 2020.
The twenty-third report highlights the improvement
in the use of technological tools and capabilities that
can significantly improve the work of investigation,

S/PV.9024

collection and storage of data and evidence in the
hands of the Prosecutor’s Office and shorten processing
times. We understand that all that should also have a
significant impact on the financial resources of the
Office of the Prosecutor. It is important to recall, once
again, the importance of the Council facilitating the
support by the United Nations for the expenses incurred
by the Court, taking into account that the situation in
Libya constitutes the second matter referred by the
Security Council to the International Criminal Court
and the first to be so referred unanimously, with 15
votes in favour of the referral (see S/PV.6491), which is
something we must never forget.
In conclusion, almost 20 years after the entry
into force of the Rome Statute, Mexico reiterates its
full support for the International Criminal Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor, in the conviction that
their work, together with the indispensable support
of all States, has the real potential to progressively
close the impunity gap in favour of the victims of the
most heinous crimes of international concern, on the
understanding that access to truth and justice is the
cornerstone of sustainable peace.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have read the latest report of Mr. Karim
Khan on his investigation of the situation in Libya. We
also note the so-called road map, which sets out the
Prosecutor’s vision for further work on the Libyan file.
The attempt to review the approaches of the previous
Prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, which were far from ideal,
is certainly a step in the right direction. However, so
far, a number of ideas raised in the report raise serious
questions. The most substantive among them is the
decision not to investigate the crimes committed in
Libya in 2011.
The Prosecutor has explicitly stated that the phase
of his work related to the investigation of the events
of 2011 has been concluded and that no new cases
are planned. We recall that the events of that period
led to the Security Council’s referral of the Libyan
dossier to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
More precisely, it was not the events themselves, but
the way they were projected by the Western media and
non-governmental organizations. The hastily fabricated
case against Al-Qadhafi by the ICC Prosecutor at the
time, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, was built on such crude
and apparent fabrications that it began to fall apart even
before the murder of the Libyan leader.

22-332965/17

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

At the same time, as we well remember, the
Al-Qadhafi case at the ICC was used to justify
NATO’s unprovoked military aggression against the
Libyan State. Western countries blatantly violated
the provisions of resolution 1973 (2011) when they
interpreted the imposition of the no-fly zone as giving
them carte blanche to carpet bomb the sovereign and,
at that time, prosperous State of Libya. The outcome
of those actions are well known: civilian deaths, chaos
and devastation within the country and mass flows
of refugees.
As of today, Libya continues to suffer from the
consequences of the 2011 NATO actions. Overall,
everything that was imputed to Mr. Al-Qadhafi and used
by the West to destroy both him and his country cannot
be compared to the suffering that Libya has endured as
a result of the NATO invasion and the years of chaos,
the power vacuum and the civil war that ensued.
We would especially like to emphasize another
point. What was done to Muammar Al-Qadhafi was
done with the connivance and full approval of United
States officials. It is worth recalling how then Secretary
of State Hillary Clinton commented on his gruesome
massacre with a smile, “We came, we saw, he died”.
If the words “justice” and “impartiality” really
meant anything to the ICC, it would not have focused
solely on investigating the supporters of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi; it would have also focused on NATO and
opposition war crimes. Instead, according to its report,
the ICC plans to end its investigation into the events of
2011. It turns out that, in the opinion of the Office of the
Prosecutor, no one else is to blame for the catastrophe in
Libya but the brutally murdered Muammar Al-Qadhafi.
That approach is simply astounding in its one-sidedness.
The principle of inevitable and inescapable
punishment, so often invoked by Western countries,
fails to apply to their own actions. I would like to ask
Prosecutor Khan: Who will be held responsible for the
breakdown of Libyan statehood and the years of its
people’s suffering? Why does the ICC have no questions
about the extrajudicial killing of Muammar Al-Qadhafi?
Should we regard that as the Court’s endorsement of the
policy of overthrowing undesirable Governments and
killing the leaders of sovereign States?
We are convinced that a comprehensive analysis
of the tragic events of 2011, while objectively taking
into account the role and responsibility of all parties,
must remain within the focus of the ICC. Without that,
6/17

28/04/2022

it would be utter hypocrisy to speak of justice and a socalled victims rights approach.
In conclusion, let me say a few words about the
current situation in Libya. Only now, almost 10 years
since the NATO aggression, are we seeing positive
signs of overcoming the deep-rooted political crisis
in Libya. We call on all parties not to interfere in the
electoral process in Libya, whose long-suffering people
have long deserved lasting peace.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
think that I have to say before beginning my intervention
that the narrative we have just heard from the previous
speaker is also astonishingly one-sided.
I thank Prosecutor Khan for his briefing. We wish
him continued success in his role and we commend
his dedication to securing justice for the most serious
international crimes.
The United States has historically been and
will continue to be a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for the victims of
atrocities through appropriate mechanisms. Justice,
accountability and the rule of law are values that we
share and that we continue to believe are best advanced
together. Now more than ever, with reports of atrocities
occurring daily in Ukraine, we see the need to uphold
support for international justice mechanisms, including
the International Criminal Court (ICC).
With respect to Libya, the United States looks
forward to ongoing cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor as he embarks on a renewed strategy
for providing meaningful accountability for heinous
atrocities committed against the Libyan people and
migrants who find themselves in Libya, pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). We welcome the extensive
and thoughtful stocktaking exercise conducted by his
Office over the past six months and his dedication to
exploring several lines of effort to meet the expectations
of victims who have waited so long for justice. That
includes commendable efforts, as he mentioned, to
re-engage with Libyan authorities on accountability
at the national level, in line with the bedrock principle
that the ICC must be a court of last resort, as well as
engagement with all other stakeholders directed at
securing tangible results.
The chronic insecurity we continue to witness
in Libya, including continued mobilization of armed
groups in the shadow of existing political rifts,
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

would be reduced by resolving political uncertainty
and promoting accountability. We welcome renewed
energy to explore available avenues for actions and
consolidation of efforts. Accountability, of course,
requires rigorous documentation and investigations.
We welcome the recent report of the Independent FactFinding Mission on Libya (FFM), released on 23 March
(A/HRC/49/4). The establishment of the FFM by the
Human Rights Council in 2020 represented a positive
step forward in efforts to document violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties in Libya since the
beginning of 2016.
Last month’s report revealed disturbing new
evidence of mass graves, thought to contain the
corpses of migrants at a trafficking hub, and affirming
that the FFM saw reasonable grounds to believe that
international humanitarian law had been violated. We
support ongoing efforts to build domestic capacity
to punish perpetrators of human rights, abuses and
violations and encourage support for local capacitybuilding and judicial reform in Libya. Central to the
success of any domestic prosecution is the guarantee
of fair-trial protections, as well as the protection of the
rights and security of victims and witnesses.
We continue to monitor the domestic legal
proceedings against Al-Senussi. We also call upon the
Libyan authorities to do more to support and advance
accountability efforts, including cooperation with
the ICC.
Former senior officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime,
such as Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, the latter of whom is subject to an arrest
warrant by the ICC for charges of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, must face justice. Victims
and survivors of human rights violations and abuses
in Libya deserve justice. We once again call on the
Government of Libya to revoke Decree 286, which
continues to curtail the work of civil society and
impede domestic efforts to secure justice for victims
and survivors.
Finally, promoting peace and security in Libya is
critical. The United States reaffirms its call for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries
from Libya, in line with resolution 2570 (2021) and
the October 2020 Libyan ceasefire agreement. The
ICC’s work in Libya is a critical element of our shared
commitments to accountability, peace and security. We

S/PV.9024

will continue to support the Court’s efforts to deliver
true justice to the people of Libya.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Prosecutor Karim Khan for his briefing, which as
always was clear, transparent and comprehensive.
In the tragic context with which we are familiar,
France reaffirms its indefatigable support for the
International Criminal Court and its staff. We pay
tribute to their independence and dedication. France
will continue to cooperate fully with the Court, the
only permanent international criminal court with
universal jurisdiction, playing a vital role in the fight
against impunity.
We welcome the attention paid by the Prosecutor
to the situations referred by the Security Council. With
regard to the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011),
France recalls that the fight against impunity is, like
the political transition, one of the central tenets of
reconciliation among the Libyan parties. We encourage
them to fully cooperate with the Court, as well as with
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, whose
mediation efforts must be supported.
France remains concerned about the non-execution
of arrest warrants issued by the Court. Resolution 1970
(2011) compels all States, whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute, and all regional and international
organizations concerned to fully cooperate with the
Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. The deaths of
the alleged perpetrators of the most serious crimes do
not deliver justice to the victims.
We note with interest the road map set out by the
Prosecutor in his briefing. We support, in particular, the
attention being paid to recent crimes under the Rome
Statute, including those committed against migrants and
in detention centres. We support his efforts to facilitate
the collection, processing and analysis of evidence.
The reports of the Secretary-General (S/2022/31)
and the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
(A/HRC/49/4) are damning. They document widespread
human rights violations, whose perpetrators must
not go unpunished. The increased repression of civil
society and human rights defenders in the context of the
political transition is particularly worrisome. We must
do our utmost to shed light on the atrocities committed
in Tarhuna and south of Tripoli. Democratic space must
be preserved, where women and young people can be
fully involved.

22-332967/17

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

The Office of the Prosecutor must possess the
necessary resources to discharge the mandate entrusted
to it by the Council. Safe and unhindered access to all
Libyan territory must be guaranteed to the Prosecutor’s
teams. Witnesses and survivors must also benefit from
all necessary protection.
The principle of complementarity remains essential
to the Rome Statute. We condemn threats and violence
against judges and lawyers in Libya. We welcome
the deepening of discussions between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the competent Libyan courts and
services. The announced visit by the Prosecutor over
the next few months will be an opportunity to enhance
such cooperation.
France will continue to work towards a political
transition in Libya, together with all of its international
partners. The goal is to create a more peaceful and
stable future for the country and its people and to
support the stability, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Libya.
Lastly, and in that regard, we strongly reiterate our
full support for the International Criminal Court and
the work of its Prosecutor, Karim Khan.
Ms. Nyakoe (Kenya): I thank Prosecutor Khan for
his briefing.
I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Libya in this meeting.
Accountability and justice are among the
cornerstones of a stable and peaceful nation. For a
country that has experienced protracted conflict, the
need for accountability and justice becomes even more
compelling. Libya retains the foremost responsibility to
ensure accountability and the delivery of justice within
its boundaries. Therefore, while acknowledging the role
of regional and international mechanisms, including
through resolution 1970 (2011), Kenya emphasizes
the need for such cooperation and assistance to be
extended within the parameters of the principle of
complementarity. We also call for increased support
to Libya in strengthening its national capacity for
investigations, prosecution and the judiciary.
Thousands of migrants, asylum seekers and
refugees continue to suffer great indignity and
inhumane treatment, reportedly at the hands of those
in authority and criminal networks alike, both within
and outside Libya. Given the extraregional interest in
the migration trends across the Mediterranean Sea into
8/17

28/04/2022

Europe, the current policies of such countries offering
assistance to stem this migration are superficial and do
not address its root causes. We call on the European
Union and other interested parties to instead seek to
honestly address the push factors of such migration.
We note the Prosecutor’s preliminary assessment of
the crimes against migrants and look forward to further
reporting on that investigation line.
Finally, we reassure the people of Libya of our
support in seeking peace in a Libyan-led, Libyanowned peace process and reaffirm our commitment to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mr. Karim Khan. We take note of his briefing. I also
welcome Ambassador Taher Elsonni, the Permanent
Representative of Libya, to today’s meeting.
The situation in the State of Libya remains uncertain.
There is competition for power, the mobilization of
militias and a lack of clarity surrounding the path of the
political process. Yet, we are optimistic that our Libyan
brothers will make it through this critical stage. In that
regard, the United Arab Emirates reiterates that there is
no alternative to a Libyan-led political dialogue, which
is the only way to end the Libyan crisis. We welcome
all Libyan efforts aimed at achieving those goals. We
also reiterate our call on all Libyans to avoid tensions
and disputes.
We commend the good offices of the United Nations
and its initiative to help to resolve the Libyan crisis,
as well as Egypt’s hosting of all parties to facilitate
dialogue concerning the constitutional basis.
To prevent escalation and further division in Libya,
it is important that the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
maintain its impartiality and distance itself from the
current political tensions. We also stress the importance
of maintaining the permanent ceasefire agreement,
including the phased, gradual and balanced withdrawal
of foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries from Libya.
As the Prosecutor previously explained, efforts to
implement the action plan for the withdrawal of those
forces would promote greater stability in Libya and
help prevent atrocity crimes.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates that the
primary responsibility of Member States is to implement
international law, including international humanitarian
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

law, and to prevent and stop atrocity crimes, including
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Ensuring
accountability for serious crimes, fighting impunity
and bringing justice to the victims must be carried
out in accordance with the fundamental principles of
international law, including respect for the sovereignty
and independence of States. We would also emphasize
that compliance with the principle of complementarity
under the Rome Statute of the ICC requires respect for
the views and positions of the concerned State.
Achieving justice, which is a national sovereign
prerogative, requires establishing lasting peace on
the Libyan territories by supporting national efforts
and building the capacities of Libyan institutions to
establish accountability and implement transitional
justice mechanisms. It also requires that Libyan
initiatives and efforts, as well as United Nations and
all other international efforts, be promoted with a view
to facilitating and supporting national reconciliation
processes to ensure long-term stability. In this regard,
we welcome the current engagement and meetings
between the ICC and the competent Libyan authorities.
We also welcome the existing cooperation between
Libya and the Court based on the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Office of the Libyan
Public Prosecutor and the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, in accordance with
the Court’s jurisdiction.

S/PV.9024

the ICC Prosecutors that the referral to the ICC had
no effect on bringing about a cessation of violence
or the restoration of stability in the country. In fact,
developments have only reinforced our view that when
cases are referred to the Court primarily for political
reasons, the ICC mechanism may not be best suited to
serve the purpose of justice.
Recent developments and political disagreements
in Libya are a matter of concern. We hope that all
outstanding political issues can be resolved peacefully
by the parties concerned, keeping the larger interests
of the Libyan people in mind. The ceasefire agreement
of October 2020 has held firm till now, and we
hope that all parties will work together to maintain
peace and stability. In that regard, we once again
reiterate the imperative of holding the presidential
and parliamentary elections as soon as possible. The
holding of the elections in a timely manner will be
necessary to carry forward the momentum generated
by the signing of ceasefire agreement. We note and
welcome the convening of the consultations of the Joint
Committee of the House of Representatives and the
High Council of State in Cairo by the Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General on Libya to determine the
constitutional basis for the elections.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
its commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of sisterly
Libya. We hope that concerted efforts will be made
to end existing divisions and prevent any measures
that would undermine the progress made during the
previous period.

The priority right now is to ensure that elections
are held at the earliest date in a free, fair, inclusive and
credible manner. We hope that all parties in Libya can
unite around that common purpose. It is important for
the Security Council and the international community
to support the Libyan people in that endeavour. We also
need to send a clear message that violence in any form
is condemnable and would undermine the progress
achieved since 2020.

Mr. Ravindran (India): I would like to join others
in thanking the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Mr. Karim Khan, for his briefing today
and for his comprehensive report on the work of the
Office with regard to Libya. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya at
this briefing today.

We must also ensure that terrorist groups
and affiliated entities are not allowed to operate
unchallenged in Libya. The continued presence and
activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Libya is of serious concern, including because of the
potential cascading effect it could have throughout the
Sahel region.

At the outset, I would like to state on record that
India is not a party to the Rome Statue. When the
Libyan issue was referred to the ICC way back in 2011,
India expressed its doubts about such a course of action.
Subsequent events have, unfortunately, vindicated our
doubts. It has been clear from successive reports of

India has traditionally enjoyed close and mutually
beneficial bilateral ties with Libya. We hope that all
efforts of the international community will contribute
towards achieving unity, peace, security and stability
and bring about an inclusive and comprehensive
national reconciliation in Libya.

22-332969/17

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

Ms. O’Sullivan (Ireland): I thank Prosecutor Khan
for his comprehensive and candid report and briefing
this afternoon. I also wish to welcome our colleague the
Ambassador of Libya.
Impunity remains a significant block to Libya’s
transition to democracy and the rule of law. That is
why the Security Council’s referral to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the Office of the Prosecutor’s
investigation are so critical to long-term peace and
stability in Libya.
We know that the operational, security and political
environment in which the Prosecutor’s Office continues
to operate in Libya is very challenging. In addition to
the fragile political situation, we are deeply concerned
by continued reports of violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law. The culture of
impunity described by the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya is particularly troubling.
In that difficult environment, progress by the
Office of the Prosecutor is particularly reliant on
cooperation with the Libyan authorities, and we
continue to urge Libya to execute the outstanding arrest
warrant against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi as a matter
of priority. We welcome the Prosecutor’s intention to
refresh the relationship with the Libyan authorities and
look forward to his travel to Libya in the near future.
We acknowledge that assistance provided by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya is in that regard
is vital.
Ensuring the ability of the Prosecutor’s Office to
conduct in-country investigative activities is also key
to progress on the situation, and we look forward to
hearing more in future briefings about a renewed
memorandum of understanding between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities.
Ireland is appreciative of the open approach to
reporting adopted by the Prosecutor in his latest report.
The Prosecutor’s prioritization of the situation in Libya
and the allocation of resources to that matter — in
particular support for the recruitment of additional staff
with specialized expertise with respect to sexual and
gender-based crimes — are also positive. That is a
particularly welcome development, since we know that
sexual and gender-based violence remains widespread
in migrant detention centres and that no action is being
taken by authorities to hold perpetrators to account.
We also note the Office’s preliminary assessment that
crimes against migrants, including sexual and gender10/17

28/04/2022

based violence, may constitute crimes against humanity
and war crimes.
However, we appreciate the fact that resources
remain a matter of concern for the Court across all
situations. We reiterate once again our view that where
the Security Council has referred situations to the
International Criminal Court, that should be matched
with adequate funding. Such referrals place an extra
burden on the Court, including through the reporting
requirement, and the Council should acknowledge as
much. With that in mind, Ireland committed additional
voluntary contributions to the ICC two weeks ago.
Such contributions will assist with all situations before
the Court and may directly benefit the work being
conducted in relation to the Libyan situation.
The increased emphasis on engagement with
victims and survivors in the Prosecutor’s forwardlooking investigative strategy is very welcome,
especially efforts to bring the work of the Office closer
to survivors, witnesses and the families of victims.
One of the challenges in that will be ensuring the
safety of those who wish to engage with the Court and
the Prosecutor’s Office. The intention to establish an
enhanced field office is a prerequisite to such further
engagement. We encourage all initiatives that ensure
that those who cooperate with the Court through
whatever means remain safe and secure.
Today, more so than ever, the work of the Court
is essential to upholding the rule of law and achieving
justice for victims. Prosecutor Khan, as always, can
count on Ireland’s strong and unwavering support
for him and his Office in working towards that
vital mandate.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): First of all, let me
thank Prosecutor Karim Khan for his useful briefing
today and for submitting the twenty-third report to the
Security Council concerning the Court’s cases in Libya.
Norway has been a staunch supporter of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) since its
establishment, and today we believe that the mission of
the Court remains as crucial as ever.
In the report before us today, we are particularly
concerned about the numerous and serious crimes
committed against the Libyan civilian population
and migrants.
Norway takes note also of the Office of the
Prosecutor’s renewed strategy of action for the situation
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

in Libya. We welcome the four core principles, including
the empowerment of those impacted by alleged
crimes to participate in the Office of the Prosecutor’s
work, and the fresh approach to engagement with the
Libyan authorities.
As the Prosecutor stressed, addressing impunity
is critical to sustainable peace and stability in Libya.
Accountability for the most serious crimes is key. Any
meaningful reconciliation will depend on holding the
perpetrators of atrocities to account. The ongoing work
of the ICC concerning its cases in Libya is crucial in
that regard.
We call on the Libyan authorities, its partners
and the international community more broadly to
cooperate with the Prosecutor’s Office. Let me recall
that resolution 1970 (2011) specifically mandated the
Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with and assist the
ICC and the Prosecutor. An important aspect of such
cooperation is for Libya, as well as the international
community, to support timely arrests and surrender
of suspects.
More broadly, Norway continues to support the
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process,
including the timely and safe holding of elections.
We commend the United Nations and Special Adviser
Williams for assisting the Libyan parties in that process.
We are worried about the current battle for
executive control, and urge the parties to agree on a
consensual way forward. That is critical to preserving
the country’s unity and stability. We must avoid a new
escalation of violence.
Norway welcomes the Prosecutor’s prioritization
of situations referred to it by the Security Council.
We look forward to continued cooperation with all
Council members in the fight against impunity and the
promotion of accountability for mass atrocities.
The Council must also assume its responsibility
and examine every possible measure to support the
Court, especially with respect to cases referred to it by
the Council. Not doing so undermines the credibility of
the international criminal justice system.
Let me reiterate Norway’s unwavering support for
the Court and the Office of Prosecutor Khan.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Mr. Karim Khan, for his valuable briefing on the

S/PV.9024

twenty-third report on the situation of Libya. I also
welcome the representative of Libya to today`s meeting.
At the outset, allow me to reiterate Brazil’s longstanding support for the International Criminal Court.
As one of its founders, Brazil recognizes the value
that a permanent, treaty-based tribunal has in fighting
impunity and bringing justice to victims.
We welcome the Prosecutor`s transparent approach
towards the renewed strategy for action in relation to
the Libyan situation. We consider it a positive step
to outline in an open manner the investigative and
prosecutorial strategy, including its key targets and
core principles, as reflected in the present report.
We also support the emphasis given by the
Prosecutor to the principle of complementarity, with
a view to supporting and strengthening national
investigations and prosecutions. We encourage the
Prosecutor to continue engaging with the Libyan
authorities on a regular basis, as complementarity is
one of the cornerstones of the Rome Statute system.
International criminal justice is a temporary solution
when States with jurisdiction are unwilling or unable
to investigate and prosecute the most serious crimes.
Brazil further welcomes the Prosecutor`s
willingness to bring his Office closer to survivors,
witnesses and families of victims, in agreement
with the national authorities. Such an enhanced field
presence could provide a safe, secure and stable
environment to witnesses who wish to engage directly
with investigators. Furthermore, cooperation efforts
can provide opportunities for strengthening local
institutions so that States can fulfil their primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes
committed in their territories.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
can also make important contributions to the national
authorities in the fight against impunity, employing a
collaborative approach in areas of investigation. Those
are important steps to hold perpetrators accountable
for their crimes, including those against migrants
and refugees.
The United Nations should provide appropriate
resources to the Court in relation to situations referred
by the Security Council. It cannot be overemphasized
that the current situation, where only States parties
cover the cost of Security Council referrals, is not
either fair or sustainable. We commend the Prosecutor

22-3329611/17

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

for having allocated additional resources to the Libya
investigation team.
In conclusion, Brazil would like to renew its
support for the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor in
ensuring justice and accountability, in accordance with
the principle of complementarity. We hope that a fruitful
relationship between the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Libyan authorities will foster a culture of justice
and accountability.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Karim Khan for his briefing on the twentythird report pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We
welcome the participation of our colleague, Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, in
this meeting.
The International Criminal Court’s mandate in
Libya is crucial. Expectations are high regarding not
only the fight against impunity, but also reconciliation
and coexistence among Libyans.
We note with concern the enormous challenges
faced by the Prosecutor in Libya in the collection of key
information and forensic evidence in the context of the
investigative steps necessary to ensure the due process
of law against persons alleged to have committed
serious crimes in Libya in 2011 and crimes related to
military operations between 2014 and 2020, as well as
crimes against migrants.
The fight against impunity must remain an
imperative for all, and we believe that the scope of
justice in Libya must be extended to all atrocities
committed. That requires the ongoing support of the
international community to fully equip the Prosecutor
and his Office in their sensitive work.
We welcome the implementation of new
investigative strategies, which take into account
budgetary constraints without detriment to the needs
of justice, let alone the requirement to establish the
responsibility of alleged perpetrators of crimes.
It is of course necessary to work closely with
the Libyan authorities and to involve international
and regional actors, as well as civil society members
who can contribute to the success of this vast and
delicate undertaking.
We
welcome
the
judicious
advanced
information
technologies,
artificial intelligence.
12/17

use
of
including

28/04/2022

We are aware of the volatile security environment
in which the Prosecutor’s new investigative strategy
is unfolding. and we appreciate his efforts. Indeed,
the military-political crisis that has affected Libya for
more than a decade now is severe. Armed violence is
far from being contained. It goes without saying that in
such a climate of terror and fear, victims and witnesses
can feel threatened, which contributes to making the
exercise of justice quite complex and perilous.
That is why we would like to renew our call to all
parties to the Libyan conflict to redouble their efforts
to reach a comprehensive settlement of the crisis that is
undermining the country. We believe that the Libyan
people need justice and that it is the vocation of the
Office of the Prosecutor to administer and advance
that justice, in accordance with the principle of
complementarity. In this regard, very close cooperation
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya as a
partner is essential.
We would like to stress the crucial importance of
creating the conditions for justice that will redress the
wounds of the Libyan people, namely, the culmination
of a political process in inclusive elections, the
cessation of hostilities, the departure of foreign forces
and a Libyan-led dialogue designed to achieve a lasting
resolution of the prevailing crisis.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
efforts of the Prosecutor in Libya and the International
Criminal Court in general.
Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting the
twenty-third report to the Council, and in welcoming
Ambassador Elsonni of Libya to today’s meeting.
Ghana notes with appreciation the well-structured
report and its proactive approach towards dealing
with the situation in Libya. Of particular importance
is the chapter that deals with the way forward, as this
gives a sense of direction to Council members on the
approach that the Court intends to adopt in conducting
its investigations and dealing with the issues.
On the substantive issues raised in the report,
Ghana wishes to highlight the following three points.
First, we reiterate the shared conviction that impunity
cannot and must not be allowed to stand wherever it
occurs and by whomsoever it is claimed. In this respect,
we reaffirm the position that all individuals facing ICC
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

arrest warrants for alleged crimes committed in Libya,
including genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity, should be made to face the course of justice
and given an opportunity to account for their actions or
inactions as they relate to the very serious crimes for
which they have been indicted.
Secondly, while calling on the Court to carry
out its mandate enshrined in the Security Council
referral (resolution 1970 (2011)), Ghana notes the
challenges facing the Court in the light of the current
complex political and security situation in Libya.
However, it is gratifying to note the approach being
taken by the Court — to invoke the principle of
complementarity — which is a core principle of the
Rome Statute. By engaging with the relevant Libyan
national authorities, the Court has taken a positive
step in confidence-building that can yield the desired
results. After all, it is primarily the responsibility of
States to protect their citizens, and, accordingly, the
State must be consulted in such matters.
We therefore encourage the Court to continue to
work with the Libyan judicial system and provide the
needed technical and capacity-building support. It is
certain that the independence of these national courts
should be paramount in capacity-building efforts. We
take this opportunity to call on the relevant stakeholders
in Libya to give unfettered access to the team of
investigators from the Court so that they can carry out
their work effectively and efficiently. In view of the
political situation in Libya, Ghana believes that the
proposed signing of the memorandum of understanding,
to which all relevant Libyan stakeholders should
commit, is a step in the right direction, as it will show
political commitment to the process as a whole for the
time when the situation in Libya normalizes.
The third issue of importance to Ghana is witness
protection — before, during and after the trial process.
As the Court proceeds with investigations into the
cases, particularly in Tarhuna, where 27 mass graves
have been discovered and approximately 338 residents
went missing between 2014 and 2020, it is important to
underscore the fact that the Court needs to put in place
efficient mechanisms that will protect witnesses.
In that regard, Ghana calls on the Court to take
into consideration the involvement of victims in the
whole process and give them the needed protection
before, during and after the trials. We believe this will
give victims the required confidence to testify during

S/PV.9024

trials, as it has been observed that in some instances
witnesses have been recanting, which adversely affects
the case for the prosecution and invariably casts a slur
on the Court. In carrying out its investigations, the
Court should also turn its attention to getting witnesses
outside Libya to testify, in view of reports of attacks
on migrants, some of whom may be survivors of these
attacks. In that regard, it would be useful for the Court
to seek the cooperation of neighbouring States as part
of the investigation, particularly by eliciting evidence
from migrants who escaped these atrocity crimes and
may be seeking refuge in those States.
Accordingly, Ghana notes with appreciation the
ongoing cooperation between the Court and such external
partners as the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Italy
and the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation in gathering credible evidence. We call
on other States and relevant international agencies that
may have relevant information to assist the Court in
carrying out its investigations.
In conclusion, I would once again urge the
Prosecutor to continue to look towards the evidence
to deliver fair and equitable justice for victims among
the people of Libya and for migrant victims from
other States. Ghana therefore continues to hope for a
balanced and global approach to the investigation of
crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court, devoid of
the perceived region-centric approach.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank the Prosecutor Karim Khan for his briefing.
I welcome the participation of Ambassador Elsonni,
Permanent Representative of Libya, in today’s meeting.
The differences among parties in Libya have
grown for some time now, and the uncertainty of the
political process has also increased. It is imperative
for all parties in Libya to maintain calm and exercise
restraint. Actions that might complicate the situation
should be avoided. The current ceasefire should be
fully maintained. Differences over the legitimacy of
the Government should be resolved through dialogue
and consultations, and a consensus on a timetable and
road map for elections should be reached to create the
conditions necessary for the holding of elections as
soon as possible.
The international community should uphold the
principles of a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led political
process and play a positive and constructive role in
bringing the political process back on track in Libya.

22-3329613/17

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

China is not a State party to the Rome Statute,
and China’s position on the ICC’s work related to
Libya remains unchanged. We have also noted Libya’s
position on the relevant issues. The ICC should continue
to strictly abide by the principle of complementarity,
stipulated in the Rome Statute, fully respect Libya’s
judicial sovereignty and the legitimate requests
and opinions of its Government and make practical
contributions to the maintenance of peace and stability
in Libya.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Prosecutor Karim
Khan for today’s briefing, for the comprehensive report
and for highlighting that his Office prioritizes the
referrals from the Security Council.
Albania reiterates its strong commitment to and
support for the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and the Rome Statute. We would like to commend the
brave and independent work of Prosecutor Khan in this
regard. As the Security Council, we have to make sure
that his Office has the necessary resources to fulfil its
mandate. We commend the Office of the Prosecutor
for its excellent work in collecting evidence and the
successful conclusion of the investigation into crimes
committed in Libya in 2011. We encourage the Office
to continue collecting evidence for possible crimes
committed during the 2014-2022 conflict. Justice
must prevail for any and all crimes, no matter who the
perpetrators are, and be provided to the victims.
Justice is a must for Libyans to move forward,
achieve reconciliation and look towards a better future.
We are deeply concerned about ongoing violence
against migrants, reports of torture in detention
facilities, human rights abuses and crimes against
women and children, including sexual violence. Those
acts are in violation of international law, human rights
law and international humanitarian law. They must be
addressed and those responsible prosecuted to the full
extent of the law, nationally and internationally, where
necessary. We were glad to hear from the Prosecutor
about the positive results of the partnership on
migration issues.
Accountability is important to the victims and
survivors of those crimes, but it can also serve as
a strong deterrent to end the repetition of crimes
and abuses in the future. The Libyan people deserve
justice, the families of victim’s demand justice, and the
ICC has the tools to deliver that justice. In that vein,
we welcome the cooperation with the Registrar of the
14/17

28/04/2022

Court, to help victims improve communication and to
listen more effectively.
Albania commends Prosecutor Khan’s vision
of a road map for accountability and welcomes the
announcement of his visit to Libya in the coming
months. Let us hope that Libyan actors will grab this
chance to sign the memorandum of understanding and
facilitate access for the Office of the Prosecutor on
the ground to gather battlefield evidence and conduct
independent investigations.
We welcome cooperation with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and the meetings with the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Libya
in compliance with their respective mandates. We
also welcome the Prosecutor’s approach in setting
benchmarks, which will increase the efficiency of
his work.
We are confident that the Office of the Prosecutor
will fulfil its mandate, but I would like to reiterate
that it is up to the Libyan authorities to build lasting
peace and security in the country, promote and protect
human rights, protect civilians and deliver justice.
We therefore call on the Libyan authorities to closely
cooperate with the ICC and Prosecutor Khan in ending
impunity and holding those responsible for atrocities to
account. Justice is not optional; it is a must for peace
and the future of Libya.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Like others, I would like to start by thanking
Prosecutor Karim Khan for his important briefing
today on the occasion of the twenty-third report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the situation in Libya. The United Kingdom gives its
full support to the Prosecutor’s ongoing investigations,
and I welcome both the Prosecutor’s briefing and
his report as a demonstration of transparency to the
Security Council.
As the report sets out, there is credible evidence
of the ongoing commission of widespread, serious
crimes in Libya, including crimes of conflict-related
sexual violence. The United Kingdom condemns those
reprehensible acts and calls for the perpetrators to be
brought to justice. Human rights must be fully protected
in Libya. We must maintain our commitment to the
victims of the past eleven years. The ICC investigation
is an important contribution to transitional justice,
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

which is critical to the success of the political process
and in the interests of all Libyans.
The United Kingdom calls on the Libyan
authorities to cooperate with the ICC investigation and
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya. Access to
sites, evidence and witnesses free from intimidation
is necessary for progress to be made. The United
Kingdom supports the Prosecutor’s renewed strategy
and the principles on which he will take forward the
investigation. The United Kingdom welcomes in
particular the prioritization of the Libyan investigation
and the announcement of additional resources, which
we hope will accelerate progress towards justice
for victims.
The United Kingdom commends the Prosecutor’s
work in cooperating with national authorities and his
intention to develop such partnerships further, including
in assisting prosecutions at the national or regional
level, where that is appropriate. We reiterate our call
on all relevant States, including States parties to the
Rome Statute and States not party to it, to cooperate
with the ICC and surrender individuals subject to
arrest warrants.
The Council mandated the Prosecutor’s investigation
in Libya and, in order to ensure accountability
for serious international wrong-doing, the United
Kingdom will remain steadfast in its commitment to
accountability for atrocity crimes in all situations in
which they are committed. We will continue to work
with the Prosecutor and with international partners to
end impunity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Khan to respond
to comments.
Mr. Khan: I am most grateful for the contributions,
observations, words of support and, indeed, even the
words of concern that have been raised. I am also
grateful for the opportunity to clarify or further explain
a few matters.
I think that, based upon any analysis, the
International Criminal Court can be viewed only as
an awful testament to the continuous proclivity of
humankind to wreak havoc and cause untold suffering
upon the most vulnerable children, women and men.
Of course, there is a lot of blame to go around with
regard to every country. All of us are flawed beings, but

S/PV.9024

that is not really the question. The question is whether
we want to live in a world where justice prevails or
whether we can somehow sleep and tolerate and accept
a world in which so many are in physical agony and
emotionally distraught.
My learned friend, the representative of the Russian
Federation, referred to the situation in Libya and asked
who actually is to blame for the continuous groans of
agony that still reverberate from that troubled land.
That is, of course, an open question, and the question
is: Who is responsible?
The Rome Statute gives clear jurisdiction to us in
relation to matters that are referred. The Charter of the
United Nations is the principal foundation of world
affairs. It makes it clear that the Council has principal
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. It is very important to bear in mind that while
we have — and I have — tremendous respect for the
promise of the Council, for the purpose of the Council
and for all members here, like many normal people
there is understandable frustration about the fact that all
around the world, away from sophisticated capitals and
cities, such as New York, and beautiful rooms such as
this one, we still tolerate a world where we are deaf and
wilfully shut our eyes to the agony of so many others.
There was a question raised regarding focus. I am a
lawyer, not a legislator, and I hope that I will never be in
a position to knowingly violate the law. Certainly, I will
never arrogate to myself authorities that are not vested
in me. The clear language of paragraph 6 of resolution
1970 (2011) holds the answer to the representative’s
question, as it clearly states that the Council decides
that nationals, current or former officials or personnel
from a State outside the Libyan Arab Republic which
is not a party to the Rome Statute shall be subject to
the exclusive jurisdiction of that State. I follow the law.
The Council creates the law in terms of the parameters
of a referral.
The other part that I would like to emphasize, if I
may, relates to something my late father from Pakistan
used to say when we squabbled as children. He said that
when you point a finger, there are three pointing back
at you. It is very easy with the history of humankind
to engage or be indulgent in the blame game. Someone
did this or that. It is all true, perhaps, but is it an excuse
for us not to try to raise our gaze collectively to higher
values and higher principles? For goodness’ sake and

22-3329615/17

S/PV.9024

The situation in Libya

28/04/2022

with respect, if we cannot do that in a building such as
this, what is the hope?

Through them, we can seek closure on the painful past
which the Libyan people have endured in recent years.

The representative of India raised an important
point. He recalled certain concerns that seemed, he
thought, to be vindicated by the International Criminal
Court and the lack of peace. It is also important
to realize, grasp and accept the reality that justice
anywhere, and international justice in particular, is not
a silver bullet that will solve every malady that afflicts
humankind. If one expects that to be the case, we will
keep failing and having expectations that simply cannot
be fulfilled. I would suggest that a more appropriate
question is whether or not, but for the International
Criminal Court, peace and justice would have fallen
like manna on the people of Libya. The simple truth
is that the Council, the region and Libya itself have
somehow not managed to help secure peace.

We reiterate the observation we have made at
several previous meetings that achieving justice on
Libyan territories is a matter of sovereignty and national
jurisdiction. That means that any suspect will stand
trial pursuant to the Libyan Criminal Code, thereby
reflecting Libya’s sovereignty over its territories and
citizens. The Libyan judiciary is committed to ensuring
that all suspects are provided with a just and fair trial.

The final comment from the representative of Ghana
really must be the last word. The question really is
whether or not we collectively provide value. We really
care for children, women and men who just want to lead
their lives but keep suffering time and time again. The
words of the representative of Ghana resonate far more
eloquently than I could ever attempt — impunity, when
committed, cannot be allowed to stand. That is why we
have an International Criminal Court. That is why we
try to get to the truth to vindicate the rights that we
should all individually, regardless of politics, hold dear.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Khan for his
further clarifications.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I thank you for your efforts.
I would also like to thank Mr. Karim Khan for his
briefing and his twenty-third report.
We reaffirm that the Libyan people are very eager
to establish a modern and civil State, consolidate the
principle of accountability and combat impunity. In our
view, that will be achieved only if we activate the path
of comprehensive national reconciliation, which will
start by activating justice, revealing the truth, seeking
the truth, making apologies, offering reparations and
calling for forgiveness and tolerance. We all know that
such steps are the foundation of transitional justice.
16/17

We confirm once again that our cooperation
with the International Criminal Court (ICC), in
accordance with its mandate, will be in keeping with
the memorandum of understanding that was signed
between the Libyan Prosecutor General’s Office and
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC, given its role
in providing assistance to but in no way replacing the
Libyan judiciary. We look forward to implementing
the memorandum of understanding accordingly and as
proposed by the Libyan Prosecutor.
We welcome the new strategy announced by the
ICC Prosecutor, which is based on prioritizing the
situation in Libya, providing the necessary resources
and cooperating with the authorities to enhance efforts
to ensure and support accountability. We hope that the
strategy will support the Libyan Prosecutor’s office
and the judiciary in charting the path to justice and
combating impunity. We underscore that there must be
no selectivity and politicization of cases.
We all know that lasting peace is tied to justice
and respect for human rights. We also know that peace
cannot be achieved automatically. Therefore, we need
to acknowledge the suffering of the victims’ families
and rebuild trust in the State’s institutions and its
ability to deliver justice. That is why we ask the ICC to
expeditiously disclose the results of its investigations
following its team’s three visits to Libya over the course
of more than a year. We refer specifically to the mass
graves that were discovered in the city of Tarhuna,
as well as other stark violations and war crimes that
have been committed — not just today, but from
2011 to date — against innocent civilians. We must
determine those responsible for those crimes, locally
and internationally, without exception or politicization,
regardless of where those crimes were committed and by
whom. That would help deliver transitional justice and
promote genuine comprehensive national reconciliation.
22-33296

28/04/2022

The situation in Libya

With regard to the migration dossier that the
Prosecutor mentions in his report, we stress that the
Libyan State is eager to defend illegitimate migrants
against any violations due to the current crisis and
despite all challenges. We will do our utmost to protect
and save them. We work to deport them whenever
possible. We would like to stress our complete rejection
and condemnation of any violations that outlaws may
perpetrate. Those are considered individual actions
and we are working to address them. However, at the
same time, we will not accept any attempt by certain
States to create and impose conditions that help them
to export their crises to us and establish the concept
of resettlement, which is a breach of international
law. In that regard, we are surprised by the negative
position of the international community concerning
human traffickers. The focus remains only on those
perpetrators inside Libya, although we all know that
human traffickers and their international networks
are transnational.
The fight against this phenomenon must start
by eliminating these networks and their leaderships
completely, wherever they are. Therefore, and like
my colleague the representative of Ghana and other
representatives of African States, we again ask
Mr. Khan and his team to ensure that their new strategy
includes comprehensive investigations to uncover and

S/PV.9024

prosecute the international criminals related to the
migrant situation in Libya. Sanctions must be imposed
on them wherever they are without exception, be it
in the States of origin and transit in Africa or in the
destination States in Europe.
In conclusion, we emphasize that the national
judicial institutions are able to establish justice
notwithstanding all the challenges facing the country,
the greatest of which is its ability to enforce the law.
This will require the Council’s support for all national
efforts to build the institutions, strengthen stability
and put an end to all forms of interference in Libya.
We ask Council members to respect Libyan ownership
and leadership of a comprehensive solution and
Libya’s achievements in terms of agreements, the road
map and its outcomes. We ask them to support the
ongoing dialogue to put an end to all the temporary
and fragile transitional stages so that we can unite our
institutions and provide the conditions necessary to
hold general elections, with the participation of all and
in a sound manner. We ask that the will of the Libyans
and their right to self-determination be respected in
order to achieve stability, build a State of justice and
law and totally remove the Libyan dossier from the
corridors of the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

22-3329617/17
