General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

70

called for under paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution
35/144 C,
Noting also the views of the Group of Experts concerning
the importance of prompt on-site investigations of allegations of the use of chemical weapons and the need to devise
appropriate procedures for impartial collection and analysis
of samples that may be obtained in the course of any such
investigations,
Considering, accordingly, that the Group of Experts
should continue its investigations,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General,
2. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the Group of Experts to Investigate Reports on the Alleged Use of Chemical Weapons, to continue his investigation pursuant to General Assembly resolution 35/144 C
and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

'36/97.

General and complete disarmament
A

STUDY ON CONVENTIONAL DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 351156 A of 12 December 1980
in which it approved, in principle. the carrying out of a
study on all aspects of the conventional arms race and on
disarmament relating to conventional weapons and armed
forces, to be undertaken by the Secretary-General with the
assistance of a group of qualified experts appointed by him
on a balanced geographical basis,
Recalling the discussions at the substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission in 1981 on the general approach
to, and the structure and scope of, the study on all aspects
of the conventional arms race and on disarmament relating
to conventional weapons and armed forces,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to establish the
Group of Experts on All Aspects of the Conventional Arms
Race and on Disarmament relating to Conventional Weapons and Armed Forces, in accordance with the provisions
contained in paragraph I of General Assembly resolution
35/156 A;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission, at its substantive session in 1982, to complete its consideration of
the general approach to, and the structure and scope of, the
study and to transmit the conclusions of its deliberations to
the Group of Experts;
3. Agrees that the Group of Experts should pursue its
work after the above-mentioned session of the Disarmament
Commission, taking into consideration such conclusions as
the Commission may submit to it, and, if necessary, the
deliberations at the substantive session of the Commission
in 1981, in particular those reflected in paragraph 21 and
annex III of the report on that session; 64
4. Requests the Secretary-General. in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 35/156 A, to submit a final report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

64

Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-sixth Session, Sup-

plement No. 42 (A/36/42).

B
CONCLUSION OF AN INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION PROHIBITING THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION, STOCKPILING AND USE OF RADIOLOGICAL WEAPONS

The General Assembly.
Recalling the resolution of the Commission for Conventional Armaments of 12 August 1948, which defined weapons of mass destruction to include atomic explosive weapons.
radioactive material weapons. lethal chemical and biological
weapons and any weapons developed in the future which
have characteristics comparable in destructive effect to those
of the atomic bomb or the other weapons mentioned above.
Recalling its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December
1969,
Recalling paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, h 5 in which
it is stated that a convention should be concluded prohibiting
the development, production. stockpiling and use of radiological weapons,
Reaffirming its resolutions 34/87 A of 11 December 1979
and 35/156 G of 12 December 1980 on the conclusion of
such a convention.
Convinced that such a convention would serve to spare
mankind the potential dangers of the use of radiological
weapons and thereby contribute to strengthening peace and
averting the threat of war.
Noting that negotiations on the conclusion of an international convention prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons have been
conducted in the Committee on Disarmament,
Taking note of that part of the report of the Committee
on Disarmament' which deals with these negotiations, 66 including the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group on Radiological Weapons, 67
Recognizing that divergent views continue to exist in connection with various aspects relating to a convention prohibiting radiological weapons.
Noting with satisfaction the wide recognition of the need
to reach agreement on the text of a treaty prohibiting radiological weapons.
1. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to continue negotiations with a view to an early conclusion of the
elaboration of a treaty prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons, in
order that it may be submitted if possible to the General
Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982;
2. Takes note, in this connection, of the recommendation of the Ad Hoe Working Group on Radiological Weapons, in the report adopted by the Committee on Disarmament.
to set up at the beginning of its session in 1982 a further
ad hoe working group. under an appropriate mandate to be
determined at that time, to continue negotiations on the
elaboration of a treaty prohibiting radiological weapons:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the
discussion by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session of the prohibition of the development. production,
stockpiling and use of radiological weapons:

" Resolution S-10/2.
"" Official Records of the General Assemb/v, Thirtv-sixrh Session. Supplement No. 27 (A/36/27). sect. Ill. E.
"Ibid.para. 117.

III.

4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Prohibition of the
development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons" .
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 198 /
C
PREVENTION OF AN ARMS RACE IN OUTER SPACE

The General Assembly,
Inspired by the great prospects opening up before mankind as a result of man's entry into outer space,
Believing that any activity in outer space should be for
peaceful purposes and carried on for the benefit of all peoples, irrespective of the degree of their economic and scientific development,
Recalling that the States Parties to the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, 68 have undertaken in article lII to carry on activities
in the exploration and use of outer space, including the
Moon and other celestial bodies, in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Natior,s, in the
interest of maintaining international peace and security and
promoting international co-operation and understanding,
Recalling also article IV of the Treaty,
Recalling further paragraph 80 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 69 in
which it is stated that, in order to prevent an arms race in
outer space, further measures should be taken and appropriate international negotiations held in accordance with the
spirit of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
Noting the important and growing contribution of satellites both for civilian purposes and the verification of disarmament agreements and aware of the possibilities of their
use to promote peace, stability and international co-operation,
Mindful of the widespread interest expressed by Member
States to ensure that the exploration and use of outer space
should be for peaceful purposes, inter alia, in the course
of the negotiations on and following the adoption of the
above-mentioned Treaty, and taking note of proposals submitted to the General Assembly at its tenth special session,
devoted to disarmament, and at its regular sessions and to
the Committee on Disarmament,
Aware of the need to prevent an arms race in outer space
and in particular of the threat posed by anti-satellite systems
and their destabilizing effects on international peace and
security,
Convinced that further measures are needed to prevent
outer space from becoming an area of military confrontation,
contrary to the spirit of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
Considering it necessary for the international community
to give attention, in the Committee on Disarmament,to specific measures regarding the question of anti-satellite systems,
Bearing in mind that the restraint of anti-satellite systems
has already been a subject of negotiations between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America,

1. Considers that further effective measures to prevent
an arms race in outer space should be adopted by the international community;
2. Urges all States, in particular those with major space
capabilities. to contribute actively to the goal of preventing
an arms race in outer space and to refrain from any action
contrary to that aim;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to consider, as from the beginning of its session in 1982, the
question of negotiating effective and verifiable agreements
aimed at preventing an arms race in outer space, taking into
account all existing and future proposals designed to meet
this objective;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to consider
as a matter of priority the question of negotiating an effective
and verifiable agreement to prohibit anti-satellite systems.
as an important step towards the fulfilment of the objectives
set out in paragraph 3 above;
5. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to report
on its consideration of this subject to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this subject by the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled ''Prevention of an
arms race in outer ~pace and prohibition of anti-satellite
systems··.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

D
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS RELATING TO THE
PROCESS OF DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/87 E of 11 December 1979,
in which it requested the Secretary-General, with the assistanc;c: of qualified governmental experts, to carry out a comprehensive study assessing current institutional rt.quirements
and future estimated needs in the United Nations management of disarmament affairs and outlining possible functions, structure and institutional framework that could meet
those requirements and needs, including legal and financial
implications, and formulating recommendations for possible
later decisions on the matter,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General7°
transmitting the study prepared by the Group of Governmental Experts to Study the Institutional Arrangements relating to the Process of Disarmament,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General and
of the study of the institutional arrangements relating to the
process of disarmament;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the Group of Experts which assisted him for the efficient
manner in which the report was prepared;
3. Recommends that all Member States should study the
report;
4. Invites all Member States to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral by 31 March 1982 their comments on the study and
its conclusions and recommendations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the study
to the Committee on Disarmament;

68

Resolution 2222 (XXI). annex.
•• Resolution S-I0/2.

71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

'

0

A/361192.

General As.sembly-Thirty-sixth Session

72

6. Decides to transmit the report and the comments of
Member States to the General Assembly at its second special
session devoted to disarmament for substantive consideration and the adoption of appropriate decisions;
7_. F_urther decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-seventh session an item entitled "Institutional
arrangements relating to the process of disarmament".
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

E
NON-STATIONING OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS ON THE TERRITORIES OF STATES WHERE THERE ARE NO SUCH WEAPONS
AT PRESENT

The General Assembly,
Conscious that a nuclear war would have devastating
consequences for the whole of mankind,
Recalling its resolution 33/91 F of 16 December 1978.
whic~ contains ~n ~ppeal to all nuclear-weapon States to
refram from stat10nmg nuclear weapons on the territories
of States where there are no such weapons at present, and
to all non-nuclear-weapon States which do not have nuclear
weapons_ on their t~rri_tories to refrain from any steps which
would d1rectly or md1Tectly result in the stationing of such
weapons on their territories,
Recalling further its resolution 35/ 156 C of 12 December
1980, in which it requested the Committee on Disarmament
to ~roceed _without delay to talks with a view to elaborating
an mternat1onal agreement on the non-stationing of nuclear
weapons on the territories of States where there are no such
weapons at present,
Noting with regret that this appeal by the General Assembly remains unheeded,
Considering that the non-stationing of nuclear weapons
on the territories of St~tes where there are no such weapons
~t present would constitute a step towards the larger objective of the subseq~en_t complete withdrawal of nuclear weapons from t~e temtones of other States, thus contributing to
the prevent10n of the spread of nuclear weapons and leading
eventually to the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Bearing in mind the clearly expressed intention of many
Sta~es ~o prevent the stationing of nuclear weapons on their
temtones,
D':eply alarmed by plans and practical steps leading to
a bmld-up of nuclear-weapon arsenals on the territories of
other States,
I. Requests once again the Committee on Disarmament
to ~roceed _without delay to talks with a view to elaborating
an mternat10nal agreement on the non-stationing of nuclear
weapons on the territories of States where there are no such
weapons at present;
2. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to refrain from
further action involving the stationing of nuclear weapons
on the territories of other States;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
C_ommi~tee on J?isarmament all documents relating to the
d1scuss1on of this question by the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit
a report on the question to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session;
_5. Decides to _include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh sess10n the item entitled "Non-stationing of
nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are

no such weapons at present: report of the Committee on
Disarmament'·.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

F
CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/91 B of 16 December 1978,
in which it invited Member States to submit their views and
experiences regarding confidence-building measures,
Noting with satisfaction that numerous Member States
responded to that invitation and provided the Secretary-General with substantive information,
Recalling also its resolution 34/87 B of 11 December
1979. in which it_ requested the Secretary-General to carry
o~t a compre~ens1ve study on confidence-building measures
with the assistance of a group of qualified governmental
experts appointed by him on an equitable geographical basis,
Expressing its concern about the deterioration of the international situation and the further escalation of the arms
race, w~ich bot~ . reflect and aggravate the unsatisfactory
mternat1onal poht1cal climate, tension and mistrust.
Desirou_s of strengthening international security and, at
the same time, creating and improving conditions conducive
to further measures of disarmament,
Mindful of the fact that, while confidence-building measures cannot serve as a substitute for disarmament measures,
they play a very significant role in achieving disarmament,
Convinced of the usefulness of confidence-building measures freely ~ved at by the States concerned and agreed
upon, takmg mto account the particular conditions and requirements of the regions concerned,
Expressing its conviction of the need for the exchange
of pertinent and timely information on military activities
and other matters pertaining to mutual security, which will
contribute to an improved climate of trust and confidence
among States, and the conviction that agreement can be
reached on measures to this end,
Noting with satisfaction the encouraging results of some
~onfidence-~uilding measures agreed upon and implemented
m some regions.
I. Takes note of the comprehensive study on confidence-building measures.7 1 prepared by the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
an~ t? the Group of Governmental Experts on Confidencebmldmg Measures which assisted in the preparation of the
study:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrang_ements f"?r the reproduction of the study as a
Umted Nations pubhcation 71 and to give it the widest possible distribution;
4. Recognizes that confidence reflects a set of interrelated factors of a military_ as well as of a non-military character and that a plurahty of approaches is needed to
overcome fear. apprehension and mistrust between States
and to replace them by confidence;
5. Recom,:nen_ds that, building on the experience gained
~rom the apphcat1on and development of confidence-buildmg measures, further efforts should be made, both within
and outside t_he United Nations. to widen their scope, so
that account 1s also taken of non-military approaches;

11
.
~/36/474 and Corr. I The study was subsequently issued with the
title Compreh_ensive Studr 011 Conjidrnce-buildinl( Measures (United Nation, puhhcat1on. Sales N,, E.82.lX.3).

III.

73

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

6. Regards the concept of confidence-building measures
as a useful approach in reducing and eventually eliminating
potential causes for mistrust, misunderstanding, misinterpretation and miscalculation;
7. Believes that the promotion of confidence-building
measures where appropriate conditions exist will significantly contribute to facilitating the process of disarmament;
8. Invites all States to consider the possible introduction
of confidence-building measures in their respective regions
and, where possible, to negotiate on them in keeping with
the conditions and requirements prevailing in each particular
region;
9. Decides to submit the study to its second special
session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to
9 July 1982, for further consideration.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981
G
PROHIBITION OF THE PRODUCTION OF FISSIONABLE
MATERIAL FOR WEAPONS PURPOSES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/91 H of 16 December 1978,
34/87 D of 11 December 1979 and 351156 Hof 12 December
1980, in which it requested the Committee on Disarmament.
at an appropriate stage of the implementation of the Programme of Action set forth in section III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 69
and of its work on the item entitled "Nuclear weapons in
all aspects'', to consider urgently the question of adequately
verified cessation and prohibition of the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear
explosive devices ai;d to keep the Asser:ibly informed of
the progress of that consideration,
Noting that the agenda for 1981 of the Committee on
Disarmament included the item entitled "Nuclear weapons
in all aspects'' and that the Committee's programme of work
for both parts of its session in 1981 contained the item
entitled "Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear
disarmament'',
Recalling the proposals and statements made in the Committee on Disarmament on these items.
Considering that the cessation of production of fissionable
material for weapons purposes and the progressive conversion and transfer of stocks to peaceful uses would be a
significant step towards halting and reversing the nuclear
arms race,
Considering that the prohibition of the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons and other explosive
devices also would be an important measure in facilitating
the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and
explosive devices,
Requests the Committee on Disarmament, at an appropriate stage of its work on the item entitled ''Nuclear weapons in all aspects", to pursue its consideration of the
question of adequately verified cessation and prohibition of
the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons
and other nuclear explosive devices and to keep the General
Assembly informed of the progress of that consideration.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

concerning the study on all the aspects of regional
disarmament,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General containing the views of Member States
on the study; 72
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the Study
on all the aspects of Regional Disarmament7 3 and his report
containing the views of Member States to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament,
so that it may consider their substance and any action on
them that may be required.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 198 /

I
STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2602 A (XXIV) of 16 December
1969, 2932 B (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3184 A and
C (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3261 C (XXIX) of 9
December 1974, 3484 C (XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/
189 A of 21 December 1976, 32/87 G of 12 December 1977
and 35/ 156 K of 12 December 1980,
Recalling that the SALT I agreement-which bears the
official title of ''Interim Agreement between the United
States of America and the, Union of SO\ ;et Socialist Republics on certain measures with respect to the limitation
of strategic offensive arms" 74--entered into force on 3
October 1972 following more than two years of bilateral
negotiations,
Recalling that the SALT II agreement-which bears the
official title of "Treaty between the United States of America and the f Jnion 0f Soviet Socialist Repuhlics on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms"-was finally signed
on 18 June 1979, after six years of bilateral negotiations,
and that its text, together with the texts of the Protocol to
the Treaty and of the Joint Statement of principles and basic
guidelines for subsequent negotiations on the limitation of
strategic arms, both signed on the same date as the Treaty.
and that of the Joint Communique, also issued on 18 June
1979, were reproduced as a document of the Committee on
Disarmament, 75
Reaffirming once again its resolution 33/91 C of 16 December 1978, in which it, inter alia:
(a) Reiterated its satisfaction at the solemn declarations
made in 1977 by the heads of State of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America in
which they stated that they were ready to endeavour to reach
agreements which would permit starting the gradual reduction of existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons and moving
towards their complete and total destruction, with a view
to a world truly free of nuclear weapons,
(b) Recalled that one of the disarmament measures deserving the highest priority, included in the Programme of
Action set forth in section Ill of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. 76 was the
conclusion of the bilateral agreement known as SALT II.
which should be followed promptly by further strategic arms
limitation negotiations between the two parties, leading to
agreed significant reductions of and qualitative limitations
on strategic arms,

H
STUDY ON ALL THE ASPECTS OF REGIONAL DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/ l 56 D of 12 December 1980

,. A/36/343 and Add.I.
" United Nations publication. Sales No. E.81.IX.2.
14
United Nations. Tr,•af\' Series. vol. 944. No. 13445. p.3
"See CD/53/Appendix lll!Vol. 1. document CD/28.
'" Resolution S-I0/2, para. 52.

74

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

(c) Stressed that in the Programme of Action it was
established that, in the task of achieving the goals of nuclear
disarmament, all nuclear-weapon States, in particular those
among them which possess the most important nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility, 77
Reaffirming that, as stated in its resolution 34/87 F of 11
December 1979, it shares the conviction expressed by the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States
of America in the joint statement of principles and basic
guidelines for subsequent negotiations on the limi_tation_ of
strategic arms that early agreement on the further hm1tat1on
and further reduction of strategic arms would serve to
strengthen international peace and security and to reduce
the risk of outbreak of nuclear war,
Recalling that, at its first special session devoted to disarmament, it proclaimed that existing arsenals of nuclear
weapons alone were more than sufficient to destroy all life
on earth, that the increase in weapons, especially nuclear
weapons, far from helping to str~ngthen international security, on the contrary weakened 1t, and that the existence
of nuclear weapons and the continuing arms race posed a
threat to the very survival of mankind, for which reasons
the General Assembly declared that all the peoples of the
world had a vital interest in the sphere of disarmament, 78
Recalling also that in the Declaration of the 1980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade, annexed to its resolution 35/
46 of 3 December 1980, it recommended that special priority
be given to the ratification of the SALT II Treaty,
1. Notes that the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (SALT II) has not
yet been ratified;
2. Urges that the process begun by the SALT I Treaty
and signature of the SALT II Treaty should continue and
be built upon;
3. Trusts that the signatory States will continue to refrain from any act which would defeat the object and purpose
of that process;
4. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America, with reference to resolutions
34/87 F and 35/156 K, to pursue negotiations, in accordance
with the principle of equality and equal security, looking
towards the achievement of an agreement which will provide
for substantial reductions and significant qualitative limitations of strategic arms;
5. Welcomes the commencement of negotiations at Geneva on 30 November 1981 between representatives of the
United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on nuclear arms in accordance with the joint
communique issued by Secretary of State Haig and Foreign
Minister Gromyko on 23 September 1981, and trusts that
such negotiations will facilitate the enhancement of stability
and international security;
6. Stresses the need for both parties to bear constantly
in mind that not only their national interests but also the
vital interests of all the peoples of the world are at stake in
this question;
7. Invites the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America to keep
the General Assembly appropriately informed of the results
of their negotiations, in conformity with the provisions of
paragraphs 27 and 114 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly;

11

Ibid., para. 48.
78
Ibid., paras. 11 and 28

8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Strategic arms limitation talks''.
9 I st plenary meeting
9 December 198 I

J
REVIEW OF THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMITTEE ON
DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that all the peoples of the world have a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
Recognizing also that all States have the duty to co~tr!bute
to and the right to participate in disarmament negot1at10ns,
as acknowledged in paragraph 28 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. 79 the
first special session devoted to disarmament.
Recalling, to that effect, its resolutions 33/91 G of 16
December 1978 and 35/156 I of 12 December 1980.
Noting that under section IX of the rules of procedure of
the Committee on Disarmament non-member States have
been invited to participate in the work of the Committee,
Recalling also that the membership of th~ Committee on
Disarmament is to be reviewed at regular mtervals m accordance with paragraph 120 of the Final Document,
1. Takes note of the relevant part of the report of the
Committee on Disarmament on its session in 1981, in which
various options and different views were stated; 80
2. Recommends that the first review of the membership
of the Committee on Disarmament should be completed,
following appropriate consultation among Member States,
during the second special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament;
3. Reaffirms that States not members of the Committee
on Disarmament should, upon their request, continue to be
invited by it to participate in the work of the Committee.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /981

K
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/83 A of 11 December 1979
and 35/ I 56 J of 12 December 1980,
Alarmed by the present grave state of international affairs
characterized by marked deterioration in the relationship
between the major military Powers, which seriously jeopardizes the process of detente and results in the flaring up
of new, and in the continuation of old, conflicts in various
parts of the world,
Deeply concerned about the long stagnation in the disarmament process, the intensification of the arms race, both
quantitative and qualitative, and the increased threat of a
nuclear conflagration,
Convinced that to achieve progress on the reduction of
arms and armaments, the arms race must first be stopped,
Convinced further that the arms race cannot be stopped
as lung as the concepts of balance of weapons or of deterrence continue to be regarded as the sole means for the
security of nations.
n Resolution S-10/2.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirry-sixth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/36/27). sect. 11.F

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Aware that the best hope for arresting the pernicious spiral
of the arms race is by the provision of alternative means of
security for nations rather than through reliance on the balance of armaments or of deterrence.
Aware further that the rational alternative means for such
security is to move towards a halt in the arms race by
developing in a parallel way the measures and modalities
for collective security as mandatorily required by the Charter
of the United Nations,
Recalling paragraph 13 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. 79 in which
it is stated that genuine and lasting peace can only be created
through the effective implementation of the security system
provided for in the Charter and the speedy and substantial
reduction of arms and armed forces by international agreement and mutual example,
Considering that it is of essential importance to create a
climate of confidence in the United Nations which will open
the way to co-operation among Member States in fulfilling
the common and basic obligations under the Charter,
Noting with satisfaction the references to statements made
by representatives of a number of Member States, including
the two major Powers, in the First Committee during the
current session of the General Assembly. indicating pos:tive
attitudes towards effective use of the United Nations in
improving the international situation and preventing war.
Reaffirming its resolution 35/ 156 J, adopted by consensus, in which, inter alia, it recommended that the main
organs of the United Nations responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security should give early
consideration to the requirements for halting the arms race,
particularly the nuclear-arms race, and developing the modalities for the effective application of the system of international security provided for in the Charter.
Reiterating its request to the permanent members of the
Security Council to facilitate the work of the Council towards carrying out this essential responsibility under the
Charter,
1. Calls upon all States to take prompt action for the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 35/156 J.
which would render effective the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and thereby be conducive to meaningful disarmament
negotiations;
2. Deems it necessary, as a first step in this direction,
that the Security Council take the required measures towards
the implementation of Chapter VII of the Charter, which
would reinforce the foundations of peace. security and order
through the United Nations and avert the growing threat of
nuclear conflagration.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

L
STUDY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/87 C of 12 December 1977.
in which it requested the Secretary-General to initiate a
study on the relationship between disarmament and international security,
Recalling also paragraph 97 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 79 the first
special session devoted to disarmament, in which it requested the Secretary-General, with the assistance of consultant experts appointed by him, to continue the study on

75

the relationship between disarmament and international
security,
Recalling further its resolutions 34/83 A of 11 December
I979, in which it took note of the progress report of the
Secretary-General, and 35/156 E of 12 December 1980, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to submit the final
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General 81
transmitting the study prepared by the Group of Experts on
the Relationship between Disarmament and International
Security,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the study on the relationship between disarmament and international security;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the Group of Experts which assisted him in the preparation of the study;
3. Commends the study and its conclusions to the attention of all Member States;
4. Invites all Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 15 April 1982, of their views regarding the study;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the reproduction of the study as a
United Nations publication 81 and to give it the widest possible distribution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the study,
together with the views of Member States, to the General
Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

36/98.

Israeli nuclear armament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions on the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also its resolutions 33/71 A of 14 December
1978 on military and nuclear collaboration with Israel and
34/89 of 11 December 1979 and 35/157 of 12 December
I 980 on Israeli nuclear armament,
Alarmed by the increasing evidence regarding Israel's
attempts to acquire nuclear weapons,
Noting with concern that Israel has persistently refused
to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 82 despite repeated calls by the General Assembly
and the Security Council to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Recalling Security Council resolution 487 ( 1981) of 19
June 198 I,
Recalling the resolution adopted on 12 June 198 I by the
Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency 83 and resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 adopted on 26
September 1981 by the General Conference of the Agency,
in which the Conference, inter alia, considered the Israeli
act of aggression as an attack against the Agency and its
safeguards regime and decided to suspend the provision of
any assistance to Israel,
Recalling its repeated condemnation of the nuclear collaboration between Israel and South Africa,
" N361597. The study was subsequently issued with the title Relationship between Disarmament and lnremarional Securitv (United Nations
publication. Sales No. E 82.IX.4)
·
"' Resolution 2373 (XXII). annex.
" See GC(XXV)/643
