S/2018/527

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2018
Original: English

United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2410
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) until 15 April 2019 and requested me to
report to the Council every 90 days starting from 1 June 2018 on the implementation
of the resolution. It covers major developments that have occurred since the issuance
of my previous report, on 20 March 2018 (S/2018/241), as well as progress on the
two-year benchmarked exit strategy, including dates and indicator s for achieving the
benchmarks (see annex I), with the goal of transferring tasks and responsibilities to
the Government, in coordination with the United Nations country team.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation and related developments
2.
A climate of relative stability throughout the period enabled the President of
Haiti, Jovenel Moïse, to pursue his reform agenda. On 19 March, the President
identified seven priority areas: State reform and political stability; investments;
agricultural production and the environment; energy, road and port infrastructure;
water and sanitation infrastructure; education; and promoting stability through social
projects. He reiterated the need for a closer alignment of international development
assistance with those national priorities. With regard to the rule of law, the President
prioritized the strengthening of the judiciary; the fight against prolonged pretrial
detention and prison overcrowding; the fight against corruption; the establishment of
a Permanent Electoral Council; the launch of a national sector-based dialogue; and
the strengthening of the Haitian National Police.
3.
On 23 March, at the end of a two-day international forum on public
administration reform organized by the Government’s Office of Management and
Human Resources with the support of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and other partners, a technical committee comprising representatives of the
public and private sectors and civil society was created to prepare a new public
administration framework. At a four-day workshop held from 9 to 13 April, the Office
elaborated a draft five-year reform plan for the period 2018–2023 to coordinate all
efforts to modernize the public administration.

18-08494 (E)

050618

*1808494*

S/2018/527

4.
The Government took further steps towards reconstituting the Armed Forces of
Haiti. On 13 March, the President appointed the interim command of the army,
comprising six officers from the force disbanded in 1995. On 27 March, the interim
command assumed its functions. Civil society organizatio ns raised concerns about
one of the officers, Colonel Jean-Robert Gabriel, who had been convicted in
November 2000, in absentia, for serious crimes by the court of first instance of
Gonaïves (Artibonite Department). Some political leaders deemed the appointment
of the officers by the executive, rather than by the interim Commander-in-Chief who
had assumed command of the force in November 2017, as a sign of increased
politicization. The Government also announced plans to recruit 1,500 army cadets by
2019.
5.
Building on consultations held in 2017 with key national sectors, on 28 March
the President appointed a steering committee of 23 Haitian personalities to lead the
national sector-based dialogue, on the theme “États généraux sectoriels de la nation
haïtienne”. The committee is tasked with leading a series of thematic workshops to
be held across the country on political and economic governance, the environment,
public security, education, health, cultural identity and social integration. The data
collected during those events would contribute to the formulation of a pact for
stability and economic and social progress, the primary outcome expected of the
dialogue.
6.
However, on 16 April, the Chairperson of the committee, Catholic Archbishop
Louis Kébreau, resigned, stating that the six-month timeline allocated for the dialogue
was too limited. One other member withdrew over differences with a peer, and 4 of
the 23 members have not attended the working sessions so far. Some national
stakeholders have called instead for the holding of a national conference, in which
the Government and the people would evaluate their past and devise a new beginning
for the country. The committee continues to refine the methodology of the dialogue
before officially launching the process on a yet-to-be announced date.
7.
Pending agreement on the joint 2018 legislative agenda envisaged by the
executive branch and Parliament, both legislative chambers agreed to prioritize the
adoption of draft laws that have, to date, been voted on in one of the two chambers,
as well as laws that have a direct positive socioeconomic impact on the population.
During the period, three draft laws were adopted by both chambers and transmitted
to the President for publication. These include the law on commer ce, the law on
vocational training and the law on accessibility of buildings for persons with
disabilities.
8.
On 29 March, on the thirty-first anniversary of the Constitution, the special
commission on constitutional amendments of the lower chamber submit ted its draft
report to the full body for consideration. The report, entitled Ce que pense la nation,
summarizes the proposed amendments gathered by the commission through year-long
consultations with various sectors of Haitian society. It is focused on co nstitutional
provisions regarding the political system and administrative governance.
9.
Amid persistent calls from presidential allies in Parliament and the ruling Parti
haïtien Tèt Kale party for ministerial cabinet changes to improve government
performance, on 23 April, the Prime Minister, Jack Guy Lafontant, announced a
partial reshuffle, replacing 5 of his 18 ministers, including the Minister of the Interior
and Local Administrations and the Minister of Justice and Public Security. On
27 April, 16 lower chamber parliamentarians requested the Prime Minister to testify
before Parliament on allegations of government corruption and non -compliance with
legal procedures governing cabinet appointments; however, there was no follow -up
before the end of the first regular session of the legislative year of the lower chamber,
on 14 May.
2/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

B.

Economic situation
10. Planned government investment in the agricultural sector and normal rainfall
during the fourth quarter of 2017 led to an above-average spring harvest, with
increased agricultural output. Inflation, which began to decelerate during the first
quarter of 2018, stood at 12.9 per cent in March. Prices are expected to increase,
however, when the automatic adjustment mechanism for retail fuel prices is fully
implemented by the end of June, as foreseen in the agreement signed by the
Government with the International Monetary Fund in February. The fiscal deficit is
expected to widen to 3.1 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) during the next
fiscal year, of which — in the absence of reforms — 1.5 per cent will finance
operational losses of the State electricity authority.

C.

Humanitarian situation
11. The Government, with the support of the humanitarian country team and donors,
began preparations and training for the upcoming hurricane season. A global risk
index published in March 2018 ranked Haiti as the fourteenth country worldwide, and
first country in the region, that is most vulnerable to the risk of humanitarian crises
and natural disasters.
12. Significant gains continued to be achieved in the fight against cholera. From
1 January to 24 March 2018, the Ministry of Health reported 902 suspected cholera
cases and nine related deaths. This represents an 80 per cent reduction from the
4,562 suspected cases and an 86 per cent reduction in deaths compared to the
63 deaths registered during a similar period in 2017. While this progress is positive,
focused engagement remains essential to fully eradicate cholera.
13. In April, the Famine Early Warning System Network indicated that the
precarious food security situation in the aftermath of Hurricane Irma is expected to
improve overall. However, the Network signalled a continuing difficult food security
situation in the North and Centre Departments.
14. On 12 March, several hundred Haitian inhabitants of Pedernales, Dominican
Republic, crossed the border into Haiti following an ultimatum made by some
Dominican citizens that they either leave the city or face reprisals for the murder in
February of a Dominican couple, allegedly by their Haitian employees. Haiti and the
Dominican Republic reinforced their military and police presence on both sides of the
border in response, while MINUJUSTH deployed a team to monitor the human rights
situation and a formed police unit platoon in support of the Haitian National Police.
This was the most serious of a series of similar incidents that occurred during the
reporting period, reflecting continued tensions between border communities.
15. Most returnees entered via unofficial crossing points and joined their relatives
in other parts of Haiti. Some 225 households were registered in a temporary shelter
in Anse-à-Pitres, exceeding its 100-person capacity. The United Nations Children’s
Fund and the International Organization for Migration deployed protection staff and
trucks of non-food items to Anse-à-Pitres. Local authorities and non-governmental
organizations provided food, drinking water, health services and hygiene kits to those
in the shelter, and financial assistance was offered by the Ministry of the Interior and
Local Administrations.

18-08494

3/25

S/2018/527

III. Mandate implementation
16. As requested by the Security Council in its resolutions 2350 (2017) and 2410
(2018), MINUJUSTH established a mechanism to monitor progress in the
implementation of the benchmarked two-year exit strategy to a non-peacekeeping
United Nations presence in the country. The peacekeeping objectives of the Mission
were aligned with the United Nations Development Assistance Framework to reflect
all United Nations efforts to facilitate the transition towards a sustainable
development setting in support of the Government’s priorities. A total of 46 indicators
with specific targets gauge the 11 benchmarks that are fully informed by the indicators
for the appropriate Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goals 5 and 16 (see
annex I). The priority areas defined by the targets and the indicators pertain to aspects
of the mandate, are based on national priorities and are considered essential for the
longer term with regard to political stability, the rule of law, women and peace and
security, human rights and development in Haiti. They include the adoption of the
draft Criminal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure, strengthened Haitian judicial
and prison systems, increased internal oversight and accountability mechanisms in
the justice, corrections and police sectors, the establishment of the Permanent
Electoral Council, the adoption of the Legal Aid Law, improvements in prolonged
pretrial detention, and community violence reduction.
17. Within this framework, MINUJUSTH adjusted its community violence
reduction programme and quick-impact projects to increase the participation of
marginalized communities and youth at risk in national policing initiatives and rule
of law projects, thus contributing to implementation benchmarks 2 and 6 of the two year exit strategy.
18. The definition and selection process of the indicators and targets addresses the
three objectives of: prioritizing and focusing MINUJUSTH activities on a core set of
achievable mandated tasks and expected accomplishments to avoid regression, in
particular within the time frame of the two-year exit strategy; providing a means to
monitor developments in mandated areas that will condition the end of peacekeeping
in Haiti; and providing a joint analytical framework for continuity in the
programmatic priorities undertaken by the United Nations system as a whole, in
consultation with the Government, against the background of the MINUJUSTH
drawdown and transition.

A.

Security and police developments (benchmarks 1, 4, 5 and 6)
19. The Mission’s police component continued to provide operational support to the
national police during the period under review by participating in 197 joint temporary
checkpoints, 467 foot patrols, 712 vehicle patrols and 4 joint police operations and
providing support in 6 crowd control operations related to protests in Port-au-Prince.
A breakdown of the composition and strength of the police component is contained
in annex II.
20. While considering the significant reduction in uniformed and civilian personnel
working on criminal data collection and verification in MINUJUSTH compared to
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which may have
decreased the ability to capture and record criminal incidents, the overall trend in
security reflects a mixed picture. In keeping with benchmark 6, national police data
for the period from 2 March to 19 April suggest a continued downward trend in violent
crimes, with 56 homicides reported, representing a 50 per cent decrease from the
131 reported for the same period in 2017, over half of which occurred in the Port -au-

4/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

Prince metropolitan area. Lynching has also continued to decrease, with 8 cases
reported countrywide compared with 15 for the same period in 2017.
21. At the same time, the period under review was marked by increased gang
activity in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhoods of Grand Ravine and Martissant and
the implementation of several measures by the national police to extend the authority
of the State in areas where its presence is minimal and the terrain unfavourable. The
measures included increasing the number of police operations, strengthening
visibility in strategic police stations in Port-au-Prince and launching community
policing. In response to the increased gang activity, the community violence reduction
programme, through a bottom-up approach, is fostering complementary initiatives to
reduce insecurity, foment dialogue for peace and stabilization, provide support to
communities and local institutions and create income-generating activities, in
partnership with local and international organizations with prior experience in those
neighbourhoods.
22. The disappearance on 14 March of the photojournalist Vladjimir Legagneur,
who had been probing into gang activities in the Grand Ravine neighbourhood of
Port-au-Prince on an independent photo assignment, reverberated greatly with the
national media and raised concerns about the ability of the national authorities to
provide a safe environment for the press to operate freely. On 30 March, the
authorities announced that two individuals had been arrested in relation with the
disappearance, one of them in possession of the victim’s phone. The investigation is
ongoing.
23. On 3 April, confrontations between rival gangs, including from Grand Ravine,
occurred in nearby Village de Dieu, and on 8 April one person was killed in renewed
day-long clashes. The incidents affected national highway 2, routing all traffic to the
south of the country, disrupted the administrative centre of the capital and led national
authorities to deploy specialized police units to restore order. A subsequent opera tion
conducted by the national police on 18 April in neighbouring Portail Léogâne was
met with gunfire and did not produce clear results. On 27 April, the national police
announced that, beginning on 9 April, it had launched an operation called
“Koukouwouj” to counter gangs, particularly in Grand Ravine and Village de Dieu.
The operation resulted in the killing of four gang members from Grand Ravine,
18 arrests and the seizure of vehicles and firearms.
24. On 22 April, the national police conducted operatio ns to dislodge armed men
claiming to be former Haitian military staff or the reserve force of the armed forces
of Haiti in Delmas (West Department) and Péligre (Centre Department). Five
individuals were arrested in Delmas; in Péligre, police arrested six p eople and seized
military uniforms, a rifle, a pistol and an imitation firearm. The operations were
supported by the MINUJUSTH police component, including its drone unit.
25. Two isolated yet significant acts of violence occurred in April. On 27 April, a
unit of the Brigade d’intervention contre l’insécurité foncière was disarmed and
chased away by the population of Thiotte (South-East Department) as it was
attempting to intervene in a land dispute case. On 28 April, the death of one individual
was reported as a result of a teargas grenade having been launched into the venue of
a public debate chaired by two Senators in Cap-Haïtien (North Department) on the
management of the PetroCaribe fund.
26. National police statistics on rape and other sexual and gender-based violence,
albeit consistently underreported, showed a decrease of 62 per cent from 2017, with
92 incidents reported thus far in 2018 compared with 245 incidents over the same
period in 2017.

18-08494

5/25

S/2018/527

27. The MINUJUSTH specialized police team on sexual and gender-based violence
continued to support advocacy efforts to professionalize the national police response
in investigation, awareness-raising in preventing cases of sexual and gender-based
violence and treatment for victims. Three workshops were organized in Grand-Anse,
Centre and South Departments. Each workshop, facilitated by the national police head
of the Unité de lutte contre les crimes sexuels, a judge of the Port-au-Prince Court of
Appeal and the Director of Courses at the school of magistrates, included
20 participants from all stages of the penal chain. The training was aimed at fostering
local ownership and sustainability by bringing together penal chain actors and
community leaders to build common understanding on the care of victims, including
best practices in prevention. In parallel, 12 working sessions held with community
violence reduction programme experts strengthened the capacity of community-based
organizations active in the area of sexual and gender-based violence, thus enabling
the delivery of four projects.
28. In line with benchmark 4, on developing police response capacity, the three
pending sites to be co-located with the national police in West Department and the
Strategic Planning and Logistics Directorates were made operational, t hereby
rendering all 17 co-location sites on national police premises functional and extending
the mentorship and advisory programme nationwide. The Budget and Finance Unit of
the MINUJUSTH police component partnered with the Directorate of Finance and
Accounting of the Haitian National Police to draft the 2018 –2019 operating budget
and a capital investment budget underpinning the 2017 –2021 strategic development
plan. The partnership aims to improve the overall budget process within the national
police, build a culture of fiscal discipline and apply best practices in public funds
management.
29. Ten new police construction and renovation projects, including the provision of
communications equipment and furniture, were launched during the reporting period,
four of which are financed through the Mission’s quick-impact projects, three through
the joint rule of law programme 2017/18, two by a bilateral donor and one through
the Mission’s specialized team on sexual and gender-based violence. MINUJUSTH
provided technical support through its drone unit and daily mentoring in strategic
planning, budget and finance, communications and information technology, criminal
intelligence, infrastructure, and logistics and fleet management, among others. In this
regard, a joint pilot initiative between the national police, the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the
community violence reduction programme to increase the pass rate o f female
candidates in the national police selection test is in the early stages of implementation.
30. As at 20 April, all 1,022 new police officers from the 28th class, which
graduated in December 2017, were assigned to active duty, bringing the total nu mber
of police officers nationwide to 15,198, or 1.36 police officers for every
1,000 inhabitants. A total of 528 new officers were deployed to the 10 departmental
directorates, while the Directorate of Prison Administration, the Border Police Unit,
the Criminal Investigation Unit and the Crowd Control Unit, among others, absorbed
494 officers, who underwent specialized training at the National Police School before
assuming duty. On 5 April, 72 officers of the fifth cohort, including four women, were
promoted to the rank of police commissioner upon graduating from the National
Police Academy after a nine-month training programme. MINUJUSTH also provided
support for the completion of background checks for the 29th class of cadets that
began training on 18 February. To date, the 29th class stands at 733 cadets, including
212 women. To achieve the targeted workforce of 18,000 police officers, with at least
12 per cent female representation, by 2021, as set out in the five -year strategic
development plan, efforts will need to be redoubled to enlist a combined 2,072 cadets,

6/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

including some 600 women, for the next three classes. On 29 April, 6,760 candidates,
including 1,008 women, sat the initial selection tests for enrolment into the 30th class.

B.

Justice (benchmarks 1, 2, 5 and 6)
31. In line with benchmark 1, MINUJUSTH continued to support the model
jurisdiction of Port-au-Prince in the fight against prolonged pretrial detention by
working to improve access to justice, handling incoming case files using a re al-time
case management system and managing the backlog of pretrial cases. This approach
supports the strategy of the Ministry of Justice and Public Security to tackle prolonged
pretrial detention, which brings together all rule of law actors in a “penal chain
committee” that meets monthly to assess progress.
32. As a result of the newly relaunched habeas corpus hearings, on 18 April,
19 cases were adjudicated and consequently 15 pretrial detainees who had been in
illegal detention for eight years were released. On 31 March, the prosecutor of the
Port-au-Prince tribunal handled 145 same-day transmission cases using real-time case
file management. Similarly, the number of cases closed by the investigative judges
increased from 74 cases closed in the previous period, from October to December
2017, to 95 between January and March 2018. The number of criminal cases
adjudicated by the court of first instance of Port-au-Prince increased from 60 during
the period from October to December 2017 to 93 between January a nd March 2018,
including 12 immediate trial procedure hearings.
33. Between 8 March, International Women’s Day, and 3 April, National Day of the
Haitian Women’s Movement, the Port-au-Prince tribunal organized special hearings
for more than 20 cases involving women in pretrial detention. UN-Women, with
technical support from MINUJUSTH and financing through the community violence
reduction programme, has elaborated a legal aid project to reduce the number of
women in pretrial detention in the new women’s prison, where 80 per cent of
detainees are at the pretrial stage.
34. As part of its key contribution to improve access to justice and fight prolonged
pretrial detention, MINUJUSTH supported the selection of 38 lawyers, including
14 women and 16 young lawyers, for two legal aid offices in Port-au-Prince funded
through the community violence reduction programme. Those offices have focused
on handling 50 per cent (1,700 cases) of the backlog of cases of detainees in pretrial
detention as well as support to immediate trial procedures and real-time case file
management since their official opening on 7 May.
35. With regard to the adoption and promulgation of legislation that improves
access to justice, reflected under benchmark 1, MINUJUSTH, through its good
offices, continued to engage with the permanent justice commissions of the two
parliamentary chambers, as well as both Speakers of Parliament, for a vote on the
draft Criminal Code, the draft Code of Criminal Procedure and the draft legal aid law,
scheduled for the second ordinary session of Parliament, to begin on 11 June.
36. MINUJUSTH also cooperated with judicial institutions to build momentum
around the Government’s key rule of law priorities. The Mission’s mobile teams
supported a series of public forums to raise community awareness on the rule of law.
During the period, forums were organized in 13 of the country’s 18 jurisdictions,
bringing together judges, prosecutors and representatives of bar associations, local
authorities, civil society, women’s organizations and universities, among others, to
examine prolonged pretrial detention that leads to prison overcrowding.
37. In keeping with benchmark 2, the Superior Council of the Judiciary took steps
to ensure the timely election of seven of its nine councillo rs, thereby avoiding any

18-08494

7/25

S/2018/527

institutional vacuum ahead of the expiry of its mandate on 3 July. The President and
the Public Prosecutor of the Court of Cassation, who are ex-officio members, will
remain on the Council.
38. The Technical Vetting Commission, comprising representatives of the Ministry
of Justice and Public Security and the Superior Council of the Judiciary, previously
handicapped by the absence of the representatives of the Ministry, is now complete
and functional. Three representatives of the Ministry assumed their functions in
March, bringing the number of members to seven, including two women. The
Commission is currently working to validate its mechanism to accelerate the vetting
of magistrates, which contributes to progress under benchmarks 2 a nd 5.
39. Nevertheless, action by the executive branch is required to end protracted delays
in completing the appointment or renewal of the term of judges, which are hindering
the normal functioning of the judicial system at all levels. At the Court of Cas sation,
6 of the 12 judges’ seats remain vacant, notwithstanding the launch of a recruitment
process in July 2017. In the month of May, the President appointed 41 out of the more
than 100 deans of the court, judges and investigating judges awaiting appoint ment or
renewal.
40. The relationship between the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the
executive branch remained strained, notwithstanding the establishment at the
beginning of 2018 of the joint ad hoc committee to devise a plan to modernize the
judiciary in efforts to harmonize their relations. Despite several meetings, no plan
was adopted in the first quarter of 2018.
41. Since 2013, the Superior Council of the Judiciary has failed to publish an annual
report detailing its activities and the situation of the judiciary in accordance with its
legal obligation since 2007. The report should include, among other aspects, an
account of critical judicial tasks, such as performance evaluation, the vetting of judges
and the inspection of courts and tribunals. Delays in the publication of the report are
due to poor organization and the lack of budget and human resources capacity of the
technical secretariat. However, the Council has taken some steps to prepare and
publish the outstanding annual reports. MINUJUST H is providing support to the
Council through a quick-impact project to assist in the timely collection and
processing of statistical data for the preparation of a report on the situation of the
judiciary.

C.

Corrections (benchmarks 1, 3 and 5)
42. The Haitian penitentiary system continued to be characterized by severe
overcrowding (366 per cent occupancy rate) owing to the high incidence of prolonged
pretrial detention. As at 8 May, Haitian prisons held 11,802 detainees, including
429 women, and 292 male and 18 female juveniles. Of those detainees, 75 per cent
were unsentenced, indicating no change in the percentage of detainees awaiting trial
since the issuance of my previous report. Overcrowding places a strain on the
available resources, leading to poor conditions of detention and resulting in violations
of inmates’ rights.
43. Low staffing levels and the inadequacy of budgetary allocations, as the
Directorate of Prison Administration does not have authority over its own operational
budget, compound the issue. No progress has been achieved in the adoption of draft
legislation on the penitentiary system or on elevating the prison administration to the
status of central directorate within the national police with autonomy over its own
resources.

8/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

44. MINUJUSTH is providing technical support to the prison administration to
develop and implement a targeted and dedicated recruitment and training strategy to
augment staff strength and reduce high turnover. In March, a needs analysis identified
the number of candidates to be retained by the prison administration from the 30th
and 31st promotions of the national police. In April and May, 42 mid -level staff,
including one woman, received administrative and management skills training
through two five-day programmes.
45. MINUJUSTH continued to assist the prison administration in the process of
certifying prisons in Haiti as capable of operating without full -time international
support. The Mission provided targeted support to the prison administration in
identifying the tools to assess 9 of the country’s 18 prisons against international
standards, leading to some improvements in conditions for 8,339 detainees, including
access to open air, meals, security, family visits and file processing and management.
46. MINUJUSTH, through its quick-impact projects, improved the potable water
and electrical power supply and assisted in the installation of toilet facilities.
Meanwhile, the Automated Fingerprint Identification System project at the National
Penitentiary has processed the files of some 3,000 inmates with technical support
from MINUJUSTH. The project is to be replicated in the prisons in Les Cayes and
Cap-Haïtien, where infrastructure refurbishment and electricity installation works,
financed through the joint rule of law programme, are ongoing.

D.

Human rights (benchmarks 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9)
47. In accordance with benchmarks 7 and 9, MINUJUSTH continued to work with
national institutions to strengthen the national human rights protection framework.
MINUJUSTH began to transmit to the Office of the National Human Rights
Ombudsperson individual cases of human rights violations that it had documented
and to train officers at the Office in monitoring human rights violations.
48. Similarly, the Ombudsperson shared with MINUJUSTH cases of prolonged
pretrial detention and difficulty in gaining access to justice. Since March,
representatives of the Office of the Ombudsperson have joined MINUJUSTH in field
visits to monitor access to justice in cases of allegations of sexual violence. In April,
MINUJUSTH facilitated an agreement between the Ombudsperson and the Director
General of the Haitian National Police to explore avenues of cooperation between the
two institutions. The Office will contribute to human rights training for police units
and the vetting of police officers. MINUJUSTH will provide technical support to the
Office in the two areas mentioned above, as well as in the development of its strategic
action plan.
49. Incidents of alleged human rights violations by the national police, in particular
allegations of excessive use of force, including against children, continue to raise
concerns with regard to the achievement of benchmarks 4, 5 and 6. On 16 March,
members of the national police killed a 15-year-old boy and injured a 10-year-old
during a private skirmish outside a stadium in Saint Saline -Gonâve (West
Department). On 17 March, members of the Unité départementale pour le maintien
de l’ordre of the national police injured a teenage boy in Caracol (North -East
Department) while dispersing a crowd during a demonstration. In the most recent
incident, on 6 April, national police officers injured an 11 -year-old girl in Hinche
(Centre Department) while pursuing a vehicle suspected of a traffic offence. Internal
investigations, including by the General Inspectorate of the Haitian National Police,
are under way, but no judicial investigations have been initiated so far. Similarly, and
despite the conclusion of the internal investigation by the General Inspectorate and
the appointment of investigative judges, judicial proceedings against national police

18-08494

9/25

S/2018/527

officers suspected of the killing and forced disappearance of civilians in the October
and November 2017 incidents in Lilavois and Grand Ravine (see S/2018/241,
paras. 34 and 35) have not yet been initiated.
50. In line with benchmark 8, civil society organizations continued to call for
accountability for past gross human rights violations. On 19 March, during the regular
hearings of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, two non-governmental
organizations voiced concerns about obstacles to judicial proceedings related to
crimes allegedly committed under the Duvalier rule. On 20 March, two other
organizations published a report on the same topic, highlighting the lack of progress
in the investigation against Jean-Claude Duvalier and his co-accused since his death
in 2014. On 26 April, the day of remembrance of the victims of the Duvalier regime,
non-governmental organizations organized a series of events to commemorate the
victims.
51. On 10 April, unidentified individuals opened fire on the offices of the National
Human Rights Defence Network, one of the most prominent human rights
organizations in Haiti. The attack took place in the middle of the night and there were
no casualties; however, the organization and its employees have been the subject of
repeated attacks over the past two decades.

E.

Anti-corruption and Permanent Electoral Council (benchmarks 10
and 11)
52. The Mission continued to support anti-corruption efforts, in particular the
oversight bodies of the penal chain, namely, the Superior Council of the Judiciary, the
Ministry of Justice and Public Security and the General Inspectorate of the Haitian
National Police. In 2017, the General Inspectorate reported the receipt and
investigation of 367 complaints, of which measures were taken for 35 per cent.
53. The memorandum of understanding between the United Nations and UNDP for
the implementation of rule of law activities in support of MINUJUSTH was signed
on 8 February 2018. Over a third of the $2.28 million in funding addresses support
activities for Haitian oversight and accountability bodies, including the General
Inspectorate of the national police, the judicial inspection capacity of the Ministry of
Justice, the Ombudsperson and national human rights institutions.
54. Further to this, the World Bank provides assistance to improve budget and
treasury management, strengthen internal and external controls and red uce misuse of
public funds and corruption, and also provides technical support and funding to build
capacity within financial oversight and accountability bodies.
55. The financial inspection unit of the Ministry of the Economy and Finance is
revising its legal framework before submission to the Government and Parliament for
approval. The National Procurement Board designed a two -to-three-year capacitystrengthening programme aimed at reviewing its institutional framework and role in
procurement. At the same time, no progress has yet been made on the draft organic
law of the Anti-Corruption Unit, the draft organic and procedural laws or the internal
regulations of the Superior Court of Audit and Administrative Disputes.
56. The process to constitute the nine-member Permanent Electoral Council has not
advanced since 2017. Although the three branches of power launched separate calls
for candidates, they have yet to complete the nomination of their three respective
representatives. In the absence of a Permanent Electoral Council, Haiti will resort to
the customary use of a provisional electoral council for holding the legislative
elections expected in October 2019, as has been the case for all elections since the
adoption of the 1987 Constitution. Similarly, indirect elections to establish the

10/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

councils and assemblies at the municipal, departmental and interdepartmental levels
have remained stalled since July 2017. The absence of the elections of local
governance structures, which play a role in the bottom-up constitutional process, also
delays the appointment of justices of the peace.

IV. Joint transition planning
57. Since February 2018, MINUJUSTH and the country team have undertaken an
assessment of the preparedness of the United Nations for the upcoming transition.
This includes an integrated approach that seeks to dovetail the benchmarked exit
strategy with the priorities of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
2017–2021 that have been agreed with the Government. A key element has been a
capacity assessment of the country team to assume programmatic aspects of the
Mission’s mandate.
58. To that end, on 22 and 23 March, a workshop held in Haiti brought together an
integrated team, including the Secretariat, UNDP, MINUJUSTH components and
members of the country team, to reach consensus on the policies and tools for
managing the transition to a non-peacekeeping presence in Haiti. As a result, the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 2017–2021 was identified as the
transition planning instrument for the implementation of programmatic priorities
during the lifespan of MINUJUSTH, as well as for the preparation of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations beyond 15 October 2019. Furthermore, as part
of the annual implementation review of the Framework, MINUJUSTH activities and
performance indicators were integrated into the Framework workplans. On 19 April,
the review was concluded in the presence of over 140 representatives of the
Government, the United Nations and civil society.
59. The exercise also allowed for the refinement of specific time -bound targets and
indicators for achieving the benchmarks, paving the way for the transfer of tasks and
responsibilities to the Government, the country team and other partners, as set out in
the two-year exit strategy. These are fully reflected in annex I. The United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, developed jointly by the Government of Haiti
and the United Nations and signed on 30 June 2017, enhances relations and
maximizes engagement with national counterparts and has strengthened the
integration between the Government, the Mission and the country team. Accordingly,
the Framework’s governance and rule of law outcome group will lead data collection,
analysis and identification of bottlenecks.
60. The joint transition planning highlighted a strong alignment between the genderrelated objectives in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework under
gender and protection (outcome 3) and the rule of law (outcome 5) and MINUJUSTH
benchmarks, particularly in the areas of women’s security and the levels of their
participation in security and justice institutions. MINUJUSTH, in active partnership
with the country team, national counterparts and women’s civil society organizations,
will continue to lead strategies that improve analysis and monitoring and strengthen
accountability with regard to women and peace and security commitments.

V. Mission support
61. In addition to providing logistical support to MINUJUSTH personnel,
particularly the police component, Government-provided corrections personnel and
the mobile teams, MINUJUSTH continued work to complete MINUSTAH liquidation
activities. Liquidation tasks range from the disposal of assets and the closing out of
contracts to the dismantling and removal of infrastructure and installations to return
18-08494

11/25

S/2018/527

properties to owners, including handling all environmental matters to ensure that
returned properties are free from contamination. This involves closing a number of
facilities in Port-au-Prince, as well as progressively shutting down all MINUSTAH
structures in the former regional centres by 30 June 2018. In this regard, the
consolidation of MINUJUSTH headquarters facilities to minimize the Mission ’s
footprint continues, while facilities where individual police officers are co-located
with the national police in Port-au-Prince and in the regions are being renovated.
62. The closing of one mission and establishment of another simultaneously has
posed challenges for MINUJUSTH to reach its full operating c apability and has
placed pressure on its resources, in particular its staff, who in some instances have
been required to perform tasks beyond their regular duties. At the time of reporting,
50 per cent of all stockholdings handed over to MINUJUSTH, valued at $20 million,
have been verified and readied for transfer to new centralized warehouse structures
at the Mission’s headquarters. The final batch of 375 assets was commercially sold
as part of the liquidation of MINUSTAH. All liquidation activities are ex pected to be
completed by 30 June 2018.

VI. Conduct and discipline
63. There have been no new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse since the
issuance of my previous report. The Mission pursued its prevention activities,
including training, public information and outreach, to sensitize the Haitian
population to United Nations standards of conduct, specifically the zero -tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, complemented by remedial action through
assistance to victims. As part of the outreach activities, a workshop for journalists,
held on 20 April, discussed the United Nations zero -tolerance policy towards sexual
exploitation and abuse to encourage in-depth coverage of the message by the Haitian
media.
64. The Victims’ Rights Advocate of the United Nations, Jane Connors, appointed
as part of my strategy to improve the response of the United Nations to sexual
exploitation and abuse, visited Haiti from 22 to 26 April to support the ongoing
implementation by United Nations system actors of an integrated, strategic, systemwide approach to prevention and response, in particular in respect of enjoyment by
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse of their rights. Along with the MINUJUSTH
Field Victims’ Rights Advocate, Ms. Connors met with the Mission leadership and
staff, agencies, funds and programmes, Haitian authorities and civil society, including
the Office of the Ombudsperson. She also met confidentially with victims.

VII. Observations
65. Haiti has come a long way on its path to durable stability, and there can be no
room for regression in the gains made in the security sector. I firmly condemn the
recent acts of armed violence perpetrated by gangs in the southern neighbourhoods
of Port-au-Prince and call upon the relevant Haitian authorities to strengthen State
authority in the area in order to stem the violence and protect citizens. The circulation
of illegal arms in the country and their availability to those gangs is a stark reminder
of the urgent work that still needs to be accomplished in licensing and controlling the
flow of firearms and in creating opportunities for people, with a particular focus on
youth, in neighbourhoods prone to armed violence.
66. I take note of the progress made in the joint implementation of the ment orship
and advisory programme in the 17 co-location sites with the national police.
Additional efforts are still required to safeguard and build upon the gains that have
12/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

been made to guarantee the proper implementation of priority actions of the five -year
strategic development plan of the Haitian National Police and to consolidate the
independence of the national police. These efforts should also adequately address
threats from gangs, organized crime and insufficient budgetary resources that could
otherwise hamper progress. At the same time, political will and active collaboration
on the part of the Government are essential factors in the coming period.
67. Increased cooperation between key State institutions that are constitutionally
required to work together to address the many challenges preventing lasting progress
in the functioning of the judiciary will be necessary. The new leadership at the head
of the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the election of new members of the
Superior Council of the Judiciary and, above all, the participatory approach of the
sector-based dialogue on justice will be conducive to the development of a genuine
judicial sector policy and action plans to implement reforms needed to strengthen the
rule of law institutions, guarantee the independence of the judiciary and ensure the
efficient functioning of a judicial system legitimized by the confidence of the
population.
68. The decades-old phenomenon in Haitian prisons of severe overcrowding owing
in part to excessive prolonged pretrial detention and the ill effects of the functioning
of the entire judicial system must be tackled with renewed energy, time, effort,
political will and adequate resources. I am encouraged by the commitment of
President Moïse to fight against prolonged pretrial detention and by the actions
undertaken by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security in the model jurisdiction of
Port-au-Prince. I hope to also see progress in addressing the overcrowding of
detainees, the majority of whom have been unable to seek defence counsel and stand
trial, as well as results of the recent measures taken to provide legal aid to detainees
at the national penitentiary.
69. I remain concerned by human rights violations allegedly committed by the
national police, including those in Lilavois and Grand Ravine in 2017. I reiterate my
call upon the Haitian authorities to ensure that those found responsible for such
actions are promptly brought to justice. I am also disheartened by the lack of progress
in identifying and bringing to justice the authors of serious past crimes and violations.
Different United Nations human rights mechanisms have encouraged the Government
to consider transitional justice mechanisms to bolster national reconciliation efforts
and consolidate the stability of Haiti.
70. The establishment of a constitutionally mandated Permanent Electoral Council
would be an important and welcome development. While strengthening the sector based dialogue is under way, it would inspire greater confidence among both natio nal
and international stakeholders, ensuring that the holding of future elections is not the
object of partisan politics but rather a reflection of a State able to exercise its true
democratic values. I strongly encourage all Haitian stakeholders to work together to
achieve this important milestone that will bolster the prosperity and stability of Haiti.
71. The steps taken by President Moïse to engage the Haitian people in a sectorbased dialogue reflect a genuine desire to move forward with political and
socioeconomic development as a unifying national project. I have heard the many
voices from State institutions, political parties, the private sector and civil society
calling for the crafting of a forward-looking national agenda capable of delivering
tangible results for stability and sustainable development. It is important that all
Haitian actors take full advantage of this unique window of opportunity and work
together to contribute to a long-awaited and meaningful national dialogue. I share the
hope of the Haitian people that this will lead to the creation of a pact for greater social
and political cohesion, consolidate the gains made in security and stabilization over

18-08494

13/25

S/2018/527

the past decade and truly reinforce State institutions to meet the needs of the Haiti an
people.
72. In that regard, the joint efforts to achieve progress against the 11 benchmarks,
further complemented by the Government and the United Nations family with
46 indicators and specific transition dates, as reflected in annex I to the present re port,
will be essential to the consolidation of stability gains and the establishment of a
strong foundation for long-term political stability, security and development in Haiti.
I encourage the Government of Haiti to foster greater cooperation with region al
organizations, in particular the Caribbean Community and the Organization of
American States, and identify and leverage new opportunities for partnership. As the
United Nations system prepares a smooth and effective transition towards sustainable
development, I encourage the different United Nations entities on the ground and at
Headquarters to continue to work as “One United Nations” through a more integrated
approach for Haiti. I also call upon the United Nations family and the international
community to assist the Government of Haiti to develop a coherent and integrated
resource mobilization strategy for the objectives of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework 2017-2021, transition planning and the new approach to
cholera in support of government priorities.
73. Progress in this respect will help to prepare a successful transition to a non peacekeeping United Nations presence in the country and place Haiti on a more
assured path to sustainable development. I am confident that the Government , the
Mission, the United Nations country team and all international and regional partners
will continue to work together to plan for this transition and beyond so as to
anticipate, address and mitigate all challenges that may emerge from the withdrawal
of peacekeeping from Haiti.
74. I wish to express my gratitude to the women and men of MINUJUSTH and the
United Nations country team for demonstrating unwavering dedication and
commitment to peace, security and development in Haiti.

14/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

Annex I
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Benchmark

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

1. The executive and
legislative branches
have promulgated
legislation that
improves access to
justice, enhances the
development of the
national police and
addresses prolonged
pretrial detention,
which is a cause of
prison overcrowding;
all branches have
initiated
implementation of the
new legislation,
including through
sustainable budget
allocations

1.1 Existence of the new
Criminal Code (1 — draft
law initiated; 2 — draft law
voted by each chamber;
3 — law promulgated by
President)

April 2019

3 — New Criminal
Code is
promulgated

1 — Draft Criminal
Code under review
in each chamber’s
justice and security
commission

1.2 Existence of the Code
of Criminal Procedure
(1 — draft law initiated;
2 — draft law voted by each
chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by President)

April 2019

3 — Code of
Criminal Procedure
is promulgated

1 — Draft Criminal
Code under review
in each chamber’s
justice and security
commission

1.3 Existence of the Legal
Aid Law (1 — draft law
initiated; 2 — draft law
voted by each chamber;
3 — law promulgated by
President)

April 2019

3 — Legal Aid Law
is promulgated

1 — Draft legal aid
law under review
for separate
adoption in each
chamber

1.4 Existence of the organic
law on the Haitian National
Police elevating Directorate
of Prison Administration to a
central directorate
(1 — draft law initiated;
2 — draft law voted by each
chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by President)

April 2019

3 — Organic law on
national police is
promulgated

1 — Draft organic
law under review by
the office of the
Director General of
the national police

1.5 Existence of the Prison
Law (1 — draft law
initiated; 2 — draft law
voted by each chamber;
3 — law promulgated by
President)

April 2019

3 — Prison Law is
promulgated

1 — Draft Prison
Law pending final
validation by
Directorate of
Prison
Administration

1.6 Identification of the
implementation
requirements by the relevant
institutions, including
budgetary allocations, for
the new legislation
(disaggregated by law)

October
2019

Implementation
requirements,
including budgetary
allocations, are
determined for new
legislation

Implementation
requirements not yet
identified for new
legislation

18-08494

15/25

S/2018/527
Benchmark

2. The Haitian
authorities make
timely, genderbalanced and meritbased appointments in
the justice sector,
including in the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary, the
Court of Cassation
and the Superior
Court of Audits and
Administrative
Disputes

16/25

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

1.7 Number of new case
files processed in real time
by the prosecutors in the
jurisdiction of Port-auPrince

October
2019

800 new case files
processed in real
time by the
prosecutors in the
jurisdiction of Portau-Prince

July 2016–June
2017: 695 of 1,560
new cases processed
in real time by Portau-Prince
jurisdiction
prosecutors

1.8 Proportion of detainees
in pretrial detention in
excess of two years at the
civil prison of Port-auPrince

October
2019

50.4 per cent of
detainees in pretrial
detention at the civil
prison of Port-auPrince

14 Nov. 2017:
62.2 per cent of
detainees at civil
prison of Port-auPrince in pretrial
detention (2,256 of
3,626)

1.9 Number of cases closed
by investigative judges in
the jurisdiction of Port-auPrince

October
2019

750 orders issued

July 2017–June
2018: 600 orders
issued by
investigative judges

1.10 Number of penal cases
adjudicated by the court of
first instance of Port-auPrince

October
2019

800 penal cases
adjudicated by the
court of first
instance of Port-auPrince

October 2016–
September 2017:
court of first
instance of Port-auPrince adjudicated
613 penal cases

2.1 Existence of the annual
report of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary, to
include: judiciary staffing by
gender; judiciary inspection
results; number of certified
judges; and implementation
of judge evaluation process

April 2019

Annual report of the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary
available, including:
judiciary staffing by
gender; judiciary
inspection results;
number of certified
judges; and
implementation of
judge evaluation
process

Provisions of article
37 of the law
establishing the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary
articulates
preparation and
publication of an
annual report. To
date, only one
report, covering
2012/13, has been
published

2.2 Number of seats filled
at the Superior Council of
the Judiciary, the Court of
Cassation and the Superior
Court of Audits and
Administrative Disputes,
disaggregated by gender

April 2019

Superior Council of
the Judiciary: 9/9
(3 women)

Superior Council of
the Judiciary: 9/9
(2 women)

Court of Cassation:
12/12 (4 women)

Court of Cassation:
6/12 (1 woman)

Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes: 9/9
(3 women)

Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes: 9/9
(2 women)

18-08494

S/2018/527
Benchmark

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

3. The Directorate of
Prison Administration
performs key
management
functions providing
basic services to all
detainees and ensures
respect for their rights

3.1 Number of deaths per
1,000 inmates

October
2019

Ratio equal to or
below 10/1,000
inmates

16/1,000 inmates in
2017

3.2 Number of prisons
supported by functioning
health services for inmates,
disaggregated by gender

October
2019

Nine out of 18
prisons and four
largest national
police holding
facilities supported
by adequate healthcare facilities for
inmates

Prison health-care
road map validated

3.3 Number of Directorate
of Prison Administration
officers recruited through a
dedicated process,
disaggregated by gender, out
of the 941 new officers
required by 2021 to meet the
Directorate’s needs

October
2019

300 Directorate of
Prison
Administration
officers recruited, of
whom 30 per cent
are women, out of
the total 941 new
officers to meet the
Directorate’s needs
by 2021

100 recruits from
the 29th promotion
of the national
police deployed to
the Directorate of
Prison
Administration

3.4 Number of prisons
certified by the Directorate
of Prison Administration as
being able to operate without
full-time support from
international actors
(MINUJUSTH or others)

October
2019

Nine prisons
certified out of 18

Draft evaluation
survey exists

4.1 Implementation rate of
strategic development plan
of the national police for
2017–2021

October
2019

43 per cent
implemented (57 of
133 priorities in
strategic
development plan)

The strategic
development plan of
the national police
is prioritized by
criticality. Actions
requiring
MINUJUSTH
presence are ranked
top

4.2 Number of police
officers per 1,000 citizens

October
2019

1.45

In 2017, ratio
reached 1.36. Target
for 2021 set at 1.51

4.3 Percentage of women
police officers

October
2019

11 per cent

In 2017, 9 per cent.

4. The Haitian
National Police
responds to public
disorder and manages
security threats
throughout Haiti,
demonstrating
elevated levels of
professionalism,
human rights
awareness and gender
sensitivity, without
requiring
international support,
as a result of the
implementation of the
relevant priorities of
the strategic
development plan of
the national police for
2017–2021

18-08494

Constitution of Haiti
sets a 30 per cent
target for women in
public service

17/25

S/2018/527
Benchmark

5. Strengthened
internal oversight and
accountability
mechanisms in the
justice, corrections
and police sectors
address misconduct
and ensure increased
effectiveness and
compliance with
human rights

18/25

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

4.4 Percentage of national
police capacity statically
deployed outside the Portau-Prince metropolitan area

October
2019

40 per cent

In 2017, 32 per cent
after graduation and
further deployment
of the 28th
promotion

4.5 Number of specialized
public order units out of the
13 existing units of the
national police (12 Unités
départementales pour le
maintien de l’ordre and
1 Compagnie d’intervention
et de maintien de l’ordre)
capable of responding to
security threats with no
MINUJUSTH support

October
2019

All 13 units are
capable of
responding to
security threats with
no MINUJUSTH
support

Six of the 13 units
operate without
MINUJUSTH
support

4.6 Percentage of public
order/security operations
planned and executed by
national police without
MINUJUSTH support

October
2019

100 per cent of
operations without
MINUJUSTH
support

95 per cent of
operations without
MINUJUSTH
support

4.7 Percentage of national
budget allocated to national
police

October
2019

8.0 per cent of
national budget
allocated to national
police

7.1 per cent of
national budget
allocated to national
police

5.1 Number of courts of
first instance inspected (xx
of 18)

April 2019

All 18 courts of first
instance and
5 appeal courts
inspected by the
Ministry of Justice

Nine of 18
jurisdictions
inspected in 2015

5.2 Percentage of
allegations of human rights
violations against public
officials (national police
officers, Directorate of
Prison Administration
officials) investigated by the
General Inspectorate of the
national police

April 2019

80 per cent of all
allegations
investigated by the
General
Inspectorate of the
national police

General
Inspectorate of the
national police:
estimated 80 per
cent

5.3 Percentage of
confirmed misconduct by
national police and
Directorate of Prison
Administration officers
disciplined by the national
police

April 2019

60 per cent of
confirmed
misconduct by
national police
officers disciplined
by the national
police

General Inspectorate
of the national
police: in 2017,
35 per cent of
confirmed
misconduct
disciplined (128/367)

Number of appeal courts
inspected (xx of 5)

18-08494

S/2018/527
Benchmark

6. Haitian women
and men, in particular
those from the most
vulnerable and
marginalized
communities,
demonstrate increased
trust in the capability
and willingness of the
justice system to
address crime and of
the Haitian National
Police to provide
security

18-08494

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

5.4 Percentage of
confirmed crimes or human
rights violations committed
by national police and
Directorate of Prison
Administration officers
prosecuted by judicial
authorities

April 2019

100 per cent of
2017: none
confirmed crimes or
human rights
violations committed
by national police
officers prosecuted
by judicial
authorities

5.7 Percentage of staff of
the General Inspectorate of
the national police deployed
outside the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area,
disaggregated by gender

April 2019

30 per cent of
projected 340 staff
of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

June 2017: none of
the 198 personnel
assigned to the
General
Inspectorate of the
national police are
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

6.1 Proportion of the
population expressing
satisfaction on how the
national police performs at
reducing crime

April 2019

88 per cent

2013: 88 per cent of
population expressed
trust in national
police (national
police/MINUSTAH
survey)

6.2 Number of youth at risk
and women benefiting from
community violence
reduction/reinsertion
programmes demonstrating
willingness to work with
national police community
policing initiatives and law
enforcement authorities

April 2019

500 youth at risk
and women
cooperating with
national police
community policing
and law
enforcement
authorities

None

6.3 Number of victims of
April 2019
intentional homicide per
100,000 citizens, disaggregated
by gender and age

Rate of 9.3 or less of
intentional homicide,
disaggregated by
gender and age

2017: 9.9

6.4 Number of kidnappings
reported in the Port-auPrince metropolitan area

April 2019

50 or fewer
kidnappings
reported in the Portau-Prince
metropolitan area

2017: 60

6.5 Number of gang-related
incidents in the hotspot
zones of Cité Soleil, Bel-Air
and Martissant

April 2019

18 or fewer gangrelated incidents in
the hotspot zones of
Cité Soleil, Bel-Air
and Martissant

2017: 24

19/25

S/2018/527
Benchmark

7. The national
Office for the
Protection of Citizens
functions
independently and
protects citizens
whose rights have
been violated

8. Civil society
organizations,
including those
representing women,
engage with the
Haitian authorities to
advocate the
promotion and
protection of human
rights, and are
empowered to bring
allegations of human
rights violations to
the competent judicial
or administrative
authorities

20/25

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

6.6 Number of sexual and
gender-based violence cases
investigated by national
police, reflecting enhanced
national police capacity

April 2019

At least 275 cases
of sexual and
gender-based
violence are
investigated

2017: 164

7.1 Status of performance
of the Office for the
Protection of Citizens in
accordance with the Paris
Principles

October
2019

Level of compliance
of the Office for the
Protection of
Citizens with
international
standards and
structural capacity
to operate as an
independent and
effective institution
in accordance with
the Paris Principles

2017: fully
compliant

7.2 Number of
recommendations of the
Office for the Protection of
Citizens implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

April 2019

Three
recommendations of
the Office for the
Protection of
Citizens
implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

2017: none

8.1 Number of reports
prepared and submitted by
civil society organizations to
international human rights
mechanisms

April 2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted by civil
society
organizations to
international human
rights mechanisms

2016: four reports

8.2 Number of cases
reported by local civil
society organizations
monitoring human rights
violations

April 2019

10 reports published
by local civil
society
organizations
monitoring human
rights violations

2017: estimated 10

18-08494

S/2018/527
Benchmark

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

9. National
authorities comply
with international
human rights
obligations, including
holding individuals
responsible for
current and past
human rights
violations and
fulfilling their
reporting obligations
to human rights treaty
bodies

9.1 Availability of national
plan of action for human
rights

October
2019

National plan of
action for the
implementation
of the
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms,
in particular through
the universal
periodic review of
the Human Rights
Council

No national plan of
action for human
rights

9.2 Number of
recommendations made by
the human rights
mechanisms accepted by the
Government of Haiti

April 2019

Three
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms
accepted by the
Government of
Haiti

July 2017–June
2018: one

9.3 Number of reports
prepared and submitted to
international human rights
mechanisms by the
Government of Haiti

April 2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted to
international human
rights mechanisms
by the Government
of Haiti

2016: four reports
submitted (Human
Rights Council,
Committee on the
Elimination of
Discrimination
against Women,
Committee on
Enforced
Disappearances and
Committee on the
Rights of Persons
with Disabilities)

9.4 Appointment by the
Government of Haiti of a
high-level human rights
focal point within the
executive branch

April 2019

One high-level focal
point within the
executive branch
appointed by the
Government of
Haiti

No high-level focal
point within the
executive branch
appointed by the
Government of
Haiti

10.1 Availability of annual
report on public spending by
Superior Court of Audits and
Administrative Disputes

April 2019

The annual report
on public spending
of Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes is
available

2017 report not yet
finalized

10. Rule of law and
anti-corruption
institutions
demonstrate increased
capacity to fight
corruption

18-08494

21/25

S/2018/527
Benchmark

Indicator

Target timeline

Target

Baseline (as at 2 May 2018)

11. The Permanent
Electoral Council is
established through a
credible and
transparent process
and exercises its
electoral
responsibilities in an
independent and
transparent manner,
without requiring
international support

11.1 Nomination by the
three branches of their three
members for the Permanent
Electoral Council, with a
view to establishing the
Council as an operational
and independent body

October
2019

The nine members
are nominated and
the Permanent
Electoral Council is
established, is
operational and
functions
independently

Nomination process
of the three
representatives has
been initiated by
each branch

11.2 Update of the electoral
lists in preparation of the
next electoral cycle

October
2019

The electoral lists
are updated

Not yet undertaken

11.3 Existence of the
Electoral Law in preparation
of the next electoral cycle
(1 — draft law initiated;
2 — draft law voted by each
chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by the
President)

October
2019

3 — Electoral Law
is promulgated

Initial preparation
under way

22/25

18-08494

S/2018/527

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as at 15 May
United Nations police officers
Country

18-08494

Women

Formed police units
Men

Women

Men

Argentina

1

5

–

–

Benin

–

24

–

–

Bangladesh

–

7

–

139

Burkina Faso

–

14

–

–

Brazil

–

1

–

–

Canada

9

–

–

–

Chad

1

–

–

–

Chile

1

–

–

–

Cameroon

1

–

–

–

Colombia

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

1

–

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

El Salvador

–

–

–

–

Ethiopia

–

–

–

–

France

–

–

–

–

Germany

1

–

–

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

India

–

280

280

280

Indonesia

–

–

–

–

Jordan

–

138

138

138

Madagascar

1

–

–

–

Mali

–

–

–

–

Mexico

–

–

–

–

Nepal

–

133

133

133

Niger

1

–

–

–

Nigeria

1

–

–

–

Norway

3

–

–

–

Pakistan

–

–

–

–

Philippines

–

–

–

–

Portugal

–

–

–

–

Republic of Korea

3

–

–

–

Romania

–

–

–

–

Russian Federation

1

–

–

–

Rwanda

–

119

119

119

Senegal

8

122

122

122

Slovakia

–

–

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

Sri Lanka

–

–

–

–

23/25

S/2018/527
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Men

Women

Men

Sweden

–

–

–

–

Togo

2

–

–

–

Tunisia

1

–

–

–

Turkey

–

–

–

–

United States of America

–

–

–

–

Uruguay

–

–

–

–

Subtotal

36

229

45

931

Total, by function

265

976

Total

24/25

Formed police units

1 241

18-08494

S/2018/527

Annex III
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti:
deployment map

18-08494

25/25
