SECUPJTY' COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECO,RDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 106
222nd meeting

222eme seance

9 December 1947

9 decembre 1947
Lake Success

New York

TABLE DES MATIERES

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Two ~ ~"ndred and twenty-second
meeting

Deux-cent-vi.Ugt-deuxieme seance
Paqc

PoglS

415. Provisional agenda . .

2769

415. Ordre du jour provisoire . . . .

2769

416. Remarks by the President

2770

416. Allocution du President

2770

• . . .

417. Credentials for the representative of
China. . . . . . • . • . • 2770

417. Pouvoirs du representant de la Chine 2770

418. Adoption of the agenda. . . . . 2770
419. Letter from the Assistant SecretaryGeneral in charge of the Department of
Security Council Affairs concerning
rules of procedure regarding the admission of new Members . . . . . 2771

418. Adoption de 1'0rdre du jour • . • 2770
419. Lettre .,du Secretaire general adj9int
charge du Departement des affaires du
Conseil de securite, concernant les articles du reglement interieur traitant de
l'admission de nouveaux Membres. 2771

420. Letter from the representative of the
United States of America concerning
the conducting of experiments relating
to nuclear fission on Eniwetok Atoll in
the Trust Territory of the Pacific
Islands . . . . . . . . . • 2771

420. Lettre du representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique concernant les experiences
relatives a la fission nuc1eaire dans l'atoll d'Eniwetok situe dans le Territoire
sous tutelle des iles du Pacifique. . 2771

421. Telegram from the Committee of Good
Offices in Indonesia concerning the
choice of a meeting place . . . . 2772

421. Tetegramme de la Commission de bons
offices en Indonesie, concernant le choix
d'un lieu de reunion. . . . • . 2772

422. Letter from the Secretary-General regarding the General Assembly's resolution concerning the "future Government of Palestine" . . . . . . 2776

422. Lettre du Secretaire general concerllant
la resolution de !'Assemblee generate
relative au "Gouvernement futur de la
Palestine" . . . . . • , • . 2776

Documents

Documents

The following documents relevant to the two
Les documents suivants, se l'apportant cl la
hundred and twenty-second meeting appear as 'deux-cent-vingt-deuxieme seance, figurent dans la
follows:
publication su!vante:
Official Records of the Security Council, Second Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de secltrite,
Year:
Deltxieme Annee:
Supplement No. 20, Annex 45
Supplement No 20, Annexe 45
Letter dated 2 December 1947 from the Assistant Lettre en date du 2 decembre 1947 adressee au
Secretary-General in charge of Security CounPresident du Conseil de securite par le Secrecil Affairs addressed to the President of the
taire general adjoint charge du Departement
Security Council concerning rules of procedure
des affaires du Conseil de securite concernant
regarding the admission of new Members (docules articles du reglement interieur traitant de
ment S/612)
l'admission de nouveaux Membres (document
S/612)
Supplement No. 20, Annex 46
SuppZCment No 20, Annexe 46
Letter dated 2 December 1947 from the repre- Lettre en date du 2 decembre 1947 adressee au
sentative of the United States of America adPresident du Conseil de securite par le repredressed to the President of the Security Council,
sentant des Etats-U:nis d'Amerique, et annexes,
and enclosures, concerning the conducting of
concernant les experiences relatives a la fission
experiments relating to nuclear fission on Eninucleaire dans l'atoll de Eniwetok dans le
wetok Atoll in the Trust Territory of the Pacific
Territoire sous tutelle des iles du Pacifique
Islands (document S/613)
(document S/613)
Supplement No. 20, Annex 47
SuppZCment No 20, Annexe 41
Telegram dated 1 December 1947 from the Com- Telegramme en date du 1er decembre 1947 adresmittee of Good Offices in Indonesia to the
se au President du Conseil de securite par la
President of the Security Council, report by
Commission de bons offices en Indonesie, rapthe Committee of Good Offices concerning the
port de la Commission de bons offices concerchoice of a meeting place (document S/61Q
nant le choix d'un lieu de reunion (document
S/611)
Supplement No. 20, Annex 48
SuppZCment No 20, Annexe 48
Letter dated 2 December from the Secretary-Gen- Lettre en date du 2 decembre 1947 adressee au
eral addressed to the President of the Security
President du Conseil de securite par le SecreCouncil (document S/614) regarding the resotaire general (document S/614) concernant la
lution concerning the "future Government of
resolution relative au "Gouvernement futur de
Palestine" adopted by the General Assembly.
la Palestine" adoptee par l'Assemblee generale.
..

.....

~ _~ . _ ~

_~--~~~""'~~~:".-.-

...

. .,"'.............

,_._=""'~~'"""""'_

,.~-"'-~.-

.......

~._._.,,-----~-~.~.~--~._~---_._

..-_.._---- ..._..._._....

~~

..,f
..-....-,_.

. . -

UNITED

NATIONS UNlES

SE'CURITY
COUNCIL

CONS ElL
DE'SEeU,RITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECONDYEAR

No. 106

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 106
I

TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY.
SECOND MEETING

DEUX.CENT·VINGT.DEUXIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 9 December 1?47, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 9 decembre 1947, a lS heures..

President: Mr. ]. HOOD (Australia).

President: M. ]. HOOD (Australie).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil,China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays su.ivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiqu~s
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Ums
d'Amerique.

415. Provisional agenda (document
S/Agenda/222)

415. Ordre dll jour provisoire (docu'ment Si Agenda/222)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 2 December 1947 from the Assistant Secretary-General in Charge of Security Council Affairs addressed to the President of the Security Council ( document
S/612), concerning rules of procedure regardf'~ the admission of new Members).l

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre en date du 2 decembre 1947 adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par le
Secretaire general adjoint charge du Departement des affaires du Conseil de securite (document S/612), concernant les articles du reglement interieur traitant de l'admission de nouveaux Membresl . .
,
3. Lettre en date du t decembre 1947 adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par le
representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, et
annexes (document S/613), concernant les
experiences relatives ala fission nucleaire dans
l'atoll de Eniwetok dans le Territoire sous
tutelle des iles du Pacifique2 •
4. Telegramme en date du 1er decembre 1947
adresse au President dtl Conseil de securite
par la Commission de bons offices en Indonesie (document S/611), rapport de la Commission de bons offices concernant le choix d'tin
lieu de reunions:
5. Lettre- en date du 2 decembre 1947 adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par le
Secretaire general (document S/614)4, concernant la resolution relative au "Gouverne-

3. Letter dated 2 December 1947 from the representative of the United States of America
addressed to the President of the Security
Council, and enclosures (document S/613),
concerning the conducting of experiments relating to nuclear fission on Eniwetok Atoll in
the Trust Territory of the 'Pacific Islands).2
4. Telegram dated 1 December 1947 from the
Committee of Good Offices in Indonesia to the
President of the Security Council (document
S/611), report by the Committee of Good
Offices concerning the choice of a meeting
place).8
'
5. Letter dated 2 December 1947 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (dpcument S/614)\ regarding the' resolution concerning the "future
y1 See Official Records of the Security COllncil, Second
~bi" Supplement No. 20, Annex 45.
d., Annex 46.
e Ibid., Anne.'C 47
'Ibid" Annex 48:

Itr_.. . . .

.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels dn CO/lseil de securiM, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 20, Annexe 45.
"Ibid., Annexe 46.
8 Ibid.• Annexe 47.
• Ibid., Annexe 48.

...
Government of Palestine" adopted by the General Assembly (document A/516).1

J

ment -futur de la Palestine" adoptee par
I'Assemblee generate (document A/s16)1.
"',J'"

416. Remarks by the President

416. AIlocution -du President

The PRESIDENT: In assuming the presidency of
the S~urity Council as representative of Australia
during what happens to be the last month of Ausfretlici.'s term of office on the Security Council, may
I say that I trust that I shall fulfil the tasks of
that position with efficiency and with the co'"Operation of the members of the Council; and that, in
doing so, I shall follow as far as I can in the footsteps of my distinguished predeceSsor in this chair,
Mr. Warren Austin of the United States of America.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): En assumant, en ma qualite de representant de l'Australie,
la presi$lence du Conseil de securite pendant ce
qui se trouve etre le dernier moil> du mandat de
l'Australie au Conseil de securite, qu'il me soit
permis d'exprimer l'esp9ir que je remplirai efficacement les devoirs de ma charge avec le concours des membres du Conseil et que, ce faisant,
je sui~~ au~~t !!~e possible la voie tracee ~ar
mon dlstmgue predecesseur, M. Warren Austin,
representant des Etats-Unis d'Atl1erique.

417. Credentials for the representative
of China (document 8/615)

417. PQuvoir~ du representant de la
Chine (document 8/615)

The PRESIDENT: Before the adoption of th~
ager;tda, w~ich is item 1 on the provisional agen~a,
I WIsh to mform the Security Council that, in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure
of- the Security Council, the Minister Df Foreign Affairs of the Chinese Republic has advised
the Security Council that Mr. T. F. Tsiang has
been appointed _representative of China on the
Security Council in place of Mr. Quo Tai-chi; and
furthermore that for the time being, during the
temporary absence of Mr. T.F. Tsiang from New
York, Mr.C. L. Hsia will be the acting representative. of China on the Security Council.
I trust that this notification will be taken as
constituting adequate provisional credentials for
Mr. Hsia.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Avant
l'adoption de l'ordre du jour, qui est le premier·
point inscrit a l'ordre du jour· provisoire, je-tiens
it infonner le Conseil que, conformement au reglement interieur pzovisoire du Conseil de securite, .
le Ministre des affaires etrangeres de la Republique chinoise a fait connaitre au Conseil que M.
T. F. Tsiang a ete designe,en remplacement de
M. Quo Tai:-chi, pour representer la Chine au
Conseil de securite, et que, pour l'instant, pendant
l'absence momentanee de M. T. S. TSlang de
New-York, M. C. L. Hsia fera .fonction de representant de la Chine au Conseil de securite.
]'espere que cette Rotification sera consideree
commeconstituant des pouvoirs temporaires suffisants pour M. ~sia.
i

418. Adoption of the agenda

418. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

The PRESIDENT: Are there any objections to
the adoption of the agenda?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Y a-t-i1
des objections a ce que nous adoptions l'ordre du
jour? .

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of A~erica): I
should like to ask, with respect to item 5, what is
intended by that item. Is it just that the Security
Council will take formal note of the- letter of the
Secretary-General or is it intended that the matter be discussed?
In the opinion of my delegation. it would be
extremely unwise for the- Security Council-to enter now into a premature discussion of the Pales-tine question when there are meetings and events
taking place in the Near East which might not be
brought any nearer to a solution by premature debate in the Security Council now.
I should just like to know what is intended by
placing item 5 on the agenda.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trad1tit
de l'anglais): Je voudrais, au sujet du point 5,
demander ce que 1'0n entend par ce poiut. Est-ce
simplement. que le Con~eil de securite prendra
officiellement acte de la lettre du Secretaire general ou se propose-t-on de discuter la question?
Selon l'avis de ma delegation, il serait tout a
fait inopportun que le Conseil de securite engageat
une discussion prematuree sur la question palestinienne ;une telle discussion ne serait pas de nature a faciliter· une· solution tandis que se derolllent au Moyen-Orient les debats et les evenements
actuels.
Je voudrais simplement savoir ce qu'on envi~
sage en inscrivant le point 5 a 1'0rdre du jour.

_

The PRESIDENT : The intention of the President
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'(mglais): L'intenis that this item should be treated at this meeting tion du President est que cette question soit trai_as a formal item only, and not as a preliminary to tee, a la presente seance, comme une simple quesany general discussion. I had proposed, when we tion de forme et non pas comme le prelude it u~e.
came to this item, to make that clear and to sug- discussion generale quekonque. Je me proposll1S .
gest simply that, concerning item 5, the Security d'expliquer cela c1airement lorsque nous serions
Council should note the receipt of the letter from arrives -a ce point et de suggerer simpl~ment que,
the Secretary-General, thereby becoming seized. en ce qui concerne le point 5, le Conseil de secuof the question of Palestine.
rite prenne note de la lettre du Secretaire general
et, de ce fait, se trouve. saisi de la question palestinienne.
In reply to the representative of the United
Pour repondre au desir du representapt des
States, the procedure can perhaps be made a Ut- Etats-Unis, lorsque nous arriverons au. point en
I See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during -its second session, resolution 181 (lI).

I Voir les Resolutions adoptees pa" l'AssemblCe gellerale- pendant sa deuxieme s~ssion, res~lution .181 (~

ps
tle clearer when we come to the particular item,
but at the moment, that is the intention in the inclusion of this item.

question, on pourra peut-etreen preciser un peu
la procedure, mais, pour l'instant, telle est l'inten- tion dans laquelle ce point a ete inscrit a l'ordre
du' jour.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria) : According to the letter from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security, Council, there is nothing to indicate that the Security Council should
merely take note of the subject. The letter stat~
that the attention of the Security Council should be
called to paragraphs (a), (li) and (c) of the operative part of the General Assembly's resolution,
which is the part concerning the functions of the
Security Council in this matter. This doe~ not
mean that the Security Council should simply take
note of this matter. The attention of the Security
Council is called to these paragraphs in order that
it may discuss them and see to what extent the
furtctions of the Security Council can be extended
in this matter. This is not merely a matter or taking' note. However, when we come to item 5 of
the agenda wc shall have to express what is intended by the itam and what we wish to be intended by it.

M.EL-KHOURI (Syne) (traduit de l'anglais) :
D'apres la lettre que le Secretaire general a adressee au President du Conseil de securite, rien
n'indique que le Conseil doive se borner a prendre
connaissance de cette affaire. La lettre demande
d'appeler l'attention du Conseil de securite sur
les paragraphes a), b) et c) ~u dispositif de la
resolution de l'AssembIee generale, qui est la partie
ayant trait aux attributions du Conseil de securite
en cett~ matiere; Il ne s'ensuit pas que le Conseil
de securite doive, purement et simplement, prendre connaissance de cette question. On attire l'attention du Conseil de secutite sur ces paragraphes puur lui permettre de proceder a un echange
de vues a leur sujet et de se rendre compte jusqu'aquel point 'on peut etendre ses attributions
dans ce domaine. C'est autre chose que de pren-,
dre puremep,t et simplement connaissance d'une
question. Toutefois, lorsque le Conseil en sera
au pOiRt 5 de son ordre du jour, la delegation
syrienne devra faire connaitre son avis sur la
portee de ce point et sur celle que nous desirons
lui voir attribuer.
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

I'

The agenda was adopte.d.

4.19. Letter from the Assistant S~cretary­ 419. Lettredu Secretaire general adjoint
charge du Departement des affaires
General in charge of the Departdu Conseil de securite, concernant
ment of Security Council Affairs
les articles du reglement interieur
concerningrnles of procedure retraitant de l'admission de nougarding the admission of New
veaux Membres
Members
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Les articles revises du reglemcnt interieur qui figurent
dans le projet de resolution sont identiques a
ceux que le Comite des experts du Conseil de securite a presentes dans son rapport, que le Conseil '
a approuve le 27 aotit 1947, a sa cent-quatre-vingtdix-septieme seance (document S/520)1. '
Dans ces conditions et comme il n'y a pas d'obUnder the circumstances, as there is no objection, I consider the draft resoitrtion suggested jection, je considere que le projet de resolution
propose par le Secretaire general adjoint est
by the Assistant Secretary-General as adopted.
adopte.
,
Au sujet de cette question, je voudrais, en tant
I should like to add, speaking as the representative of AUSTRALIA on this item, that the accept- que repre.sentant de l'AUSTRALIE, formuler les
ance by the Security Council of these amendments observations suivantes. Le fait que le Conseil de
included in the draft resolution is, of course, with- securite accepte les amendements qui figurent
out prejudice to the right of any delegation, in- dans le projet de resolution ne porte, il va sans
cluding my own, to suggest further modifications dire, </-ucune atteinte au droit que possede n'imat some future time if the circumstances, in our porte queUe delegation, y compris la mienne, de
opinion, so justify.
proposer de nouvelles modifications dans l'avenir,
cl un moment quelconque, si, a notre avis, la situation le justifie.

The PRESIDENT,: The revised rules of procedure
contained in the draft resolution are identical with
those submitted by the Security Council's Committee of Experts in its report approved by the
Council at, its one hundred and ninety-seventh
meeting, on 27 August 1947 (document 5/520).1

420. Letter from the representative of 420. Lettre du representant des Etats- Unis d'Amerique concernant les
the United States of America conexperiences relatives it la fission
cerning the conducting of experinucIeaire dans I'atoll d'Eniwetok,.
ments relating to nuclear fission on
situe dans le Territoire sous tutelle
Eniwetok Aioll in the Trust Terrides iles du Pacifique
tory of the Paciqe Islands
The PRESIDENT: The members have before
them a copy of the letter atldressed by the representative of the United States to the President of

Le PRisIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Les membres du Conseil de securite ont sous les yeux'
copie de la lettre par laquelle le representant des

y 1 SeeNOffic.ial Records of the Security COllncil, Second

1 Voir les Proces-verb.aux officiels du Conseil de secufite, Deuxieme Annee, No 85, et Supplement, No 19.

ear,

0.85, and Supplement No. 19.

2772
the. Security Council, advismg the Security Council of the designation of Eniwetok Atoll in the
Trust Territory of the former Japanese mandated
islands in the Pacific as a security area, pursuant
to the provisions of the Trusteeship Agreement re, lating to that area.
I suggest that the proper procedure would be
for the Security Council to take note of that letter (document S/613) at the present tinle, bearing
in mind that certain considerations relating to longterm security requirements in this particular security area will be dealt with. at a subsequent
meeting of the Security Council, which will depend on the receipt of a report from the Committee of Experts now examining the functions of
the Security Council in relation to strategic Trust
Territories.
If there are any points to be raised on this question, I suggest that relevant observations be deferred until receipt of the report of the Committee
of Experts on rules and procedures, if any, which
may be required to bring the practices of the Security Council into conformity with the situation
which arises from this first Trusteeship Agreement covering strategic areas.

Etats-Unis a avise le Conseil que l'atol~ d'Eniwe-'
tok, faisant partie du Territoire sous tuteIle des
iIes du Pacifique autrefois placees sous mandat
japonais, a ete constitue en zone interdite pour
motifs de securite,en vertu des dispositions de
l'Accord de tuteIle concernant cette region.
La methode la meilleure serait, a mon avis, que
le Conseil de securite se bornat, pour le moment,
a prendre note de cette lettre (document S/613),
etant entendu que certaines considerations relatives aux exigences de longue duree qu'implique
la securite dans cette zone interdite feront I'objet
de deliberations ulterieures, lorsque le Conseil
aura relju le rapBort du Comite des experts qui
examinent a l'heure actueIle les attributions du
Conseil de securite en ce qui concerne les Territoires sous tutelIe ayant un caractere strategique.
Si cette question doit donner lieu a des observations, je propose qu'on attende, pour les presenter, que le Conseil ait re~u le rapport du Comite
des experts charge d'etudier les articles du reglement interieur qu'il pourra etre necessaire de
modifier pour mettre les usages .du Conseil de
securite en harmonie avec la situation nee de ce
premier Accord de tuteIIe visant des regions strab~giques.

Therefore, I suggest that at the moment it
would· be sufficient for the Security Council to
take note of the communication from the representative of the United States contained in document ·S/613. As there is no objection, it is so
agreed.

J'estime donc qu'il suffit, pour le moment, que
le Conseil de securite prenne note de la communication du representant des Etats-Unis qui figure
dans le document S/613. Puisqu'il n'y a pas
d'objection, it en est ainsi decide.

4.21. Telegram from the Committee of
Good Offices in Indonesia concerning the choice of a meeting place

421. TeIegramme de la Commission de
hons offices en Indonesie, concer·
nant le choix d'un lieu. de reunion

The PRESIDENT: The document S/611 before us
reports on the chok~ of a meeting place for the
purpose of embarking on discussion between the
Governments of the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia leading to a settlement of the Indonesian problem.
•
The report does not, of course, deal with the
substance of the discussions between the Governments of the N etherIf~ds and the Republic of Indonesia. However, it may be anticipated that in
the near future reports on that aspect will be
received from the Committee of Good Offices. Until that time, it would appear that there would be
110 purpose to be served by holding any discussion on the substance of the Indonesian question
at this meeting. Therefore, I suggest that the Security Council take note of this telegram, document S/611, and defer the discussion of the substance of the question to a subsequent meeting.
At the same time I desire, as representative of
AUSTRALIA, to· draw the attention of the Security
Council to an incidental circumstance arising out
of the opening meetings of the Committee of Good
Offices. As the Council is aware, for various reasons the Committee has just begun to embark on
the main content of its work, and there is every
reason to think that the Committee will require
a considerable period from now on before it reaches
the conclusion of its functions. That is to say, the
work of the Committee will almost certainly ex.
tend beyond the end of this year.
In that case, the question arises-I wish merely
at this stage to bring the question to the minds
of the members of the Council-as to the continued membership of the Committee. The Committee of Good Offices was appointed from the memo.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ['anglais) : Le document S/611 que nous avons sous les yeux contient un rapport sur le choix du lieu ou se tiendront les conversations entre le Gouvernement
des Pays-Bas et celui .de la Republique d'Indonesie, en v~e du reglement du probleme indonesien.
Ce rapport ne touc4e, evidemment, pas au fond
des conversations entre les Gouvernements des
Pays-Bas et de la Republiq'ile d'Indonesie. Cependant, on peut s'attendre a ce que la Commis:
sion de bc;ms offices ne tarde pas a faire parvenir
des rapports sur cet aspect de la question. Jusquela, it ne semble pas qu'il soit utile d'entamer, ala presente seance, une discussion sur le fond de
la question indonesienne. Je propose donc que le
Conseil de securite prenne note de ce telegramme,
portant la cote S/611, et qu'il remette a une
seance ulterieure la discussion sur le fond.

Je voudrais en meme temps, en ma qualite de
representant de l'AUSTRALIE, attirer l'attention
du Conseil de securite sur la situation fortuite
qui resulte des premieres seances. de la Commission de bons offices. Le Conseil n'ignore pas que,
pour diverses raisons, la Commission vient a peine·
d'entreprendre I'essentiel de ses travaux; it y a
tout lieu de croire qu'il faudra a la Commission
un temps assez long pour parvenir au terme de
sa tache. Cela revient a dire qu'iI est presque
certain que les travaux 'de la Commission se prolongeront au dela. de la fin de cette annee.
Dans ce cas, une question se pose: c'est celle de
la composition de la Commission a. l'avenir. Je
.me borne, pour le moment, a attirer l'attention
des membres du Conseil sur cette question. Les
membres de la Commission de bons office~

bers of the Securit y O:mncil as of the time of its ete choisis
parmi le..; membres qui composaient le
,establishment. After 31 December 1947, Austra lia Conseil
de securite 10rsqu'eUe a ete creee. Or,
will cease to be a member of the Securit y Counc it apres
le 31 decenibre 1947, I'AustraIie cessera
It is therefore nec~ssary, not for a fOrn;ial accord, de
faire partie du Conseil de securite. 11 faut donc
but, at any rate, for an unders tanding to be reach~ qu'une
entente, sinon un accord formel, s'etabetween the parties concerned as to the composIblisse
entre
les parties quant a la composition de
tion of the Committee of Good Offices after the
la Commission de bons offices apres la fin de cette
end of this year.
annee.
I add only at this stage the following:. In the
Je n'ajoute; pour le moment, que ceci: la deleview of the Austra lian delegation it would be a gation
most convenient course, and indeed the only feasi- plus de l'Austr alie estime que la methode la
commode et certainement la seulep ossible ,
ble course in the practical circumstances, for the
Committee to continue its work with the three etant donne les circonstances materielles, serait
que la Commission contin uatses travaux , en
countries now comprising its membership.
restant comptJsee des represe ntants des trois delegations qui en font partie. actuellement.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socia;..
publics) (translated from RuSSia1Z): I believe I listes
sovienques) (traduit du russe): Sauf eram right in saying that we have receh..ed the first reur
de ma part, la premie re commu nicatio n tant
more or less explicit communication, dated 1 Desoit pen detaillee que nons ayolls rec;ue de la Comcember, from the Committee of Good Offices. From
it we may gather that the Committee has not yet mission de bons offices est datee du 1er de.cembre.
begun to consider the questions it is to study and It ressort de ce rappor t que la Commission n'a
that, generally speaking, it is progres sing too slow- pas encore entame l'exa~en des questions qu'on
ly. It has not yet informed the Securit y Council lui avait soumises, et que, d'une manier egeneof the fu:filment of the task entrust ed to it. I do rale, dIe ne travaille pas assez vite.~ Elle n'a pas
not mean to imply that the Committee of Good Of- encore ete en mesure de faire savoir au Conseil
ficesbas failed to resolve the complicated problems de securite que la mission que celui-ci luiava it
arising out of the situation in Indonesia. Nevert he- confiee avait ete remplie. Je ne veux pas dire par
less, as I have said already, it is not getting on fast la que la Commission de bons offices n'apas ete
enough. We have a right to expect that the Com- capable de. tranche r un certa~~ nombre de. ques:mittee will display greater activity and energy tions compliquees qui ont trait a la situatio n en
and will keep the Securit y Council informed of Indonesie. Mais, comme je I'ai deja dit, .elle travaille trop lentement. Nous sommes en droit de
the results. of its work.
lui deman der d'etre plus active, de traVailler plus
energiquement et d-informer le Conseil de securite du resulta t de ses travaux .
As regards the question of Austra lia's memberQUailt a la participation de l'Austra lie a cette
ship ir' the Committee, although I do not foresee
Commission, je necro ispas que I'e:iq>iration de
any complications in connexion with the fact that
Australia will be. leaving the Securit y Councit, son manda t au Conseil de securit e puisse provonevertheless today is hardly the proper moment quer des complications, mais il me semble qu'il
for taking any decision, whethe r positive or nega- serait inude de prendr e, des aujourd 'hui, une
tive. I think it would be right to allow Members decision a ce sujet dans un sens .ou clans l'autre..
of the Council some time to think the matter over. A mon avis, il serait preferable que les. membres
I repeat, I do not foresee any complications, but du Conseil desecu rite aient le temps de retlechir
I also see no need for taking any formal decision a cette question. Je repete_ quoique je ne prevoie
on the question at this meeting of the Securit y pas de complications, je n'aperc;ois pas la necesCouncil. In due course, should the necessity arise. site de prendr e, au cours de la present e seance
we can revert to this question. The necessity may du Conseil de securite, une decision formelle a
ce sujet. En cas de besoin, nous pourrions repossibly never arise.
prendr e la question plus tard; peut-et re ne serace point necessaire.
The PRESIDENT: I should like to make it clear,
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'a1Jglais): En ma
as the representative of AUSTRALIA, that my dele- .qualite
gation is in no sense pressin g for an immediate precise de represe ntant de l'AUSTRALIE, je tiens a
r que rria delegation .n'insiste auc,unemeiilt
conclusion with regard to this matter. The point
pour qu'une . decision soit prise sui le champ a
was raised simply as one which clearly should be
in the minds of the membe rs of the Council dur- cet egard. Si la question a ete soulevee, c'est siming this month, in order that the Committee of plement parce qu'il est incontestable qu'il faut
Good Offices should not remain longer than is ·es- que les membres du Conseil y pensent ce mois-ci,
sential in any doubt as to its continued functioning afin que la Commission de bons offices ne reste
pas plus longtemps qu'il n'est· indispensable dans
in its present composition.
.
l'incertitude sur. le point de savoir si eUe continuera. cl fonctionner telle qu'elle est actuellement
constituee.
Mr. JOHNSON (Unite d States of Ameri ca): My
M. JOHNSON (Etats- Unis d'Amer ique) (trsdui t
delegation simply would like to point out, for
de
l'anglais): Ma delegation desire simplement
possible consideration by the other members of the
<:otln~l, certain facts as they appear to us in this signaler certains faits pour que les autres membres
du Consei lles examinent eventueUement.
SItuation.
The limhation in the re~0lution1 confining the
Les dispositions de la resolution1 qui restrei1 The resolution on the establishment
of a Committee of
Good Offices was adopted by the Security Council at its
194th meeting on 25 August 1947. See 0 [ficial Records of
the Security Coimcil,Second Year, No. 83. For the text
of the resolution, see Ibid., No. 82.

~~s~""'> •... ,

., La resolution relative a la creation d'une Commission
de bons officeS a ·ete adoptee par le Conseil de securite
a sa 194eme seance, le 25 aout 1947 (voir lesProces-1le,.ballz olJicielsdll COlIseil de secllriM, Deuxieme Annee,
No83). Pour letexte de la resolution, voir Ibid~, N.o82.

.....

_.-...............

gnent le choix: des -parties, c' ~st""a.-dire de la Republique indonesienne et du Royaume des PaysBas, aux seuts memQres du Conseil de securite,
n'etaient, en quelque'sorte, qu'un moyende fournir une liste des nations pouvant etre choisies
pour faire partie de· la Commission· au moment
ou le choix: en fut fait. Ce choix fut fait en vue
d'une mission ou d'une tache determinee; il ne
s'agissait pas d'une mission permanente.
Ma delegation estime done qu'il serait contraire
Therefore, in the view of my delegation, it
would not be in the best interests of the parties aux interets des parties interessees ou du Conseil
concerned, or of the Council itself, to make a lui-meme de modifier, en plein travail, la compochange in midstream in a committee as small as sition d'une Commission a~si restreinte, ou les
this, where the countries obviously were chosen pays ont ete manifestement choisisen raison du
because they were acceptable to the parties. If fait qu'ils pouvaient etre agrees par les deux parAustralia were to withdraw now for the technical ties. Si l'Australie devait se retirer de la Comreason that Australia will no longer be a member mission pour la raison qu'elle cessera de faire.
of the SecuritY; Council after 1 January 1948, partie du Conseil de securite le ler janvier 1948,
then the Indonesian Republic would have to make raison qui est d'ordre purement technique, la Reanother choice; It is not the Council which will publique indonesienne devrait alors choisir une
make th~ choice.
autre nation. Ce xi'est pas le Conseil qui prooederait a. ce choix:.
I suggest that it would be in the best interests
A mon avis, il est preferable, dans 1'interet du
of this problem if we could tacitly recognize that reglement de cette question, d'admetire tacitethe Committee should remain unchanged. If we - ment que la composition actuelle de la Commisdo not do that now, or at some early meeting of sion ne doit pas etre modifiee. Si nousnele
the Council, and if later th~ Committee should be faisons pas des a .present ou a une prochaine
changed, we might be left with a period. of a seance du Conseil, et si par la suite des modificamonth .or two before the place of tf:1e reti.-ing tions doivent etre apportees a la composition de
Australian representative could be filled. We la Commission, un mois ou deux pourront s'ecoumight lose precious time; and, in any case, the ler .avant que le siege laisse vacant par le reprenew member wot~ld be inexperienced in the sentant de l'Australie tie soit pourvu.· 11 se pourramifications of the problem.
rait que nous perdions un temps precieux, et, de
toute maniere, le nouveau membre ne connaitra
pas la question dans ses details.
Qu'il me soit permis d'ajouter que le choix de
I might add, too,. that the choice of Australia
and Belgium by the Indonesian Republic and by l'Australie et de la Belgique par la Republique
the Netherlands was no~ conditioned by them on indonesienne et les Pays-Bas n'a pas ete subortheir continued Security ,Council membership, nor donne a la condition que ces pays continuent de
did Australia and the others accept appointment faire partie du Conseil de securite, et ni l'Austracontingent on ~at fact. Both choice and acceptance lie ni les autres p.ays· n'ont fait dependre leur
presumably. were for the duration of the actual acceptation de cette condition. Tant le choix que
work of this Committee, which by its very nature l'acceptation s'entendent vraisemblablement pour
will have a limited life.
la duree des travaux memes de la Commission
qui, par leur nature, n'auront qu'une duree limitee.

choke of the parties-that is, of the Indonesian
Republic and the Kingdom of the Netherlands-to Security Council members was merely, in a
way, a device which provided a panel or a list
of nations eligible for Committee membership at
the time the choice was made. That choice was for
a specific purpose, a specific mission or task. It
was not a continuing mission.

Mr. KATz-SuCHY (Poland): I do not think
that my delegation will raise any objection to the
continuation of Australia on the Committee of
Good Offices. However, I should rather favour the
suggestion made by the USSR representative,
namely, that the final decision shQUld be postponed,
thereby giving the members of. the Council some
time to consider this matter.
At the same time, I feel it must be made clear
that, while. it is true that the members of this
Committee have been sel~ted by the parties to
the dispute, the Committee is only an organ of
the Security Council an~ is responsible to the Security, Council. This is clearly stated in the resolution adopted by the Security Council on 2S August
1947, which states that the Securit), Council "resolves to tender its good offices to the parties in
order to assist in the pacific settlement of their
dispute. . ." The resolution goes on to speak Q.f
the composition of the Committee as follows: "The
Council expresses its readiness, if the parties so
request, to assist in the settlement through a committee of the Council consisting of three members
of the Council, each party selecting one, and the
third to be designated by the two so selected." I
am quoting from the resolution in order to make
jt clear that even if Australia should continue to

M. KATz-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je ne crois pas que ma delegation souleve
d'objections contre le maintien de l'Australie a
la Commission de bons offices. Toutefois, je suis
pluto! partisan de la proposition faite par le representant de I'URSS tendant a ajourner la decision
definitive a ce sujet, ce qui donnerait aux membres du Conseil le temps d'etudier la question.
De plus, j'estime qu'il y a lieu de bien etablir
que, s'il est vrai que les membres de la Commission ont ete choisis par les parties en presence,
il n'en reste pas moins que la Commission est
seulement un organe du Conseil de securite et
qu'elle releve de lui. C'estce que dit nettement
la resolution adoptee le 2S aoftt 1947 par le Conseil de securite, qui porte que le Conseil "decide
d'offrir ses bons offices aux parties intt~ressees
pour contribuer au reglement pacifique de leur
differend . . .". Cette resolution traite ensuite en
ces termes de la cQmposition de la Commission:
"Si les parties interessees en font la demande, le
Conseil est dispose a contribuer au reglement de
ce differend au moyen d'une commission du Conseil composee de trois membres dont deux seront
choisis respectivement par chacune des parties
interessees et le troisieme par les deux premiers".
Je cite ces extraits de la resolution, a,fin de bien...J

remain a member of the Committee-and I believe it will-the Committee of Good Offices will
remain an organ of the Security Council and responsible only to the Security Council.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) : I
should simply like ~o state, in addition to what I
said previously, that my delegation is in agreement with the views expressed by the repr~senta­
tive of Poland to the effect that, whether or not
Australia continues to be a member of the Committee of Good Offices, that Committee remains
an organ of the Security Council and is responsible only to the Security Council. I should not
think that that would be doubted by anyone unless the Security' Council adopts another resolution.
At present there is nothing which would require members of the Committee of Good Offices
to be members of the Security Council, except at
the time when they are chosen. This point has
nothing to do with their remaining members of
the Security Council, nor does it affect the responsibilities and functions of the Committee of
Good Offices.
Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from French):
In my opinion, it would. be an advantage if we
took a decision now on the question which the
President raised a short while ago. It is already
the 9th· of December, and unless we take a decision or clear the matter up, the Committee at
the end of ihe month will still not know whether
its composition is in order. A time-allowance of
three weeks is normal when it is a matter of taking a decision on a question of this kind.
On the other hand, I fail to see what other factors of appraisal we would have, if we took up
the question again in ten days' time or so. The
c-onsiderations which can bring us to a decision
are clear and we can fully appraise them today.
As regards the substance of the matter, in the
first place I think that in the ternlS of the resolution by which the Committee 'ras set up there is
nothing to show that it must necessarily be composed of members of the Security Council. No
doubt when its members were designated, particularly in the case of Australia, the fact that Australia was a member of the Security Council was
taken into consideration; but there is no connexion of right between the fact of being a member of the Security Council and that of being a
member of the Committee. In the second place,
there is an obvious practical advantage in not
altering the composition of the Committee at the
very moment when it has just begun its work.
For these reasons, I will support the idea of an
immediate decision and such a one as will maintain the composition of the Committee in its present form.
Mr. EL-KHouRI (Syria): So far as concerns
the substance of the matter as it stands now, the
Security Council considers that Australia is a
member of this Committee, and Australia will
c~n~nue to be a member as long as Australia is
wtlhng. If, however, Australia wishes to withdraw
an~ should express its decision to do so, the Secunty Council would have occasion to inform the
parties of this withdrawal and to ask Indonesia
to choose another member to take the place of
Australia, who was selected by the Indonesian Republic.

montrer que, meme si l'Australie devait continuer

a. faire partie de la Commission, et je crois qu'elle
le fera, la Commission de bonsoffices restera un
organe du Conseil de securite, relevant uniquement du Conseil.

M. JOHNSON (Etat;-Unis·d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): Je voudrais simplement ajouteI' a.
ce que j'ai dit precedemment que ma delegation
partage le point de vue exprime par le representant de la Pologne selon lequel, que l'Australie
continue ou non a faire partie de la Commission
de bons offices, cette Commission continuera d'etre
un organe du· Conseil de securite relevant uni-'
quement du Conseil. J e ne crois p.as qu'il puisse
y avoir des doutes a ce sujet, a moins que le Conseil de securite n'adopte une autre resolution.
It n'existe actuellement aucune disposition qui
exige que les membres de la Commission de boils
offices fassent partie du Conseil de securite, sauf
au moment OU ils sont choisis. Cette condition
n'implique nullement qu'ils doivent continuer a
faire partie du Conseil de securite· et n'influe en
rien sur les attributions et fonctions de la Commission dehons offices.

M. P ARODI (France): A mon avis, il y aurait
interet a ce que nous prenions des'maintenant
une decision sur la fluestion soulevee tout a
l'heure par le President. Nous sommes deja le
9 decembre; en l'absence d'une decision ou d'une
precision de notre part, la Commission sera, a la
fin de ce mois-ei, dans I'ignorance al,1 sujet de la
regularite de sa composition. Un delai de trois
semaines est normal lorsqu'it s'agit de prendre
une decision sur une question de ce genre.
D'autre part, je ne vois pas bien quels autres
elements d'appreciation nous aurions si nous reprenions la question dans une dizaine de jours.
Les considerations susceptibles de nous decider
sont claires et nous sommes a meme de les appreder completement des aujourd'hui.
Quant au fond, je pense tout d'abord que, dans
les termes de la resolution qui a cree la Commission, rien n'indique que cette Commission <;toit
necessaii'ement etre composee de membres du
Conseil de secorite. Certes; dans les designations
faites, en particulier en ce qui concerne l'Australie, le fait que ce pays etait membre du· Conseil
de securite a ete pris .en consideration;_mais it
n'y a pas de lien de droit entre la qualite de membre du Conseil de securite et la qualite de mem.bre de la Commission. En second lieu, it y a un
interet pratique evident a ne pas modifier la composition de la Commission aumoment meme ou
e1le vient de commencer a travailler.
Pour ces raisons, j'appuierai l'idee d'une decision immediate, et d'une decision maintenant la
composition de la Commission dans sa forme actuel1e.
M. EL-KHouRI. (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
En ce qui conceme le fond de la question telle
qu'eUe se presente actueHement, le Conseil de securite estime que l'Australie fait partie de la
Commission et qu'eUe continuera a en faire partie
tant qu'eUe le desirera. Toutefois, si l'Australie
desire se retirer de la CoIrimission et declare
qu'elle a decide de le faire, le Conseil de securite
informera les parties de ce depart et demandera a
l'Indonesie de designer un autre membre pour
remplacer l'Australie sur laquelle s'etait porte son

mmx.

.

D'autre part, tant que. I'Australie n'exprimera
On the other hand, as· long as Australia does
not express a definite wish to withdraw, the Se- pas le desir formel de· se retirer, le Conseil de
curity Council has nothing .to do. in the matter of seeurite n'a paS a i!1tervenir dans la composition
the composition of the Committee,"which contin- . de la Commission ql1i demeurera la meme, et la
ues to be _compOsed and to act as it stands. As I Commission continuera a fonctionner avec les
understood it, the represenGltive. of Australia did me1&1bres qu'elle cQmporte actuellement. Jecrois
not express any wish to withdraw by the end of que le representpnt de I'Australie u'a pas exprime
the year, butl should like to ask what exactly is the le desir de se retirer a. la fin de l'annee, mais je
intention of the Aust~ian delegation in this serais heuJ;'eux de savoir exactement queUe .est
connexion. If they doio fact intend to withdraw l'intention de la delegation.australienne a ce sujet.
we must act, and I wnsider that it would be ap- Si elle desire se retirer, en fait, il faat agir et
propriate to act now, because three weeks is hard- j'estime qu'il conviendrait de le faire des a prely enough time for Indol)esia to select another sent, car trois semaines constituent un d~ a
member. In these circumstances we could adopt peine suffisant pour permettre a l'Indonesie de
another resolution before .the beginning of next choisir un autre,. membre. Dans ces conditions,
year, b\lt for the reasOns I have given' I submit nous pourrions adOpter une autre· resolution avant
that discussions of this matter depend upon the le debut de l'annee prochaine, mais pour les raip<lsition to. be taken definitely by the Australian sons que j'ai exposees precedemment, j'estime
representative.
que les debats sur ce sujet dependront de la position precise qu'adoptera le representa.nt de l'Australie.
. ,
Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'ongla;s): L'AustraThe PRESIDENT: Australia has no intention of
lie n'a nullement l'intention de se retirer de la
withdrawing from. the Committee.
Commission.
Je voudrais demander au representant de
I would ask the USSR representative" whether
he still prefers to have further time for consider- I'URSS s'il desire encore avoir ,du temps pour
ation of this point. If he does, it can be allowed; examiner cette question~ S'il"le desire, on peut
but in· that case I should hesitate to make this a le lui laisser, mais dans ce cas, j'hesiterais a faire
formal item for discussion at the next meeting, hav- porter officiellement ce point 8: I'ordre du jour
ing regard to the' oPinions already expressed here de notre prochaine seance en raison des" opinions
this afternoon, In that event we might leave the qui ont deja ~te exl'rimees ici cet apres-midi.
matter' at this point : that in the absence of objec- Dan::l re cas, nous pourrions adopter la procedure
ti(}ns from any member of the Security Council suivante: si aucuneobjection n'est presentee par
between now and the next meeting, or any objec- un metribre du Conseil de securite entre. la seance
tions e.xpressed at the· next meeting, it is the un- ti'aujourd'hui et .la prochaine seance, Ouau cours
derstanding of the Security Council that the de la prochaine seance, it seraentendu que le
membership of the Committee shall remain as at Conseil estime que la composition de la Commispresent constituted.
.
sion demeurera la mme.
Mr.. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM.GROMYKO (Union des Republiques soda. ptiblics) (translated from Russian): I have said listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Comme
already that I do not think we should take any de- je I'ai deja dit, j'estime qu'au cours de la precision, whether positive or negative, at this meet- sente sea.ce il n'y a pas lieu d'adopter une deciing. Should the neCessity arise, we can revert tc? sion a ce sujet. En cas de besoin, nous pourrions
this question. .
.
reprendre I'examen de. la question.
·Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): A mon
The PRESIDENT: I believe we can record the
understanding of the Security Council at this avis, nous pouvons enregistrer auproces-v:erbal
meeting-and. confirmation of that understanding le fait que, a la presente seance, leConseil de.
will be .asked at the next meeting-that i.t is in ac- securite Se trouve d'accord pour estimer qu'il est
cordancewith the sense of the Security Council's conforme a ses desirs que la Commission de bans
w~shes that the membership. of. the Committee of
offices demeure telle qu'elle a ete constituee a
Good Offices should continue as originally con- l'origine. I1 sera demande confirn'..ation de cet
stituted.
accord a la prochaine seance. "
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodaMr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trallslated from Russian) : I should like listes sovietiques) (traduit duo rltsse): Je vous
itto be placed on record that I reserve the position prie de noter que je reserve l'attitude de la deleof the USSR delegation, since I consider that no gation de l'URSS car,a mon avis, it ne faitt prendecision, either a positive or a negative one, should dre aujourd'hui de decision ni dans un sens ni
be taken at this meeting. As I have said already, dans un autre. Mais, tout en reservant mon attithe fact that the USSR delegation reserves its po- tude, je ne m'oppose pas a la participation de
sition does not mean that we object to Australia's I'Australie a la Commission.
membership.
.

422. Letter from the Secretary-General 422. Lettre du Secrel:aire general con·
regarding ·the General Assembly's.
resolution concerning the "future
Government of Palestine"
The PRESIDENT: The intentions of the President
in respect of this item were indicated at the opening of the meeting. I propose that the letter of the
Secretary-General simply be' not~ by the Security Council at this stage. Without embarking

cernant· la resolution ·de I'Assem·
bleegenerale relative au "Gouvernement futur de la Palestine"
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais) :. Le President a fait connaitre au debut de la seance ses
intentions au sujet de, ce point de l'ordre du jour.
Je propose que, au stade actuel, le Consed de
securite prenne simplement note de la letlre ~

..

2777
on any observations at aU as to. the· implications Secreta
ire general. Sans formuler des observaof the letter or the circumstances surrounding it,
tions
sur
la portee de la lettre ot]sur les circonsit must be clear, in my opinion, that the circumtances
qui
font inspir~, it est necessaire, a mon
stances in which the provisions referred to in
the letter become operative as far as the Security avis, d'indiquer.·clairement que les ~irconstances
Council is concerned are not yet within the knowl- dans lesquelles les dispositions mentionnees dans
edge of the Security Council, and that therefore la lettre deviennent executoires, pour ce qui le
any discussion arising out of the letter in re~d concerne, ne sont pas encore parvenues a la conto· its implications for the Security Council would naissance du Conseil, et que, par consequent, it
-not yet be in orqer. I shall leave· the matter at ne serait pas conforme au reglement d'engager
en ce moment une discussion sur la portee que
that.
cette lettre peut avoir pour le Conseil de securite.
There is, however, a turther point with which I J'en resterai la.
II y a toutefois un autre point dont je youdra,is
wish to acquaint the Security Council: the receipt
saisir
le Conseil de securite; les Gouvernements
of a request from the Governments of Lebanon
and Egypt that they should be atIowed to partici- du Liban,et de l'Egypte nons ont demande d'etre
pate in the Council's discussion of what is described admis a participer aux debats qui auront lieu au
in their telegrams as the ,question or the problem Conseil pour· examiner· ce qu'ils appeUent dans
la question palestinienne (docuof Palestine (documents S/6171 and S/6182 ). The leurs teIegrammes
1
2 ).
ments
S/617
et
5/618
Cette demande a ete
request is made in pursuance of the ternlS of Arformule
e
en
vertu
des
dispositions de l'Article 31
ticle 31 of the Charter. As I understand it, these
telegrams have been distributed among the mem- de la Charte. Je crois comprendre que ces teiebers of the Security Council. I suggest that they grammes ont ete communiques aux membres dti
also be left for consideration at an appropriate Conseil de sCcurite. Je propose d'en remettre
aussi l'examen a un moment plus opportun.
time in the future.
1 The text of the telegram is as follows:
Document 5/617
8 December 1947

[Origillal: French]

TELEGRAM DATED 7 DECEMBER 1947 FR()~I THE EGYPTIAN
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO THE SEQmTARVGENERAL

1

Voici le texte de ce te1egramme :

Document S/617

8-decem breJ941

[Teste original eft frall,ais]

TELEGRAlIfME E..... DATE DU 7 Jl)ECEMBRE 1947 ENVOYE PAR
LEMINISTRE DES- AFFAIRES ETRANGERESn'EGYPIE AU
SECRETAIRE GENERAL
In virtue of the resolution adopted by the General
En vertu de la resolution adoptee par l'Asseml>lee
Assembly on. 29 November 1947, the Security Council is general
requested to take the necessary steps to implement the plan invite ele 29 novembre 1947,le Conseil de securite es.t
for the partition of Palestin e as provided in the said plan. pla~ dea prendre les mesures nece~saires prevues dans le
In all probability the Security Council will soon be con- Selon partage de la Palestin e pour sa mise a execution.
toute probabiIite leConse il. de securite sera _convened to examine the Palestin ian question. In application voque
of the terms of Article 31 of the Charter and of Articles 14, lestinienprochainement pour l'examen de la questio npa37 and 38 of the Council's provisiOnal rules of procedure 31 de ne. Par application des dispositions de l'Article
la Charte et des articles 14, 37 et 38 du reglement
the Egyptian Government, as a party interested in the interieu
Pil1estinian question and in the maintenance of peace in demander, provisoire du Conseil, le Gouvernement egyptien
Palestine, asks to be represented at the Security CouncWs palestini en tant que partie interessee a la question,
session to examine the Palestin ian question. The Egyp- ter a la enne et a la paix en Palestine, a se faire t'epresentian Government appoints and accredits Mahmoud Bey I'exame session que. tiendrai t le. Conseil de securite · pour
Fawzi, its permanent delegate to the United Niltions, as Cgyptienn de la question palestinienne. Le Gouvernement
nomme et accr&lite Monsieur Mahmo udBey
delegate plenipotentiary to the above session.
Fawzi, son delegue permanent aux Nations Unies~ comme
son deIegue plenipotentiaire a la dite session. Veuillez
agreer, Monsieur le Secretai re general, les assurances de
ma tres baute- consideration.
(Signed) AHMAD. MoHAMMAD KHASHABA PASHA
(Signe) AHMADMoHAMMAD KHASH_-\BA PACHA
Egyptr'a,t MimSter

for Foreign Affairs

'The text of the telegram is as foUows:Document S/618

8 December 1947

[Origiiuzl: French]
TELEGRAM DATED 7 DEcEMBER 1947 FROM THE PRIME
MINISTER AND ACTING MINISTER FOR F()REIGN AFFAiRS
OF LEBANON TO THE SECRETARy~GENERAL
.

Ministre des affaires ftrangeres d'Egypte.

• Voici le texte cie ce tetegram me:
DoCument S/618

8 deceml>re 1947

[Teste original en fraft,ais]

TELEGRAMME EN DATE DU 7 DiCEMBRE 1947· ENVOYE PAR
LE PREMIER MINISTRE ET MINISTRE DES AFFAIRES
ETRANGEREs PAR INTERIM DU LmAN AU S'ECRETAffiE
GENERAL
.
The Security Council having been requested, in virtue
Le
Conseil
de
securite
etant appele, en vertu de la
of thP. General Assembly's decision of 29 November 1947, to
t~ke the necessary steps to implement the plan for the par- decision de l'Assemblee generale en date du 29 novembre
1947,
a
prendre
les
mesures necessaires enoncees au projet
tition of Palestine as provided in the said plan, and in view
of the possibjl~ty of a session of the Security Council being de partage de la Palestin e pour l'execution du projet
precite,
et etant donnel a possibilite d'une convocation
c!llled in the near future to consider the question of Pales!me, the Lebanese Government, being an interested party prochaine du Conseil de securite pour l'examen de la
question palestinienne, le Gouvemement libanais, etant
In that question and in the nlaintenance of order
in Palestine, requests, in accordance with Article 31 of the Char- partie interessee dans l'affaire de la Palestine et dans
ter and articles 14, 37 and 38 of the rules of procedure le maintien de l'ordre en Palestine, demande, confor?f the Security Council, tqat it be allowed to participate mement aux Articles 31 de la Charte et 14, 37 et 38 du
1!1 the session of the Security Council at which the ques- reglement provisoire duCons eil, qu'il soitadm is a partitiMon of Palestine is discussed. It-appoi nts His Excellency ciper a la session que doit tenir le Conseil pour l'exame n
r: Cal.11i1Ie Chamoun, Chairm an of the Lebanese dele- de la question palestinienne. It deIegue Son Excellence M.
gation to the United Nations to act as its plenipotentiary CamilIe Chamoun; Chef de la delegation libanaise aux
Nations Unies, en quaIi~e de represen tant plenipotentiaire
representative at the said session. _
pour ladite session. Veuillez agreer, Excellence, I'assuranee de ma baute consideration.
(Signed) RrAD SOLH
(S~'gne) RlAD SOLH

Prime Minister and Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Leban01t.

Premier Ministre du Liban e! Mi,~!stre des ,!ffi!b:es
etrangeres par ~nterlm.

2778
M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) :(traduit de l'anglais):
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): As to the suggestion
that the Security Council simply take note of this La proposition tenGant a ce que leConseil de seresolution which is referred to it, that is a- mat- curite prenne simplement note de la resolution
ter which requires explanation. I notice that ref- qui lui est transmise appelle des explications. Je
erence is made in the Secretary-General's letter constate que la lettre du Secretaire general se
to paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of the operative rHere aux paragraphes a),· b) et c} du dispositif
part of the resolution, which includes the recom- de la resolution, qui comporte :les recommandamendations or requests addressed to the Security tions ou les demandes adressees au Conseil de
Council. The Security Council certainly has to take securite. A coup sur le Conseil doit prendre note
note of such matters and study them when its at- de ces recommandations et de ces requetes et les
tention is called to them, and the Security Council etudier lorsqu'on appelle son attention sur elles
has to deternline to what extent it can accept or et it doit determiner dans queUe mesure it peut
apply such requests or recommendations.
les accepter ou les mettre a execution.
If it is simpler to take note of them and read
Si 1'0n considere qu'il est plus simple d'en
them without giving any opinion, that is another prendre note etd~ les lire sans formuler d'opimatter. However, I do not think it would be ap- nions, c'est 13. une autre question. Cependant,
propriate for the Security Council simply to pass il ne me semble pas flU'il convienne que le ConseU
over communications of this sort without reading de securite passe simplement sur des communithem and without studying the questions which cations de ce' genre sans les lire et sans etudier
they involve or which flow from them.
les questions qu'elles mettent en jeu ou qui decoulent d'elles.
I1 existe dans ce dOll1aine de nombreuses quesThere are many matters in this connexion which
are of very great importance. The implementa- tions qui ont une extreme importance. Le Contion of this resolution adopted by the General As- seil de securite est maintenant charge de mettre
sembly is now assigned to the Security Council; it execution la resolution adoptee par l'Assembtee
all responsibility for that implementation is placed general~. C'est a lui qu'incombe a cet egard toute
on the Security Council, through the commission la responsabilite par I'intermediaire de la Comof five which was nominated for that purpO:3e by mission des Cinq que le President de l'Assemblee
the President of the General Assembly at the As- generale a nommee a cet effet au cours de la centsembly's one hundred and twenty-eighth plenary vingt-huitieme. seance pleniere de l'Assemblee1•
meeting.1 The Security Council is requested to Le Conseil de securite est invite a s'inspirer, dans
act according to the instructions or information son activite, des instructions et des renseignereceived from that commission. As long as that ment qu'il recevra de cette Commission. Tant
commission has no foundation or justification in que la Charte ne contiendra pas de disposition qui
the Charter, this matter ought to be studied by prevoie ou justifie l'existence de cette Commisthe Security Council. The commission is to be sent sion, le Conseil de securite devra etudier la questo Palestine and vested with authority to promul- tion dont il s'agit. La Commission doit etre
gate laws and regulations, to command armies, to envoyee en Palestine et elle a autorite pour procontrol the economy of the country and to nomi- mulguer des lois et des reglements, commander des
nate governments and control them. The Security armees, prendre en mains la direction de l'econoCouncil should determine on what basis that com- mie du pays, nommer les gouvernements et les
mission is being sent to Palestine, and whether the soumettre a son controle. Il faudrait done que le
Council itself is bound to take into account infor- Conseil de securite determinat sur quelle base
mation supplied by the commission ans to enforce cette Commission est envoyee en Palestine, et s'il
or implement its instructions. The present situa- est tenu de prendre en consideration les renseignetion is that there is no trusteeship agreement and ments qu'etle lui fournira et d'appliquer ses insthat the representatives who will serve on the com- tructions par la force ou par d'autres mpyens.
mission have not even been selected. This scheme Actuellement, il n'existe pas d'accord de tuteUe
was not even ratified by their Governments accord- et on n'a pas meme choisi les representants qui
ing to constitutional processes. No convention or feront partie de la Commission. Leurs gouverneanything of the sort exists. I think that such an ments n'ont pas meme ratifie, selon les formes
off-hand procedure requires a certain amount of constitutionnetles, le plan qui nous occupe. 11 n'y
discussion in the Security Council either before, a ni convention, ni aucun accord dece genre. A
immediately after, or simultaneously with the act mon sens, un{. telle improvisation doit faire l'obof taking note of this resolution.
jet d'uQe discussion d'une certaine ampleul' au
Conseil, soit avant qu'il prenne note de la resolution en question, soit des qu'il en aura pris note
ou eR meme temps qu'il prendra note.
J'estime done qu'il conviendrait de reunir a
For this purpose, I think that it would be appropriate that a special meeting of the Security cette fin le Conseil de securite en seance speciale
Council should be convoked in order to have a full afin d'instituer un large debat sur ces questions,
debate on these matters and have the views of the de maniere a bien preciser les opinions des memmembers, after studying this situation, clearly un- bres apres etude de la situation et a etabtir jusqu'a
derstood, and to know the extent to which such quel point une telle resolution contribuerait a la
a resolution would lead to peace and security in paix et a la securite du Proche Orient. L'importhe Near East. Such a resolution is very import- tance d'une telle resolution est grande et le Conant, and the Security Council is the organ which seil de securite est 1'0rgane auquel incombe la
is charged with responsibility in this matter. En- responsabilite en la matiere. C'est au Conseil de
forcement is in the hands of the Security Council securite seul qu'il appartient de faire executer
only. The General Assembly cannot exercise any cette resolution. L'Assemblee generale ne peut
governmental authority in any country directly. exercer directement, en aucun pays, des pouvoirs
1 See Official Records of the second session of the
General Assembly, plenary meetings.

.

~'."'~~"---'~'''''.''''-''-'---'---''''--'~~-~'-''-

-,.~- ~-

-_..,_. ---

1 Voir les Docwments officiels de la de1l:rieme session~de
l'Assemblee generale, seances pIenieres•
~--

- - -- -

t·r-

2779
It may do that through the Trusteeship System,
or through the mandatory, or. through the S~urity
Council by enforcement act',:m for the mamtenance of international peace and security. But in
this case there is no trusteeship agreement, and
the General Assembly is not a world government
which' can dictate orders, partition countries or
impose constitutions, rules, regulations and treaties on people without their consent. This is a
matter which should be considered very thoroughly and carefully in the S.ecurity Co~ncil before
taking note of the resolutIOn, as I saId, or soon
thereafter.

I think that the requests from the Egyptian
and Lebanese Governments, to which the President has referred, should be discussed and decided
upon before any discussion is held on the subject, and a special meeting should be called for
full consideration of the matter.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Sov.iet Socialist Republics) : Would it· not be better, instead of saying "the Security Council takes note of the resolution of the General Assembly," to say that the
Security Council accepts the resolution of the
General Assembly and from now on is seized of
the Palestinian question?

de gouvernement. EIle peut ,le ,faire dans le
cadre du regime de tutelle ou par l'organe de la
Puissance manda,taire, ou encore en exer~ant, par
1'intermediaire du Conseil de securite, une action
coercitive dans 1'interet du maintien de la paix
et ,de la securite internationales. Or, dans le cas
present, il n'existe pas d'accord de tuteiie et l'Assemblee generale n'est pas, non plus, un gouvernement mondial qui pu~sse donner des ordres,
scinder des pays ou imposer aux peuples sans
leur assentiment des constitutions, des reglements
et des traites. C'est la une question qu'il convient
d'examiner tres a fond et avec beaucoup de prudence au Conseil de securite, soit avant de prendre acte~de la resolution, comme je I'ai deja dit,
soit aussitot apres.
A mon avis, it faudrait discuter les demandes
des gouvernements de I'Egypte et du Liban, dont
le President a parle, et prendre une decision a
leur egard avant tout debat sur la question dont
il s'agit; it faudrait, en outre, reunir le Conseil
en seance speciale qui serait consacree a une discussion approfondie de la question.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de [' anglais) : Au lieu
de dire: "Le Conseil de securite prend acte de la
resolution de l'Assembtee generale", ne serait-il
pas preferable de dire que le Conseit de securite
accepte la resolution de l'Assemblee generale et
se trouve desormais saisi de la question palestinienne?

The PRESIDENT: I should like to say merely this
Le PRESID
in reference to the remarks made by the repre- des observa ENT (traduit de ['anglais) : Aprop os
sentative of Syria. It is to be noted that the resolu- la Syrie, tions formulees par le representant de
je me bornerai a dire ceci: it convient
tion of the General Assembly comes to the Se- de
remarq
uer que la resolution de l'Assemblee
curity Council in the form of a recommendation
.genera
le
est
presentee au Conseit de securite sous
and a request. It is, therefore, of course entirely
proper for the Security Council to discuss, when forme de recommandation et de demande. Le
the time comes, the method of implementing and Conseil de securite est, par consequent, parfaiteputting into effect the request. I should imagine ment justifie a discuter, le moment venu, les mothat such a discussion would imply a considera- dalites d'application et la fa~on dont il sera fait
tion of a good many of the points which the rep- droit a cette demande. Un tel debat comporterait,
resentative of Syria has in mind. There WOUld, j'imagine, l'examen d'un grand nombre des points
however, Le obvious limitations to the scope and envisages par le representant de la Syrie. Il est
subject of the debate in the Security Council which evident toutefois que les debats au Conseil de seI am not as yet prepared to indicate. N onethe' curite seraient limites dans leur portee et leur
less, there would remain a large -area of discussion, objet, quoique je ne 50is pas encore en mesure
and in the same way it would be, of course, proper, de preciser quelles seraient ces limites. Le champ
with reference to the point last made by the rep- de la discussion n'en resterait pas moins tres vaste
resentative of Syria, that before such a discussion .et il conviendrait aussi, bien entendu, comme l'a
was initiated in the Council, consideration should fait observer le represenh!.nt de la Syrie, qu'avant
be given to the requests of the Governments of d'entamer le debat le Conseil examine les deEgypt and Lebanon for participation in, the dis- mandes de participation a la discussion presentees
par les Gouvernements de I'Egypte et du Liban
cussion.
qui sont desireux de participer a la discussion.
Mr. JOHNSON (Unite d States of America) : My
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
delegation would regret seeing a date fixed now de l'anglais): Ma delegat
ion regretterait qu'une
for a particular discussion of the Palestinian ques- date fut fixee, des
mainte
nant,
pour une discustion, because we do not believe this would be sion speciale de
la
questio
n
palestin
ienne, car eUe
hfipful. I should like to point out to the represen- estime que
ce serait inutile. Je voudrais faire
tative of -Syria the fact that if there is sufficient observe
reason, the Palestinian question may, at any time, pour r au representant de la Syrie que, s'it y a
be brought before the Security Council. It is not lestiniecela des motifs suffisants, la qtl~tion panne peut, a tout moment, etre evoquee au
necessary to determine a date now and state that
Consei
l
de securite. It n'est pas necessaire de
the Security Council will, on that date, debate the
fixer
une
date maintenant et de declarer que, a
P~lestinian question. I do not believe such action
cette
date,
le Conseil de securite discutera la ques:"111 have a specific effect at this moment. There tion
palestinienne. J e ne crois pas qu'une telle
IS no immediate reason for scheduling such a
debate at this time. This matter is entirely for the initiative soit, en ce moment, de nature a avoir
un effet d'apaisement. Aucune raison urgente
Security Council to decide, but my delegation n'existe
, a l'heure actueUe, en faveur de la fixawould regret a decision fixing a particular date tion d'une
date pour un tel debat. C'est au Con..'

for discussiuG the question. because it is not necessary at the present time,

seil de securite qu'il appartient entierement de
prendre une decision. mais ma delegation verrait
avec regret fixer une date determinee pour la
discussion de la question palestinienne parce que
c.ela n'est pas necessaire pour !'instant.

The PRESIDENT: I th- :, that the· USSR representative implied someming very similar in his
suggested wording for the reception by the Security Council of the resolution of the General
Assembly.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je crois
que le representant de l'URSS a voulu dire quelque chose d'analogue dans la formule qu'it a propose d'adopter pour marquer la reception de la
resolution de I'Assemblee generale par le Conseil
de securite.
Si le Conseil de securite accepte la resolution
de l'Assembtee generale, cela signifle nettement
que-pour employer l'expression dont on s'est
servi precedemmeht-'-it est saisi de: la question.
Comme l'a fait remarquer le representant des
Etats-Unis, la question peut. a tout mement, etre
soumise a l'examen du Conseil de securite et etre
discutee par fui sans qu'il soit besoin pour cela
de dispositions speciales.
S'U n'y a pas d'autres obserVations, je propose
que le Conseil de securite prenne acte de la lettre
du Secretaire general en. ces termes.

If the Security ~oundl accepts the resolution
of the General Assembly, it is clearly implied
that. to use the phrase which has been used preViously, it is seized of the question. As the representative of the United States has· pointed out.
the question can then. at any time, be brought to
the attention of the Security Council and can be
discussed without further special arrangements.
If there are no further observations, I suggest
that the Security Council take note of the letter
of the Secretary-General in those terms.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) : Perhaps it is ,not sufficient just to state.
"takes note of the r~solution of the: General Assembly:' The Security Council should implement
the resolution of the General Assembly, and it
should be stated that the Security Council is seized
of the Palestinian question from now on. The Security Council should not mention the resolution
of the General Assembly in passing and just take
note of it. The resolution of the General Assembly
should be implemented.
I believe it would be better to state that "the Security Council accepts the resoindon of the General Assembly," or. "the ,Security Counoil. takes
note of the resolution of the General Assembly"I would prefer the former-"ant\ from now on is
seized of the Palestinian question."
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): Certam paragraphs
of the resolution of the General Assembly which
concen1 the Security Council are referred to .,the
Council. namely. paragraphs (a), (b) and (c),
outlining the functions of the Secu!ity Council in
respect of the Pa.lestinian ques~ion. All of the members of the Security Council are familiar with the
Council's functions. which are well defined and
c1earlystated in the Charter of the United Nations.
I do not believe th?t the resolv.tiol'l of .the General
Assembly can add to or delete from these functions.
The recommendations of the General· Asse:.nbly
are well known to be recommendations, and Member States are not required by force to acc~t
them. Member States mayor Zilay ,,)t accept
them, and the same applies tiJ the Security Council.
In this respect, there are many examples. Many
resolutions of the General Assembly were. sent to
the Security Council which were not adopted.
Adoption was prevented by one member or more
than one member. This would not be the first
time that the' Security, Council w.ould not accept a recommendation of the General Assembly. The most recent case is the matter of~he admission of new Members. Another case is the
Balkan question, and still another is the Korean
question. The General Assembly has adopted
~ny resolutions, and the Security Council has

M. GR01ttYKO (Union des Republiques sccialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais) : Ilne suffit peut-etre pas de se homer a dire: "prend acte
de la resolution de l'Assemblee generale". Le
Conseil de securite deVTait donner suite a lil resolution de l'Assemblee generale et il faudrait dir~
que le Conseil de securite ~st ~isi de la question
palestinienne a. partir de ce moment. Le Conseil
de securite ne devcait pas se contenter de mentionner, en passant, la resolution de l'Assemblee
generate et se borner a en prendre acte. La resolution de I'Assemblee generate doit etre mise a
execution.
J'estime preferable de dire: uIe Conseil de securite accepte la resolution de l'Assemblee generale" ou "le Conseil de securite prend acte de la
resolution de l'Assembtee generale"-je prefererais la premiere formule-"et se trouve desormais saisi de la question palestienne".
M. Ei.-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Certains alineas de la resolution de l'Assemblee
generate qui concementle Conseil de securite sont
renvoyes a ce Conseil; ce sont les alineasa), b)
et c). qui definissent les attributions du Conseil
de securite a l'egard de la question palestinienne.
Tous lesmembres du Conseil de secuiite connaissent bit>n les attributions du Conseil, qui sontparfaitement defiuies et nettement enoncees clans la
Charte des Nations Unies. Je ne crois pas que la
resolution de l'Assembtee generale puisse etendre
ces attributions ni en retrancher quoi que cesoit.
On sait fort bien que les recommandations de
I'Assemblee generate ne sont que des recommandations' et que lesEtats. Membres ne sont pas
forcement obliges de Ies accepter. Les Etats
Membres peuvent les accepter ou non, et cela
s'applique egalement au, Conseil. de sec~rite. It
existe de nomhreux exemples a ce sUJet. De
nombreuses resolutions de l'Assemblee generale
ont ete· renvoyees au Conseil de securite et n'ont
pas ete adoptees~Leur adoption a ete empeche.e
par un seul membre ou par plusieurs. Ce ne ser~t!
pas la premiere fois que le Conseil de securtte
n'accepterait pa~ une recommandation de I'Assemblee generate. Le cas· le plus recent s'es! produit a 1'0ccasion de l'admission de nouveaux
Membres. Un autre cas est c~lui de la question
des Balkans, et un autre encore est celui de,

i:...

27&1
not, in accordance with the rule of unanimity in
Article 27 of the Charter, accepted these resolutions without discussion, as it is proposM to do
now.

Q"~~tio:-

_dIe. L'Assemblee generate a adop-

t~ beau.l.'<.. ~p de resolutions et le Conseil de seeu-

rit~, conformement a la regIe d'unanimite enoncee a l'Article 2i de la Charte, n'a pas accepte
ces resolutions sans debat, comme on propose de
le faire dans le cas present.
I do not say that General Assembly resolutions
Je ne dis pas qt:.;
should not be accepted, but I do say that they cepter les resolutionsle Conseil ne. doive pas acde l'Assemblee generate,
must be discussed.
mais je disqu'i l doit le~ diseuter.
There are many members of the Security CounBeaucoup de membres du Conseil de securite
cil who did not vote in favour of this resolution n'ont pas vote en faveur
de cette resolution en
in the General Assembly. Some members_ opposed seance ptenier
it flatly, and others ahstained, giving as their rea.. se sont netteme de l'Assemblee generate. Les uns
son the fact that they did not ronsider the pro- sont abstenus, ent prono!!ces contre, les autres se
en faisant valoir que les disposivisions of the resolution correct and just, and tions de la resolut
ion ne leur paraissaient ni reguconsidered th{lm not to be within the jurisdiction Heres, ni
justes,
et
qu'a leur avis eIies ne sont ni
and competence of the General Assembly. Now du domaine,
ni
de
la competence de l'Assemblee
the Security Council is asked to accept them with- generale. Or,
aujourd'hui, 01\ demande au Conout discussion and without allowing each mem- sdi de securite de
les accepter sans debat et sans
ber to express his opinion on the subject and to donner a chacun de
ses membres la possibilite
state what are the defecfs.
d'exprimer son avis sur la proposition et d'en'in diquer 1es de£auts.
This is a matter of a Non-Self-Governing TerNous sommes en presence d'une question c~n­
ritory with which we are dealing. The question cernant un territoi
of Non-Self-Governing Territories is dealt with in des Nations Uniesre non autonome. La Charte
ne traite de la question_ des
only three chapters in the Charter of the United territoires .non
~utonomes que dans trois deses
Nations. Chapter XI applies to the colonies un- chapitr
Le Chapitre XI se rapporte au cas des
der the special administration of certain powers, coloniees.
s
placees
sous l'administration particuliere
and the other two chal'ters apPly to Territories de certaines
under Trusteeship or mandate. There are no concernent puissances, les deux autres chapitres
1es Territoires sous tutelle ou sous
others. We are creating another category of Non- mandat.
Il n'y en a pas d'autres. Nous sommes
Self-Governing Territories administered in a new en train de creer
form, and we are adding new articles to the Char- non autonomes, une autre categorie de territoires
administres selon une nouveUe
ter.
forme; nous sommes en train d'ajout er de nouveaux articles a. la Charte.
Many members of the Security Council who
Un bon nombre des membres du Conseil de
have constantly championed respect for the Char- securite qui ont
toujOUlS preche le respect de la
ter are now show:!'1g themselves meek and lenient Charte et
se
sont
institues ses defenseurs, ne
in this regard, and are overlooking or bypassing montrent
plus aujourd'hui que douceur et indulthe~e matters which are outside the jurisdiction
gence a cet egard; ils se montrent accommodants.
of the Charter and in violation of it.
se laissent aller a des oublis et usent de biais dans
des affaires qui ne sont pas du domaine de la
Charte et qui constituent une infract ionaux dispositions de ceIle-ci.
Either we have a Charter and are bound by it,
De deux chases, rune:
or we are free to do whatever we like, according Charte et nous sommes ou bien nous avons· une
to our own politics and our own fancies. This sommes libres de faire lies par ~lle,ou bien nous
is another question which would lead us to results au gre de notre propre ce que ban nous semble,
poIitique et de notre-prothat the world would not like to see coming from. pre fantaisie. C'est
la
une
autre question qui risthe Security Council. The Security Council is ex- que de nous condui
re
a
une
situation que le monde
pected to do otherwise in this respect.
-n'aimerait pas savoir etre le fait du Conse il4e
securite. On attend du Conseil de securite une
autre attitude acet egard.
The Geo,eral Assembly is attempting to create
L'Assemblee genera
a permanent trusteeship, a trusteeship without a . gime permanent de le essaie d'instituer un retrustee. Where is the Trusteeship Agreement? sans tuteur. Oil est tuteUe, un regime de tutelle
l'accord de tutelle? L'AssemThe General Assembly made the City of. Jerusalem blee generate a
erige
la ville deJeru salem en Ter~ permanent Trust Territory. Who is the adminritoire
Istrato r-the General Assembly? Is there any l'adminsous tutelle a titre permanent. Qui f.n est
istrateur? L'AssembIee generale? Existe~rrangement, is there. any trusteeship agreement,
t-it un accord quelconque, y a-t-il u~ accord de
.IS there';~ll Article of the Charter which permits tutelle?
Y a-t-il un article de la Cha~te qui autosuch a system or such a rule? Is it a new creation? rise
l'institu
tion d;un systeme ou d'un regime de
We have to consider that. We must be careful for
our Charter, for •our Organization and for the cette nature ? S'agit-il la d'une innovation? I1
peace which we are bound to respect and to pro- faut que nous tenions compte de ceci. Nous devons agir avec . circonspa.'tion dans l'interet de
tect.
notre Charte, de notre Orga1.1isation et de lapaix
que nous sommes tenus de respecter et. de proteger.
Before any discussion on this matter, I ask that
Avant toute discussion ')ur cette question, je
the applications of the Lebanese and the Egyptian demande que
le Conseil examine la demande des
Governments be considered and·adopted.
Gouvernements du Liban et de l'Egypte et y fasse
droit.

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America): I
think that these requests from Lebanon and of
Egypt, according to the liberal practice of the
Security Council, would have to be acted upon
affirmatively, if we enter into any discussion of
the substance of this case. For that reason, and
because my delegation sincerely believes that this
is not the time to have a substantive discussion,
we suggest that the Security Cotmcil simply postpone the matter indefinitely, as it can be brought
up by any member of the Security Council at any
time, if necessary.
The Security Council is certainly going to do
everything it can to carry out the specific requests
made of it by the General Assembly. That does not
mean the Security Council is assuming the responsibility for implementation of the entire resolution
of the General Assembly. It simply means that
the Security Council will do those things, if it
agrees to do so, which it is specifica!ly requested
to do, and n,aturally will fulfil its general obligations arising under the Charter.
If the Security Council is going into a full
discussion of the substance of the Palestinian problem, it, I think, must act on these requests from
the Egyptian and Lebanese delegations. I suggest that this matter be postponed indefinitely.

M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de I'anglais): Les demandes presentees par les
delegations du Liban et de l'Egypte devraient,
conformement a i'usage liberal du Conseil de securite, donner lieu a une decision affirmative, si
nous devons nous engager dans une discussion du
fond de la question. Pour cette raison, et aussi
parce que la delegation des Etats-Unis crait sin-o
cerement que I'heure n'est pas a des discussions
de fond, nous proposons que le Conseil de securite ajourne simplement la question sine die, pn!squ'en cas de necessite, l'examen peut en etre redame, a n'importe quel moment, par tout membre
du Conseil de securite.
Le Conseil de securite va certainement s'efforcer, de tout son pouvoir, de faire ce qu'exigent les
demandes precises qui lui sont adressees par l'Assemblee generale. Il ne s'ensuit pas que le Conseil de securite .assume la responsabilite de la
mise en oeuvre de la resolution tout entiere de
l'Assemblee generale. Cela veut dire simplement
que le Conseil de securite prendra, s'il en decide
ainsi, les mesures qu'il est expressement invite a
prendre et qu'il remplira, naturellement, ses obligations de caractere general decoulant de la
Charte.
Si le Conseil de securite doit s'engager dans un
large debat sur le fond d~ probleme de Palestine,
nous serons tenus, je crois, de nous prononcer sur
les demandes presentees par les delegations de
I'Egypte et du Liban. ]e propose que l'examen
de cette question soit ajourne sine die.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria) : I second the motion.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de I'anglais):
J'appuie cette proposition.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): I venture to make a
different suggestion, which perhaps might be acceptable to the Security Council. That is, "The
Security Council takes note of the resolution
adopted by the General Assembly concerning the
future government of Palestine, and decides to invite the representatives of Egypt' arid Lebanon
to participate in the meetings of the Security
Council at which the question of Palestine will be
discussed." Perhaps that might meet the wishes
of the Security Council.

. M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de I'anglais):
J e me permets de presenter une proposition differente dont I'acceptation paraitra peut-etre possible au Conseil de securite. Elle est ainsi con~ue:
"Le Conseil de securite prend acte de la resolution adoptee par l'Assemblee generale au sujet
du futur gouvernement de la Palestine et decide
d'inviter les representants de l'Egypte et du Liban
a participer aux seances du Conseil de securite
au cours desquelles la question de Palestine sera
discutee." Peut-etre ce texte rencontrera-t-il
I'agrement du Conseil de securite.

The PRESIDENT: I had thought it might be more
convenient to treat this matter without any formal
proposition before the Security Council. Any proposal of a formal nature on this matter would al':
most certainly lead to discussion.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): J'avais
pense <lu'il serait, peut-etre, plus pratique de resoudre cette question sans que le Conseil de securite soit saisi d'une proposition formelle. Toute
proposition de caractere formel concernant cette
question conduirait, presque certainement, a un
debat.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) : If
the Security Council "takes note", which is prend
acte .inFrench, is not the effect of that simply that
the Security Council _accepts such obligations as
mayfall on it pursuant to the request ofthe General Assembly in its resolution?

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis rl'Amerique) (traduit
de I'anglais): Si le Conseil de securite "prend
aete", pour employer le terme franc;ais, cela ne
voudra-t-il pas dire simplement que le Conseil d~
securite acceptc les obligations qui pourront IUlincomber, a la suite de l'invitation contenue dans
la resolution de l'Assembtee generale.
En d'autres termes, l'important n'est pas de
maintenir constamment cette affaire a l'ordre du
jour: l'important -c'est plutot que le Conseil prenne acte des responsabilites que la resolution de
l'AssembIee generale l'invite tout particulierement
a assumer, et qu'illes accepte.

In other words, it is not a question of keeping
the matter permaJ;lently on the agenda, but that the
Council takes note and accepts the responsibilities
which it is particularly requested to accept in the
resolution of the General Assembly.
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I have a point of
order. There has been a motion for the postpone-

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
_
Je demandela parole sur un point d'ordre. Le .......

2783
ment of the question indefinitely.. That has priority and it should be voted without discussion.

Conseil est saisi d'une proposition tendant it
ajoumer la question sine die. Cette question a
la priorite et doit etre mise aux voix sans debat.

The PRESIDENT: I was about to add, in reference to the observation of the representative of
Colombia, that, in the circumstances, he might
consider not putting forward any formal pr-oposal because, in my opinion, the suggestion made
by the representative of the United States with
regard to the indefinite postponement of this
question, while not amounting, as I understood
it, to a formal proposal for adjournment, nonetheless would in effect meet the wishes of the
Security Council on this matter at the present
time.
It is quite clear that whether we use the words
"take note of", the word "accept", or some other
phrase, the connotation remains identical, namely, that the Council is seized of the question of
Palestine. The question of Palestine thcncdorth
will become included on the list of those questions of which the Security Council remains
seized, and it would be open thereby to be br0ught
up for discussion at any time. .
Before the discussion was side-tracked, I was
about to propose that we conclude on that note,
namely, that the Security Council takes note or
or accepts the communicatioln from the Secretary-General conveying the text of the resolution, thereby becoming seized of the question of
Palestine, and we can leave it at that. If that
procedure were agreeable to the members of
the Security Council, I think it would be the
~~st way to conclude the point at the present
stage.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): J'allais
ajouter, it propos des observations formulees par
le representant de la Colombie, que, dans le cas
present, il pourrait envisager de ne pas presenter
de proposition formelle parce que, it mon avis, la
suggestion du representant des Etats-Unis tendant it ajoumer l'examen de cette question sine
die, sans revetir le caractere d'une motion formelle d'ajoumement, n'en repondrait pas moins
aux desirs du Conseil de securite en cette matiere it I'heure actuelIe.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): The Syriil.l1 representative has
raised a point of order to the effect that the purpose of the United States proposal is to adjourn
the discussion of this question sine die.
This point is explicitly provided for in Rule
33, paragraph S, of our Rules of Procedure, which
adds that such motions shall be decided without
debate.

Ceci est parfaitement net: que nous employions
les termes "prendre acte de", le mot "accepter"
ou telIe autre expression qu'on pre£erera, le sens
demeure identique, it savoir que le Conseil est
saisi de la question de Palestine. La question de
Palestine doit, par consequent, etre dorenavant
au nombre des questions dont le Conseil de securite reste saisi, et elIe pourra de ce fait etre discutee it tout moment.
Avant que la discussion n'ait devie, j'alIais proposer de conclure dans ce sens, it savoir que le
Conseil de securite prend acte de la communication par laquelle le Secretaire general transmet lie
texte de la resolution, ou, si 1'0n pre£ere, qu'il
accepte cette communication et de ce fait se declare
saisi de la question de Palestine; nous pouvons
nous en tenir la. Si cette methode convient aux
membres du Conseil, je crois que, au stade actuel
de la question, c'est la meilleure des conclusions.
M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Le representant de la Syrie a presente, tout it I'heure, une
motion d'ordre tendant it faire observer que la
proposition formulee par le representant des
Etats-Unis a pour objet de remettre sine die la
discussion de la question.
Le point est expressement prevu par l'article
33, alinea e) de notre reglement interieur, qui
ajoute. que, dans ce cas, il est statue sans debat.

. I think that this exchange of views would in
the circumstances be a satisfactory conclusion to
the discussion.
I see no need for taking formal note of the communication. In fact, it will be noted in the records
of our meetings.

J e considere que cet echange de vues serait,
dans les circonstances actuelIes, une conclusion
satisfaisante.
J e ne vois pas la necessite de prendre formellement acte de la communication. Il en est pris
acte, en fait, dans les proces-verbaux de nos
seances.

The PRESIDENT: Is that course agreeable to
the members of the Security Council?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Cette solution convient-elle it tous les membresdu Conseil
de securite?

. Mr. JOHNSON: (United States of America) : I
should . . like to ask a question. If we accept the
p~oposal as stated by the representative of Bel~um, does the fact that this discussion appears
m our records mean that the Security Council
does take note of this resolution which has been
sent to it by the General Assembly-because it
seems to me that taking note of a resolution of
th~ General Assembly does not necessarily entad debate.

M. JOI1NSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je voudrais poser une question.
Si nous acceptions la proposition telle que l'a
formulee le representant de la Belgique, le fait
que cette discussion figure cl' ''1 nos proces-ver-::
baux implique-t-il que le Consel1 de securite prend
effectivement acte de la presente resolution qui
lui a ete adressee par l'Assemblee generale? Car,
selon moi, prendre acte d'une resolution de l'Assemblee generate n'implique pas necessairement
qu'il y ait une discussion.
J'aimerais voir le Conseil de securite prendre
acte .de la resolution et ajourner sine die toute
discussion de la· question palestinienne. Ainsi,

I should like to see the Security Council take
note of the resolution and then adjourn sine die
any discussion of the Palestine problem. That

2784
would seem to put the matter in the most satisfactory situation; namely, that the Councit has received and has taken note of this communication
adjourns discussion.

semble-t-it, la question se trouverait placee dans
la situation la plus favorable, a savoir que le
Conseil de securite aurait re~u la communication,
en aurait pris acte etaurait ajourne la discussion.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): I think it would not be correct to say
that we as a Council just "take note" of the resolution of the General Assembly. We may take
note of many documents and we may not deal
with them; we may. take note of many questions
raised in certain documents and we may not deal
with them.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republi~ues sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais I : Je crois
qu'il ne serait pas juste de dire que nous nous
bornons en ta?i1t que Conseil a "prendre acte" de
la resolution de l'Assemblee generate. Nous pouvons prendre acte de bien des documents et ne pas
nous en occuper; nous pouvons prendre acte de
hien des questians soutevees dans certains documents et ne pas nous occuper d'elles.
C'est pourquoi it $~rait opportun de dire que
nOUi; avons accepte la communication du Secretaire general ainsi que la resolution -de l'Assemblee generale, et que, a partir de maintenant, nous
sommes et resterons saisis de la question palestinienne. C'est la le point principal.
Je serais dispose a accepter la proposition clu
representant des Etats-Urtis, tendant a ne pas enti"eprendre des maintenant la discussion de la
question palestinienne; mais il a mele deux choses
entierement differentes, a -savoir l'acceptation de
la resolution de l'Assemblee generale, qui a pour
effet de saisir le Conseit de cette resolution, et
I'ajournement de la discussion de la question. 11
s'agit de deux choses totalement differentes et
c'est pourquoi j'espere que le representant des
Etats-Unis jugera possible de ne pas les lier.
Je souscris a la derniere declaration du President; en d'autres termes, je suis pret a dire que
le Conseil de securite accepte la communication
du Secretaire general ainsi que la resolution de
l'Assemblee generale, et qu'il est saisi de la question palestinienne. En fait, it ne serait pas necessaire d'employer les mots "question palestinienne". Si nous employions, tout simplement, les
termes "cettequestion", tout le monde comprendrait ce que nous voulons dire.
Par la suite, si le -representant de la Syrie insiste, nous decidcrons si nous devons commencer la discussion ou l'ajourner. Toutefois, pour
ajourner ou commencer la discussion, il faut que
nous ayons une question a traiter. Personnellement, je pense qu'it serait souhaitabte de considerer la derniere declaration du President comme
exprimant l'opinion du Conseil et de lever la
seance.

and

That is why it would be desirable to say that
we accepted the communication from the Secretary-General, together witb the resolution of the
General Assembly, and that we remain seized of
the Palestinian question from now on. That is
the main question.
I would accept the suggestion made by the representative of the United States, namely, not to
start discussion. now on the Palestinian question;
but he mixed together two entirely different
things: first, the acceptance of the resolution of
the General Assembly, with the· purpose of being
seized of this resolution; and, second, postponelPent of discussion with regard to the question.
They are entirely different things, and that is why
I hope that the representative of the United States
may find· it possible not to· connect them.
I would: agree with the last statement of the
President, that is to say, I would agree to say
that the Security Council accepts the communication from the Secretary-General, together with the
resolution of the General Assembly, and is seized
of the Palestinian question. In fact, it would not be
necessary to use the words "Palestinian question".
If we said merely "this question" everyone would
understand what was meant.
Then, if the representative of Syria insists, we
shall decide whether we are to start a discussion
or to adjourn. In order to adjourn or to start the
discussion, however, we must be in a position of
having something with which to deal. Personally I
think it would be desirable to accept the last statement of the President as an expression of opinion
of the Council, and to adjourn.

Mr. PARODI (F~ce) (translated trom
M. PARODI (France) : Si le President. veutbien
French) : If the President will allow me, I shall m'y autoriser, je dirai quelques mots en ce qui
say just a few words about the proposal which concerne la-proposition qui a ete faite par le reprewas submitted by the USSR representative and sentantde l'URSS et qu'il vient de defendre de
which he has just defended once again.
nouveau.
- If the proposal, as he stated-at least according
S'il s'agit, comme it l'a dit - tout au moins
to the French interpretation of his words--is to d'apres l'jnterpre~ation franc;aise de ses paroles accept the Secretary-General's communication, I d'accepter la communication du Secretaire genedo nl~ 'f~-Jte see the point of it. The Security Coun- ral, je ne comprends pas tres bien. Le Conseil de
cil ret:dves a communication from the Secretary- securite r~oit une communication du Secretaire
General. Ris the Secretary-General's right t9 make general. C'est le .droit .du Secretaire general de
~_ communication. It is not for us to "accept" or lui en faire. Nous n'avons pas a. "accepter" ou a
'~not to accept" this communication.
"ne pas accepter" cette communication.
If theproposar is to accept, not the communicaS'il s'agit d'accepter, non pas la communication of the text of the resolution, but the resolu- tion du texte de la resolution, mais la resolution
tion itself, then it means that we are defining a elle-meme, alors cela signifie que nous definissons
position, which will be that ofthe Security Council une position, qui sera celle du Conseil de securite
in i"elation to the resolution adopted by the Gen- par rapport cl la resolution adoptee par l'Asse~­
eral Assembly. In that· case, we shall be taking blee· generale. Dans ce cas. nous prenons partt.
sides. We catu:lot do so without a debate, since Or, nous ne pouvons pas le faire sans un debat,
some of our colleagues desire that it should take puisque certainsde nos colU~gttes desirent que

......

2785
place-notably the representative of Syria- and
since other members of the Council have asked
to be heard.
As I think we are at present agreed not to hold
a debate just now, it seems to me that the formula
submitted by the USSR representative should
be rejected.
There stili remains the question of whether we
should take note· of the communicati{ln or simply
adjourn.
I fail to see of what advantage it would be for
the Security Council to adopt a formal resolution
in connexion with the communication that has
been made to us. There is nothing that obliges us
to do so. Indeed, we have received a communication which, for the time being, is a communicatioll
of an informative nature. There is no need for us,
any more than in regard to any other communication, to adopt a resolution concerning it today.
As regards the formula by which we would
state that we take note of the communication, I
confess I cannot see what it \lIould add. Indeed,
from the moment a communication is made to us,
it is obvious that we take note of.it. We are not
going to forget it. We are not going to pretend
that we have not received it.
In a word I think: our wisest and most p"'oper
course would be, in accordance with what has just
been proposed by the United States representative and with what was also the opinion of the
Belgian representative, not to adopt any resolution at the present time but simply to adjourn and
to take up this question again when any representative of· the Security Council deems it necessary.

celui-ei s'institue--c'est le cas du representant de
la Syrie notam ment-e t puisque d'autres memhres du Conseil ont demande a etr'e entendus.
Comme je pense que nous sommesd'accord, a
l'heure actuelle, pour ne pas amorcer un debat
des maintenant, la formule qui a ete presentee par
le representant de I'URS S'me parait devoir etre,
en tout cas, ecartee.
Reste la question de savoir si nous devons prendre note, ou ajourner purement et simplement.
Je ne voilS pas tres bien l'utilite, pour le Conseil
de securite, de prendre une resolution formelIe ala suite de la communication qui nous a ete. faite.
Rien ne nous y oblige. En effet, nous avons re~u
une communication qui, pour l'instant, est une
communication d'information. Pas plus que pour
toute autre, nous n'avons besoin de prendre aujourd'hui une resolution a- son snjet.
Quant a la formule par laquelle nous dirions
que· nous prenons note, j'avoue ne pas voir ce
qu'elIe ajoutera. En effet, du moment qu'une communication nous est faite, il est evident que nOllS
en prenons note. Nous n'alIons pas l'oublier.
Nous n'alIons pas faire comme si nous ne l'avions
pas re~e.
Je crois done en definitive que le plus sage, le
plus correct, conformement a ce que vient de proposei' le representant des Etats-Unis et a ce qui
etait nussi l'idee du represen~t de la Belgique.
consisterait it ne pas prendre actuelIement de resolution, et it nous ajourner purement et simple.
ment, quitte a reprendre la question quand l'un
quelconque des membres du Conseil de securite
l'estimerait necessaire.

Mr. ]OHNSON: (United States of America) : As
I understood the meaning of what the USSR representative has just said, he has resolved the necessity I saw for putting these two tltings together in
the definition which be gave of the word "accept".
~ think: we have merely been. talking round the
meaning of words. As I understood Mr. Gromyko's last intervention, be does not mean, by using this word "accept", that we have taken a
substantive decision.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de fanglais): Si je comprends bien ce que le
representant· de I'URSS vient de dire. il a eca.rte
la necessite que je voyais. dereu nir ces de~
choses par la definition qu'il a donnee du mot <lac·
cepte". Je crois que nous n'avons fait que jouer
sur les mots. Lorsque M. Gromyko emploie le
mot "accepter"- il ne veut pas dire, si j'interprete
bien ce qu'il a declare en dernier lieu, que nous
ayons pris une decis~on ,Sur le fond de la question.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of· Soviet Socialist Republics) : We have received the commtmication.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
!lvons r~u la communication.

Mr. JOHNSON: (Unite d States of Ameri ca):
Yes, we have received it-it is a question -of
words and we are, of course, already seized of this
question and have admitted it to the agenda of
this meeting.
.

M. JOHNSON. (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de I'anglais): Oui, nous l'avons -r~ue; eest
une affaire de mots ; nous sommes evidemment deja saisis de cette question et avons accepte de l'ins:'
crire a l'ordre du jour de la presente seance.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) : But if the Security Council is seized of
the question, that applies to this meeting and to
subsequent meetings from now on.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques o;;ocia':'
listes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Mais si
le Conseil est saisi de la question cela s'applique
a la presente seance et aux seances ulterieures.

Mr. JOHNSON: (Unite d States of Ameri ca):
1\s.I understand our rules, it remains on our proVlslonal .agenda· until we have removed it,. and
may be brought up at any time at the request of
any member of the· Secun.ty Council.
.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de I'atl-01ais): Si je comprends bien notre
reglement interieur, la question continue de figurer a notre ordre du jour provisoire tant que nous
ne l'en avons pas retiree, et eIle peut
levee
a tout moment a la demande de l'unetresou
quelconque
des membres du Conseil de securite.

The PRESIDENT: That depends upon how it is
treated.

Le PRESIDENT: Cela depend de la f~on .dont
eIle est traitee.

Ill. --

2786
.Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): It
has just been suggested that discussion be postponed. It seems to me that the.very use of the
word "postpone" means that we .still have the
question. To postpone is not to dismiss.

M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de fanglais): On vient de proposer d'ajourner la discussion. Selon moi, l'emploi meme du
mot "ajournement"ip1plique que nous restQns
saisi de cette questiorii Ajourner n'est pas eearter.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) :, You mean that the Council is seized of
the question.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (troouit de I'anglais): Vous
voulez dire que le COl.1seil est saisi de la question.

Mr. ]OHNS9N (United States of America):
Exactly.'
,

M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : Parfaitement.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) : You do not wish to state that?

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de I'anglais) : Voulezvous le declarer formellement?,

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): I
have no objection to stating it.

M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je ne vois pas d'inconvenient
a le faire.
.

The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the representative of ,Colombia, I, should like to lmow whether
, it would be possible to condense the opinions express~d 'around this table by writing into the
records of this meeting a statement to the effect
that the Council has received the communication
from the Secretary-General and, having been
~eized ()f this matter, has agreed to postpone further discussion.

Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Avant de
donner la parole au representant de la Co~ombie,
je voudrais savoir s'il· est possible de condenser
les opinions exprimees autour de cette table en
faisant figurer dans le proces-verbal de la presente
seance une declaration portant que le .Conseil a
re~u la communication du Secretaire general et
que, se trouvant saisi de la question, it a decide
d'ajourner la suite de la discussion.

Mr. JOHN,SON (United States of ,Amenca):
That is agreeable.

M.' ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit del'anglais); C'est une formule acceptable.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) : Yes, that is satisfactory.

M. GROMYKo'(Union des Rel!ubliques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de I'anglais) : Qui, eUe
est satisfaisante.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): All our discussion
seems to point to the advisability of having a decision of the Council, instead of a ruling of the
President, o~. the question. The suggestion that
was made seemed to mean that the Council could
reconcile the different views that have been expressed, because the Council would indicate that
it takes note of the resolution adopted by the General Assembly and would then leave the question
of when ta discuss the Palestine matter ta..a..la.ter
date, at the. same time accepting the request' of
Egypt and Lebanon to be invited, to the discussion. It seems to me that that is the sense of the
Council: that, when this discussion comes up,
Egypt and Lebanon should be invited. However,
I should first like to have a decision by the President as to whether or not the proposal should be
put to a vote.

·M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Toute notre discussion semble indiquer qu'il y a
interet a ceque le Conseil' prerine une decision a
ce sujet au lieu de laisser ce' soin au President.
La proposition qui a ete faite semble vouloir dire
que le Conseil peut concilier les differentes opinions exprimees, car il montrerait qu'il prend
acte. de la resolution adoptee par l'Assemblee et
laisserait ensuite en suspens la question de savoir
a queUe date il discuterait la question palestinienne, tout' en acceptant la demande presentee
par I'Egypte et le Liban en ce qui concerne la
participation aux debats. Il me semble que I'idee
des membres du Conseil est que l'Egypte et le
Liban doivent etre invites quand nous en viendrons. a cette discussion. Toutefois, je voudrais
d'abord que le President se prononce sur le point
de savoir si Qui ou non la proposition doit etre
mise aux voix.

" The PllESIDENT: I would rather not have this
wording regarded as a ruling or a decision or a
formal p.roposition of any kind. It is merely a suggestion. I did not understand that the representative of Colombia objected to the suggestion in itself. If I hear no objection from the members of
the Council, I would propose that the Assistant.
Secretary-General he asked to adopt that suggestion as a guide or, in any event, as a minute
on this discussion. As there is no objection, that
will be done.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Je prefererais qu'on ne consiElere pas cetteformule cornme une decision dQ. President ou une proposition
formeUe quelconque. Il s'agit d'une simple suggestion. ] e n'avais pas compris que le representant, de la Colombie elevait une objection contre
la suggestion en elle-meme. Si les membres du
Conseil ne font pas d'objection, je proposerai que
l'on demande au Secretaire general adjoint de
s'inspirer de cette suggestion ou, en tout cas, de
la considerer comme un resume de la presente
discussion. Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'objection, il en
sera ainsi.
,
M. EL-KHOURI (Syr.ie) (traduit de l'anglais):
J'estime que la premiere formule mentionnee par

Mr. ·EL-KHOURI (Syria): I think that the first

p~rase mentioned by the President, to .theeffect

~

-

2787
that the Security Council has received the communication and has posponed discussion, would
give the idea that. the communication has been
received and is on the agenda, that the postpone~
ment means that the question remains on the
agenda. If it is postponed until a specified date,
it will be taken up on that date. If it is postponed
sine die, that means that it may be put on the
agenda for a particular date at the request of any
member of the Council.

le President, a savoir que le Conseil de securite
a re<;u la communication et remis la discussion a
plus tard, donnerait l'idee que la communication
a ete re<;ue et est inscrite a l'ordre du jour, et
que l'ajoumement signifie quecette question reste
cl l'ordre du jour. Si elle est ajoumee jusqu'a
une date precise, on la discutera a cette date i si
elle est ajournee sine die, cela signifie qu'elle peut
etre inscrite a l'ordre du jour a une date determinee sur la demande de l'un quelconque des
membres du Conseil.·
What is the use, then, of including the phrase
A quoi··bon alors introduire l'expression· "ayant
"having been seized of the question" ? What would ete saisi de la question"? Quel avantage celaprethat add? I am afraid that the use of that phrase, sente-t-il-? Je crains que l'emploi decetteexpreswhich has been employed in other situations, would sion, qui a ete utilisee dans d'autres situations, ne
complicate the matter and confuse the intended complique la question et ne fasse qu'on se m'emeamng. The Security Council is seized of a situa- prennesur le sens qu'on veut lui donner. Le
tion or dispute which is likely. to endanger inter- Conseil de securite est saisi d'une situation ou
national peace and security; it is seized of such a d'un differend susceptible de menacer la pane et
question and is bound to offer a solution. That la securite internationales; it est saisi de cette
takes place when there is a situation or dispute question'et est tenu de proposer une. solutio~. Ceci
between two 01' more States.
arrive lorsqu'une situation delicate ou un differend
se produisent entre deux ou plusieurs Etats~
There is nothing of that kind in the question
It ne s'agit de rieri de tel dans la question dont
now before us. We may be seized.of the question nous nous occupons actuellement. Nous pouvons
later on, when some such situation arises. Even ctre saisis de cette questien plus tard, lorsqu~une
the request ~y the General Assembly does not situation de ce genre se produira. Meme la destate that there is any such situation now. The mande de I'Assemblee generale ne mentionne.pas
General Assembly requests that the Security Coun- qu'une telle situation existe actuellement. L' As~
cil act in the future, when anything oi that nature semblee generale invite le- Conseil de securite a
happens. That is entirely a different matter. I agir al'avenir, s'it se produit une situation de cette
therefore do not think that it is necessary to in- nature. C'est tout a fait autre chose. Par conseclude the. phrase ".having been seized of the ques- quent, je ne crois pas qu'il soit necessaire ·d'introtion". The first phrase mentioned by the Presi- duire l'expression "ayant ete saisi de la question".
dent will be sufficient. Postponement of discus- La premiere expression indiquee par le President
siotl of the question means that it remains on the suffira. Uajournement de la discussion: signifie
agenda unless it is subsequently withdrawn, and que la question reste ll. l'ordre du jour, a·moins
that it may be brought up at the. request of any . qu'elle n'en soit ulterieurement retiree, et qu'elle
member of the Security Council. At the same peutetre discutee a la demande de l'un quelcop.que
time, the request of the Govemments of Egypt des membres ·duConseil de securite. En meme
and Lebanon would be granted.
temps, le Conseil accederait a la demande des
Gouvernements de l'Egypte ou du Liban.
.
Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I beHeve that we
are reaching a stage in our discussion where we
can come to a certain general agreement. The
differences at the moment are really only verbal
differences.
I believe that rule 10 of our provisional rules
of procedure completely solves the problem with
which we are now dealing. Let us remember that
at the beginning of today's meeting we adopted
the agenda, and we admitted, under item 5 of to..
day's agenda, the letter of the Secretary-General
in which the Secretary-General transmitted to the
Security Council the resolution of the General Assembly concerning the future government of Palestine and drew the attention of the Security Council to the operative parts thereof conceming the
Security Council, in particular paragraphs (a),
(b) and (c).
.
By this decision, we admitted this item on our
a~enda, and since that moment; as the representative of the United States pointed out; the Security
Council has been seized of that question.
Rule 10 reads: "Any item of the agenda of a
meeting of the Security Council, consideration of
which has not been completed at that meeting,
spall, unless the Security Council otherwise deCIdes, automatically be included in the agenda of
t~e next meeting." We are trying to decide other-

"::t=::~~h~~. we are trying to postpone

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit d~ l'anglais) : Je crois que nous arrivons a un stadede
la disc'.1ssion ou l'accord general devient possible.
Les divergences qui existent actuellement sont
vrai dire d'ordre purement verbal.
J'estime que I'artic1e 10 de notre reglement interieur provisoire resout completement le probleme dont nous nous occupons actuellement.
Souvenons-nous qu'au debut de la seance d'aujourd'hui, nous avons adopte l'ordre du jour et
nous avons admis,' comrne cinquieme point de
l'ordre du jour de la presente seance, la lettre par
laquelle le Secretaire general transmet au Conseil
de securite la resolution de l'Assembtee generale
relative au gouvemement futur de la· Palestine et
attire l'attention du Conseil sur la partiedu dispositif interessant le Conseil, en particulier sur
lesalineas a), b). et c).
Par cette decision, nousavons inscrit la question a notreordredu jour, et depuis ce moment,
comme l'a fait remarquer le representant des
Etats-Unis, le Conseil de securite a ete saisi de
cette question.
.
L'article 10 est le suivant: "Toute question
figurant a l'ordre du jour d'une seance du Conseil
de securite et dont l'examen n'est pas acheve au
cours de ladite seance est portee automatiquement
cl l'ordre du jour de la seance suivante, a moins
que le Conseii de securite n'en decide autrement."
NoOus sommes en train d'essayer d'en decider au-.

a

di~sion indefinitely" whiCh nl~ns that any
member' of the Security Council, when he finds
thatth~ situation so requires, may reopen the discussion by asking the Secretary-:General to put
the item on. the agenda of a mee~ing of the Security ..Cuunci1.

trement. Cela signifie que nous sommes en train.
d'essay.er d'ajourner indefiniment la discussion;
il en resultera que toutmembre duConseil 'de
seeurite, lorsqu'il estiJJ;1era que la situ~tion l'exige,
pourra rouvrir la disCussion en demandant au
Secretaire general d'inscrire ce point a l'ordre du
jour d'une seance du· Conseil de securite.
L'artiele 11 traite de celles g,es questions dont
Rule 11 deals with questions which. have not
been completed and '. c<?ncerning. which no decision le Conseil de 'securite ,s; ete saisi, dont l'examen
has been takeri on .matters of· which. the Security n'est pas tennine et au sujet desquelles aucune
Council is seized, and, the rule provides that the decision n'a ete. prise; it stipule que le Secretaire
Secretary-General shall:. communicate each week general communiquera chaque semaine auX repreto: the representatives on the Security Council a , sentants .siegeant au Conseilde' securite un sommaire de toutesces questions;
summary of ·all these' matters.
I, cannot agree with the definition of the repreJe ne puis me rallier a la definition donnee par
sei1~tive of Syria that only important ·questions le representant de la Syrie, selon laquelle le Con. concerning peace and security, where there are seil de securitene peut etre saisi que des questions
disputes between States, are, matters of which the importantes coneernant la paix et la securite donSeeuJityCOl,Ulcilcan.' be seized. 'We hav~been nant lieu a des differends· entre des Etats. Par
seized of, for instance" the problem of our rules ' exemple, nousavons etesaisis du probleme de noof procedu:re, Until today's decision concerning M1 tre rcglement inrerieur provisoire, jusqu'a la de_amEndment to the rules of procedure regarding the cision d'aujourd'hui relative a I'amendemcnt au
admission of ·new ,members. :Whether or. not the reglement interieur concemant l'admission des
words "seized of" a~ used, by placing ,the matter nouveaux Membres. Que 'les mots "saisi de"
on the agenda, ~y not taking any decision on the soient employes ou non, en mettant la question a
question and by postponing the cdiscussion, the Se- l'ordl'e du jour, en ne prenant pas de decision a
curity,Council is seized of the Palestinian question, son sujet et en ajournant la discussion, le Conseil
and any member may ask the Secretary-Genera! ~o de securite se trouvesaisi de la question palestiplace it again on ,the agenda.
nienne et tout membre peut demander au Secretaire general de l'inscrire de nouveau a l'ordre
du jour.
The PREsiDENT : 1 think the representative of
'Syria, while fearing some implication in the phrase
"the :Council is sei~ed of", reads more inta the
,plmlse. than is t~hnicalJy th~e., I can appreciate
that he may. fear ~ome. implication i~. th~phrase,
but I cal<1 assure.him that, so far asI understand
the .procedural ' aspects of .that phrase,. i~; p1eans
nothing more than' that tJ:~e matter, -remains' on the
ag~daof the S(!Curity Council. I ,noti~, for example, in rule 11 that the Secretary'-General shall
communicate matters of which the Security Council is seized. I note thatinnocuous phrase in the
rules'of'J>rocedure of the Security Council and two
9Dthree other phrases of a si~ilar nature.

'Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je crois
que. le represenf?1nt de ,la Syne, lorsqu'il craint
que ·l'expression "le Conseii est saisi de" ehtr~in\!
des consequences, veuillelui faire dire plus que
.les mots eux-memes ne signifient.· Je comprends
qu'il puisse craindre que l'expressionentraine des
consequences, mais je puis l'assurer que, pour autant. que je comprennela portee de cette expression du point de .vue de la pr~dure, elle ne signifie rien de plus que le fait que la question denteure
a I'ordre du jour du Conseil de ·securite. Je remarque, par ~emple, dans I'artiete 11, que le
Secretaiie generat·doit CODlmuniquer les q~~stions
dont le Conseil desecurite est saisi. Je 'eleve
dans.le reglement intc~rieur du Conseil de se_ lrite
cette phrase' inoffenSIVe, ainsi que deux ou trois
autres phra..~s de caractere analogue.
La presentation de la question sous cette forme
There is no implication of anything deep or of
sinister import in the inclusion of this matter in ne dissimule aucune consequence profonde ni authat' fQrm. "The 'matter of which the Security eun dessein mena~nt."La question dont le ConCouncil is. seized", means that it is the wish of seil de securite est saisi", signifie que C'est le desir
the' Security,CounciJ-and l believe it is aiso the du Con~eil de securite--et je pense que c'est egalewish of the representative of Svria:"""'that the mat- ment ledesir du representant de la Syrie-que
ter remain on the .agenda; available for' discussion la question demeure a l'ordre du jour etpuisse
at the request of any member or members at any etre discutee a tout moment, a' la dentande d'un
011 de plusieurs membres du Conseil.
time.'
"
Je propose d'adopter la formule suivante et de
I propose that we accepf this formula, for in- '
la
consigner au proces-verbal de cette seance: "Le
elusion in the minutes of this meeting: "The Securib' Council received the letter from the Sec- Conseil de securite a re~u la lettre du Secretaire
retary-!ieneral enelosing the resolution of the generalcontenant la resolution de l'AssembIee
General Assembly concerning Palestine, and, being generale relative it la Palestine,,et, se trouvant saisi
seized of the question, decided to postpone dis- de ·la question, a decide d'ajourner la discussion."
cussion."
. '
.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria).: I think the suggestion
of the representative of Colombia should be added,
namely, that the representatives of Egypt and
Lebanon should be admitted to all future discussions.of th~s question without any further discussion or decision being neces§ry. This action would
enable. theSe two States to be ready and to know

M., EL-KHOUIU (Syrie) (tt'ad'ltit de l'anglais):
J'estime qu'it faudra!t y ~jouter la proposition clu
representant de la Colombie, a savoirque les representants de l'Egypte et du Liban devraient titre
admis a toutes ~iscussions futures de la questio~
sans qu'un nouvimu deklt ou qu'une nouve11e decision soient nb.:essaires. Cette mesure ~rmet-

2789
the result of their applications. As you know, they
are situated quite a distance from here.
'

trait a ces deux Etats de cotmaitre le resultat de
leurs demandes et de se tenir prets. Comme vous
le savez, ils sont tres loin d'ici.

Mr. JOHNSON (Unite d States of America) : My
M. JOHNSON (Etatsdelegation would have no objection to the addition duitde l'anglais) : .Ma Unis d'Amerique) (tradelegation ne voit pas d'obof that expression, but I should like, certainly for jection a ce qu'on
our part, to assur~ the representative of Syria that tiens pour ma part.ajoute cette expression, mais je
a assurer le representant de la
I amconvinc::ed that whenever the Palestinian Syrie que
je
suis
convain
cu que, it quelque moquestion is brought up, no member of the Se- 'ment que
la question de Palestine soit soulevee,
curity Council would object to the requests oi aucun membr
e du Conseil de securite ne s'oppOJ
Lebanon and Egypt to be admitted.
sera a ce que 1'0n permette au Liban et a I'Egypte
de participer a la discussion. '
The PRESIDENT: There would be no objection,
of course, to the inclusion of that provision in this
formula. However, it is my duty to point out that
such action would not necessarily dispose of the
question of the participation of other parties in
the discussion of this matter. At the moment, the
Security Council has received requests from only'
two parties, and further requests are, of course,
not necessarily excluded.
It had occurred to me, therefore, that it might
be more convenient to wait until we could discuss
all the requests received for participation in the
discussion, assuming that we receive more.

There is no objection by the members of the
Security Council to the participation of the two
Governments which have already submitted requests, and if that were included in our understanding today, it would also be included that this
action would not result in the exclusion of the
consideration of further applications.,
As there is no objection, this formula is accepted.
The meeting 1'ose at 5.35 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Rien ~e
s'opposerait, naturellement, a ce qu'on introduise
cette disposition dans la formule proposee. Neanmoins, i1 est de mon devoir de signaler que cette
mesure ne reglerait pas necessairement la question de la participation d'autres parties a la discussion de la question. Pour le moment, le· Conseil de securite n'a re«;u de demandes que de deux
Gouvemements seulement, mais it est evident que
cela n'exc1ut pas forcement la possib ilitede nouvelles demandes.
I1 m'a done semble qu'il pourrait etre plus com-,
mode d'attendre jusqu'a ce que nouspu issions
discuter toutes les demandes de participation a la
discussion, a supposer que nous en recevions d'autres.
Les membres du Conseil de securite ne s'opposent pas a la participation des deux Gouvernements qui ont deja presente leur deman de,et s'il
est fait etat de ce fait dans I'entente a laquelle nous
avons abouti aujour d'hui, ilsera egalement convenu que cette mesure n'aura pas pour effet d'exelure la prise en consideration d'autres demandes.
Aucune objection n'etant formulee, ceUe formule est acceptee.
La seance est levee a 17 h. 35.

"

---SALES A EN S'

UBI:Il;A-nu·........-

DEPOS'TA'RES DES PU8L'CATIONS DES NATIONSUNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AJp.ES
AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S: A.
14·22 rue du Persi!
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Lihreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press'
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 RDnan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COlOMBIE
Lihreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA
COSTA RICA-COSTA-RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE
CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

0;

FRNLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Sou81ot
PARIS, Ve
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Lihrairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
A:mENEs

PERU-PEROU
(Libreria internacional del Peru,
.- S.A.
Casilla 1417

HAITf

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A.
LAuSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY.
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL.
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA-SYRIE
Lihrairie universelle
DAMAS'

LIMA
PHiliPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzi-elna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
aa-Poznanska
~UATEMALA
WARS2;AWA
Jose GOlihaud
SWEDEN-SUEDE
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
S u c e s o r : Hofbokhandel
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
Freasgatan 2
GUATEMALA
STOCKHOLM

Mnx Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A la Caravelle"

Boite postale 111.B
PORT.AU.PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK
INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scinma House
. TURKEY-TURQUIE
NEW DELHI
Lihrairie Hachette
IRAN
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-!STANBUL
. Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICATEHERAN
UNION SUP-AFRICAINE
IRAQ-IRAK
Central News Agency
Commission'Jr & Rissik Sts.
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
JOHAl'lNESEURG and at CAPETOWN
BAGHDAD
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMLEBANON-LlBAN
ROYAUME-UNI
Lihrairie universelle
H. M. Stationery Office
BEYROUTH
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
LUXEMBOURG
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
Lihrairie J. Schummer
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHEST
Place Guillaume
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMINGHAM
LUXEMBOURG
DENMARK~DANEMARK
and BRISTOL
NETHERLAND5-PAYS-BAS
Einar Munksgaard
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAN~rregade6
Lange Voorhout 9
ETATS-UNIS D'AMERIQUE
K~BENHAVN
'S·GRAVENHAGE
International Documents Service
DOMINICAN REPUBLICColumbia University Press
REPUBLlQUE DOMINRCAINE
NEW ZEALAND2960 Broadway
Lihreria Dominicana
NOUVELLE-ZELANDE
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Apartallo 656
Waring Taylor Street
URUGUAY
ClUDAD TRUJILLO
WELLINGTON
Oficina de Repreeentacion de
Editoriales
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR,
United Nations Association of
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
New Zealand
MONTEVIDEO .
Nueve de Octuhre 703
P, O. 1011, G.P.O.
Casilla 10·24
WELLINGTON
VENEZUELA
GUAYAQUIL
Escritoria Perez Machado
NICARAGUA
EGYPT-EGYPTE
Conde a Piiiango 11
Ramil'O
Ramirez
V.
Lihrairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
CARACAS
Agencia de Publicaciones
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
MANAGUA, D. N.
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE
CAIRO
DI:iLVnO Preduzece
NORWAY-NORVEGE
ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Jugoll!ovenska Knjiga
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Agence ethiopienne de publicite
Mo",k'Jv-oka UI. 36
Kr.
Augustgt.
7A
P. O. Box 8
,B1WCr.~
OSLO
ADDlS-ABEBA
Printed in the U.S'.A.

~

t

Price in the United States: 20 cents

April 1949 - 3
