Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Co,nmittee

tries in support of the objectives and policies of t~e
United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements
Foundation, having due regard to national policies,
programmes and development priorities;
2. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations syst~m
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as
other non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of human settlements, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
broad dissemination of infmmation referred to above.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3435 (XXX).

United Nations Environment
Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling recommendations 24, 36, 37, 74, 85 and
l 02 of the Action Plan for the Human Environment21
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, held at Stockholm from 5 to
16 June 1972,
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVII), 2996
(XXVII) and 2997 (XXVII) <;>f 15 December 19~2
concerning, inter alia, co-operation. between Sta!e~ _m
the field of the environment, international respons1b1hty
of States in regard to the environm~nt and the es~ablishment of the Governing Council of the Umted
Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling its resolution 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
Noting resolution IV of the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Lima from 25 to 30 August 1975, 22 condemning the
colonialist Powers and/ or aggressors that have neglected to remove the materi~l remnants of w~rs and
acts of aggression, such as mmes, and demandmg th~t
they should remove such material remn~nts of t~eir
acts, indicate their whereabouts and proVIde techrucal
assistance for their removal,
Recognizing that most developing countries have
been subjected to foreign occupation and exposed to
wars waged by certain colonialist Powers, thus incurring tremendous losses of lives and property,
Emphasizing that it is the duty of the international
community to take adequate measures to protect and
improve the environment, including, in particular, the
continuation and strengthening of international cooperation in this field,
1. Recognizes that the development of certain developing countries has been impeded by the mat~rial
remnants of those wars, the most important of which
are mines, which continue to be present in their territories;
2. Condemns the colonialist Powers which have neglected to remove those material remnants of such
wars, particularly mines, and considers them to be
responsible for any material and moral damage suffered by the countries in which such mines were placed;
21 See

Report of the United Natio11s Conference on the
H11ma11 Environment (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.II.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. II, sect. B.
22 See A/10217 and Corr.l, annex I.

53

3. Calls upon those States which took part in tl1ose
wars to make available forthwith to the affected State
all information on the areas in which such mines were
placed, incl_uding maps indicating the position of those
areas, and on the types of mines;
4. Calls upon those States which created this situation to compensate forthwith the countries in which
such mines were placed for any material and moral
damage suffered by them as a result thereof and to
take speedy measures to provide technical assistance
for the removal of such mines;
5. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to undertake a study
of the problem of the material remnants of wars, particularly mines, and their effect on the environment,
and to submit a report on the subject to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3436 (XXX). Conventions and protocols in the
field of the environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 23 adopted at Stockholm on 16 June 1972, which was intended, inter alia,
to promote international law in the field of the environment,
Recalling with appreciation decisions 24 (Ill) of
30 April 1975 and 35 (III) of 2 May 1975 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,24
Expressing the conviction that the development of
adequate environmental law is an essential supporting
measure for the implementation of the policies, strategies and recommendations of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Noting with satisfaction that a number of global and
regional conventions and protocols in the field of the
environment have been negotiated and adopted since
the adoption of the Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,
Concerned that existing international conventions or
protocols in the field of the environment have not yet
received the wide acceptance and application they
deserve,
Convinced of the need for further elaboration of
conventions and protocols in the field of the environment,
1. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to take such measures as may be necessary for the realization of the
objectives and the implementation of the strategies relating to the programme of the United Nations Environment Programme in the field of national and international environmental law and, in particular, to take
measures designed to provide technical assistance to
23 Report of the U11ited Nations Conference on the Human
Environment
( United Nations publication, Sales No.

E.73.II.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. I.
24 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), annex I.

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

54

developing countries, at their request, for the development of their national environmental legislation;
2. Urges all States entitled to become parties, as
appropriate, to existing conventions and protocols in
the field of the environment to do so as soon as
possible;
3. Requests the depositaries of the conventions referred to above to inform the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme periodically of the status of those conventions;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to assist States, upon
request, in preparing proposals for legislative or other
measures necessary for their adherence to conventions
in the field of environmental management;
5. Further requests the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme to keep the
General Assembly informed annually of any new international convention concluded in the field of the environment and of the status of existing conventions, with
particular reference to ratifications, accessions and entry
into force, as well as of the intention to become parties
to such conventions expressed by Governments during
the year between sessions of the Council.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3437 (XXX). Report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2849 (XXVI), of 20 December 1971 and 2994 (XXVII), 2995 (XXVII),
2996 (XXVII), 2997 (XXVII), 3000 (XXVII) and
3002 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
Recalling its resolutions 3129 (XXVIII), 3131
(XXVIII) and 3133 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973,
Recalling the Declaration2" and the Programme of
Action 26 on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, as well as the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, 27 which lay down the
foundations of the new international economic order,
Also recalling its resolution 3326 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974,
Reaffirming that the protection, preservation and
enhancement of the environment for present and future
generations is a responsibility of all States,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its third session, 28
Considering the need to ensure co-operation in carrying out the activities of the United Nations Environment Programme and in implementing its decisions,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the work of its third session;
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to continue to bear
in mind the need for the Programme to be in line with
the relevant provisions of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, with the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States and with the
25 Resolution 3201

(S-VI).

26 Resolution 3202 (S-VI).
27 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
28 Official Records of the General

sion, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025).

Assembly, Thirtieth Ses-

decisions of the· General Assembly at its seventh spe
cial session;
3. Takes note of the report of the Executive Di
rector on co-operation in the field of the environmen
concerning natural resources shared by two or mor,
States;29
4. Requests the Executive Director, in consultatio1
with the Governing Council, to continue to implemen
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3324
(XXIX) in developing the work programme and th,
programme activities of the Fund of the United Nation
Environment Programme;
5. Requests the Executive Director to inform th,
General Assembly, at its thirty-first session, of actio1
taken pursuant to paragraph 7 of Assembly resoluti01
3226 (XXIX) of 12 November 1974, regarding co
operation between the United Nations Environmen
Programme and the United Nations Scientific Com
mittee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation;
6. Requests the specialized agencies, the Intema
tional Atomic Energy Agency and other organization
of the United Nations system to continue their activ
co-operation in carrying out the activities of the Unit~
Nations Environment Programme, allocating the neces
sary priorities and resources for the maximum succes
of those activities.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3438 (XXX). Habitat: United Nations Confereno
on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3001 (XXVII) of 15 De
cember 1972, 3128 (XXVIII) of 13 December 197:
and 3325 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 on the prep
arations for Habitat: United Nations Conference 01
Human Settlements,
Having noted with appreciation the earlier report
of the Secretary-General called for in decision 4 (I)
adopted by the Governing Council of the United Nation
Environment Programme on 21 June 1973, 30 and i1
General Assembly resolution 3128 (XXVIIJ), 31
Recognizing the important contributions to the prep
arations for t~e Conference made by the regional prep
aratory meetmgs,
Noting with satisfacti<?n the active support given b:
Governments to, the obJective of the Conference an<
the assistance lent to its preparation by interested or
gans of the United Nations and intergovernmental an,
non-governmental organizations,
Expressing its appreciation for decision 37 (III) ,3
adopted by the Governing Council of the Unite<
Nations Environment Programme on 23 April 1975
allocating additional funds to the audio-visual pro
gramme of the Conference with the view, in particular
of assisting developing countries in the preparation o
their audio-visual presentations,
Recognizing the importance of ensuring that the globa
efforts for the improvement of human settlements be
supplemented and made more effective by measures anc
programmes at the regional and subregional levels,
2 9 UNEP/GC/44 and Corr.I and 2 and Add.I.
30 A/9238.
31 A/9729.
32 See Official Record, of the General Assembly,

Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), annex I.

Thirtietl
