S/PV.8995

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8995th meeting

Tuesday, 15 March 2022, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Asokan
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28765 (E)
*2228765*

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

continues to spill into the region. On 21 February,
shrapnel from a drone intercepted over Jizan city’s
King Abdullah Airport wounded 16 civilians.

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Mr. Grundberg: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council again on
the situation in Yemen and on the relentless efforts of
the United Nations to support a peaceful resolution of
this conflict. Yemenis have been denied the possibility
of living in peace for too many years. We need a joint
concerted effort by Yemenis and the international
community to break this never-ending cycle of violence
and lay the foundation for a sustainable peace.
Allow me first to give a few updates on the past
month’s developments. In Taiz, the exchange of
artillery shelling has again inflicted civilian casualties
and damage to residential buildings. Hostilities
have also been reported in Sa’dah and Ad Dali’
governorates. Air strikes inside Yemen continue, this
month primarily on front lines in Ma’rib and Hajjah. In
Ma’rib, Ansar Allah continues its offensive, which has
caused enormous harm to civilians for more than two
years. In Al-Hudaydah’s southern districts, hostilities
continue, with reports of civilian casualties, including
women and children. The United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement is working to rebuild
communication between the parties, re-establish
avenues for de-escalation and enhance the Mission’s
monitoring of the ports, while expanding its patrolling
reach. I join Major General Beary in stressing the need
to maintain the civilian nature of the ports, which are
a lifeline for millions of Yemenis. The violence also
2/19

15/03/2022

Sometimes territory exchanges hands; sometimes
it changes back. We see front lines go quiet in one part
of the country, only to intensify elsewhere. Always, we
see civilians paying an unacceptable price for choices
over which they have no influence. Through the ebbs
and flows of the conflict, the fact remains that a
military approach is not going to produce a sustainable
solution. Years of fighting have only destroyed Yemen’s
institutions, economy, social fabric and environment.
As UNICEF reported, at least 47 children were killed
or maimed in Yemen during just the first two months
of this year. More than 10,200 children were verified
injured or killed over the past seven years, with the
actual numbers likely to be much higher.
As the fighting goes on, the economic crisis
continues to deepen. As we will also hear from
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, it is likely to get
worse. In Aden and the surrounding governorates,
the Yemeni rial has decreased by 20 per cent against
the dollar since January, raising concerns of another
precipitous decline in the currency, increasing prices
and deepening divisions in the nationwide economy.
Tangible measures are needed to stabilize the currency.
Throughout Yemen, accessing fuel is increasingly
difficult. That is particularly acute in Ansar Allahcontrolled areas, where fuel shortages have grown even
more severe. Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8966),
one ship carrying cooking gas has entered Al-Hudaydah
port; two fuel vessels remain in the coalition holding
area, waiting for clearance. Impediments to overland
deliveries have aggravated shortages. The currency
depreciation and fuel shortages impact Yemenis’
everyday needs — clean water, food, transportation,
electricity and health care. Civilians will be affected
even more during this period as Yemeni households
prepare for the holy month of Ramadan.
Yemenis also continue to live with severe
restrictions on their freedom of movement. The
closure of Sana’a airport prevents many Yemenis in
the north from travelling abroad. Ongoing fighting, the
proliferation of checkpoints and the closure of access
points, especially in Taiz, impede Yemenis’ movements
within the country. International Women’s Day this
month was a reminder that women and girls face
additional movement restrictions with the imposition
of a male guardian. Against the backdrop of those
22-28765

15/03/2022

S/PV. 8995

The situation in the Middle East

exceptional challenges, we see Yemeni women coming
together to advocate powerfully for political change.
In Taiz, for example, women, young people and civil
society recently launched a campaign to challenge the
arbitrary demand for a guardian when women apply for
a passport and to insist that Yemeni law be upheld. That
campaign has achieved initial success, with the Prime
Minister issuing directives to the Ministry of Interior
to uphold the law.
I am keenly aware of the urgent need to halt the
violence and to provide relief to Yemenis. That is why,
in parallel to my work on the framework, I am actively
exploring options with the parties regarding immediate
de-escalation measures that could reduce the violence,
ease the fuel crisis and improve freedom of movement.
With Ramadan approaching, I hope that the parties will
engage swiftly and constructively with my proposals
so as to bring the people of Yemen some much-needed
hope and relief. In that regard, I am looking forward to
the opportunity to engage with the leadership of Ansar
Allah in Sana’a on this issue and on how we can move
the political process forward.
However, as I have said before, any potential
de-escalation measures will not hold unless they
are supported by a political process. That is why my
framework and its attempt to chart a path towards
reaching an inclusive political settlement are vital.
Since I briefed the Council last month, my Office
has launched a series of structured consultations
intended to inform the development of my framework.
I am encouraged by the interest and active engagement
from Yemeni political parties, components, experts
and civil society representatives. I am also grateful for
the very constructive discussion that I had earlier this
month with President Hadi Mansour about the process.
Over the past week, I have held bilateral meetings
with leaders from the General People’s Congress party
and with delegations from the Al-Islah party, the
Yemeni Socialist Party, the Nasserist Unionist People’s
Organization and the Southern Transitional Council.
I want to express my gratitude to the Government of
Jordan for facilitating the holding of those meetings
in Amman, and I want to thank the members of the
Council and other Member States that have shown clear
support for the consultations.
I am focusing the consultations on identifying
short- and longer-term priorities for the agenda of the
multitrack process envisaged for the framework. I am

also exploring guiding principles for the process and
gathering an understanding of the participants’ vision
for the future. I hope that the consultations mark the
beginning of a serious and structured conversation
between Yemenis about finding an end to the war.
In the coming weeks, I will hold consultations
with more Yemeni political components, security and
economic actors and civil society representatives.
Furthermore, I have strongly encouraged all political
parties and civil society organizations to include
at least 30 per cent women representatives in the
consultations, and my Office continues to follow up
with the delegations to encourage them to reach that
standard. I also intend to consult the broader Yemeni
public, including young people, to ensure that the
framework reflects public priorities and aspirations.
Following all these years of war, there is a need
for serious, constructive and solution-oriented political
dialogue. The consultations held in Amman are an
encouraging reminder that this is possible. Together, we
need to pursue solutions that will not only end the war,
but also build the foundations for a sustainable peace. I
will continue to look to the members of the Council to
support the process as it moves forward.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing.

Arabic):I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I extend my best wishes to the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Emirates,
Ambassador Nusseibeh. I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council. As we heard from
Mr. Grundberg, after more than seven years of war,
Yemen is becoming what humanitarians often refer
to as a chronic emergency. And, as aid workers know,
there are grave risks in chronic emergencies, namely
inertia and fatigue. We must not give into those forces.
Tomorrow, the Secretary-General will join the
President of Switzerland and the Foreign Minister
of Sweden in hosting a high-level pledging event for
Yemen. Aid agencies are seeking nearly $4.3 billion
to help more than 17 million people across the country
this year. Yemen suffers globally from the terrible
statistic that it has the highest rate, as a percentage of
its overall population, of people in need. That is why
we so often hear that it is one of the gravest global
humanitarian catastrophes.

22-287653/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

Tomorrow’s event is not just about the money,
although that is tremendously important. It is also an
opportunity for the international community to show
that we are not giving up on Yemen, even after all these
years, and with new crises emerging. That is a very
important message because Yemen still urgently needs
help. Hunger, disease and other miseries — as we have
been hearing from Mr. Grundberg — are rising faster
than aid agencies can roll them back.
New nationwide assessments run by our
humanitarian partners in Yemen confirm that
23.4 million people now need some form of assistance.
That is three of every four people — a vastly astonishing
figure that is deeply troubling. Among them, 19 million
will go hungry. That is an increase of almost 20 per
cent since last year, and we believe — and I use these
words carefully — that more than 160,000 of those will
face famine-like conditions.
Despite many calls for dialogue and a ceasefire — as
Mr. Grundberg has just reminded us — hostilities persist
along nearly 50 front lines. This includes Ma’rib, where
the Houthi offensive continues to this day, two years
in, and Hajjah, where clashes have escalated sharply in
recent weeks.
Last year, hostilities killed or injured more than
2,500 civilians and forced nearly 300,000 people to flee
their homes — now amounting to 4.3 million people
who have been displaced in Yemen since 2015.
The war has also accelerated Yemen’s economic
problems, pushing more families into destitution. This
collapse is among the largest drivers of humanitarian
needs. We see this in so many of the crises that we
discuss in the Chamber.
Unfortunately, the outlook is grim. Yemen relies on
commercial imports for about 90 per cent of its food
and nearly all its fuel and other essential goods. Many
of those goods could soon be much harder to obtain and
only at a greater cost. About a third of Yemen’s wheat,
as we were discussing before this meeting, comes from
Russia and Ukraine, where the current conflict may
restrict supply and push up food prices, which already
nearly doubled in Yemen last year. And these could go
much higher. There is no doubt of the consequences and
of the harm that this will cause to the lives of so many
Yemeni families.
Fuel imports, as Mr. Grundberg reminded us, have
also fallen sharply recently through Al-Hudaydah,
4/19

15/03/2022

where fuel volumes last month were less than half the
average. That drop is contributing to fuel shortages and
price rises, which are likely to become even more acute
as energy prices globally continue to rise.
All of this means that Yemen’s import-dependent
economy, because of events that have nothing to do
with Yemen, is even more fragile now than just a few
weeks ago. The Yemeni economy needs the support of
all of us, including through foreign-exchange injections
and other measures, in order to avoid risking further
damage. We are very hopeful that Governments in the
region will also look to this as an urgent priority.
Much of what I have just described will already
be familiar to the Council and the wider international
community because, since 2015, donors have spent
nearly $14 billion on United Nations appeals to reduce
the suffering. It is an exceptional, extraordinary and
generous sum. More than 75 per cent of that money
has come from just six donors — the United States, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom, Germany and the European
Commission, who footed so much of that bill. I would
like to thank all donors for their exceptional generosity
over the years. It has made an enormous difference, and
it is important to take stock of what that generosity and
the humanitarian programmes it spawns has achieved.
First and foremost, for the dog that does not bark,
there has been no mass starvation in Yemen, as we were
so often reminded might be coming. The country started
down that dark road several times, including early last
year, only to be pulled back by timely, well-funded
humanitarian action. That is an important success. The
new increase in the food security numbers I mentioned
earlier show how important it is to continue that effort
to contain and repel the prospect of such starvation.
Initial research also indicates that humanitarian
action has helped keep morbidity and mortality rates
steady during the conflict. In other words, without the
level of the response, many more people in Yemen would
have fallen sick and died. That is another critical result.
Those and other achievements are the result
of collective action — not the action of one. Last
year, more than 200 aid agencies — the great
majority of them being Yemeni non-governmental
organizations — worked together, in coordination
with international organizations, including the United
Nations, through the response plan — we will be
launching this year’s tomorrow — to help nearly
22-28765

15/03/2022

S/PV. 8995

The situation in the Middle East

12 million people every month. That aid reaches all 333
districts across the country. That is what was true last
year and that is what we must hope for this year.
We have always been clear, however, that delivering
that aid is much harder than it should be. We are
especially alarmed about growing insecurity for United
Nations personnel and other aid workers, including
recent abductions of staff. Efforts continue at all levels
to secure their release. Those kidnappings, in addition
to a rise in carjackings and other incidents, may signal
the start of a very dangerous trend. Houthi authorities
also continue to detain two United Nations staff who
were arrested in Sana’a in November — a completely
unacceptable violation of United Nations privileges
and immunities.
Beyond the security risks, humanitarian aid agencies
also continue to face the familiar bureaucratic and
other obstacles that hinder their work. Those problems
are especially severe in Houthi-controlled areas, where
they include restrictions on movement, attempts to
interfere with aid operations and other challenges.
Last year, 2021, those kinds of obstacles delayed or
otherwise affected assistance for millions of people.
Here, too, there have been some improvements.
Over the past two years, agencies have worked very
closely with donors, many represented in the Chamber,
and other stakeholders to address those challenges and
impediments through detailed negotiations. One of
the key improvements is the completion of the three
new needs assessments that produced the figures I
cited earlier, but there is much more work to be done.
Many more improvements are still needed, including
in data collection, monitoring and other areas. They
are possibly dull but absolutely essential elements of
an effective humanitarian response plan. That remains
a top priority for agencies and donors, working closely
together this year and coming together tomorrow. The
Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation, a massive
operation and task, will be published in the coming
weeks. It will help us, as it is an objective review of
humanitarian performance.
On a separate and positive note, last week
Houthi authorities in Sana’a signed a memorandum
of understanding on the FSO SAFER tanker. That
confirms the agreement in principle we announced
last month — on which David Gressly, humanitarian
leader in Yemen, has been working — and brings the
world just one step closer to solving a very dangerous

problem. We must hope that that will be achieved
in May, at the latest. When I held Mr. Grundberg’s
position, I frequently spoke to the Council about the
difficulties that the United Nations has encountered in
trying to reach an agreement on the issue. Let us hope
that it works. I sincerely thank the Government of the
Netherlands for its support and assistance in bringing
in this private sector hybrid operation.
Nonetheless, all of those achievements are at
risk, as aid agencies face alarming and unprecedented
funding shortages, as I warned here last month (see
S/PV.8966). It is astonishing to say that two-thirds of
major United Nations programmes have already scaled
down or closed in recent months for lack of money. It
includes deep cuts to core services, such as food aid,
water, health care and relief for people fleeing violence
in Ma’rib and elsewhere.
If I have one message for the world today, it is
this — let us not stop now. The United Nations and
its Members must keep working together to help the
millions of Yemenis who urgently need and deserve it.
They must show that being out of the headlines does
not mean being left behind. We will look for generous
pledging at tomorrow’s event and prompt disbursement.
Attention and investment are needed in the longer
term, too, to support Mr. Grundberg’s efforts. As my
predecessor said every time he spoke in the Chamber,
the efforts of the Special Envoy are to bring peace and
resolution to the conflict, which is the hope of all of us
and the greatest priority.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their valuable and sobering briefings today.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the launch
of Mr. Grundberg’s consultations with the parties this
month. We commend his inclusive approach, which
invites the views of a wide range of Yemenis. We
encourage all parties to engage constructively, in line
with their obligations under resolution 2624 (2022). I
would like to thank Council members for their efforts in
the adoption of that resolution. It imposed, for the first
time, an arms embargo on the Houthis as a whole, and
explicitly denounced the Houthi terrorist group. That is

22-287655/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

vital as we witness continued cross-border attacks on
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, including
last Thursday’s attack on a Saudi oil refinery.
It is important to highlight that resolution 2624
(2022) was also clear in its support for the continued
maintenance of humanitarian access and commercial
imports of food, fuel and other essential civilian
commodities into all Yemen’s ports. The Council has
not targeted humanitarian activity or trade.
Resolution 2624 (2022) also called for the immediate
return of all United States and United Nations staff
to their families and for Houthi withdrawal from the
United States Embassy. The United Kingdom strongly
condemns the detention in February of an additional
United States staff member. We also call for the Houthis
to release British national Luke Symons.
As we have heard from Mr. Griffiths today, across
Yemen the conflict continues to have a devastating
human toll. The evidence from the Integrated Food
Security Phase Classification and from today’s
briefing is clear — Yemen is experiencing drastically
deteriorating food security. As 7 million Yemenis
risk starvation in 2022 and the number of those in
famine-like conditions is expected to increase fivefold,
the Yemen pledging conference convenes tomorrow in
need of $4.27 billion. The United Kingdom calls on all
donors, including those in the region, to step up.
Finally, I would like to end on a hopeful humanitarian
note by welcoming the signature this month of the
memorandum of understanding between the Houthis
and the United Nations regarding the transfer of oil
from the FSO SAFER tanker, as Mr. Griffiths briefed
us. That is an important step. We must now all act
together in support of the initiative.
Mr. Asokan (India): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for their briefings.
It is unfortunate that the calls of the Council and
the international community for a nationwide ceasefire
and urgent de-escalation of tensions by all parties to
the conflict are yet to be heeded. Military operations
continue undermining the peace and security of not
just Yemen but the entire region. We strongly condemn
the cross-border terrorist attacks, using missiles and
drones, on the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia,
which have resulted in the death or injury of innocent
civilians, including Indian nationals.
6/19

15/03/2022

Reports about the possible use of Al-Hudaydah’s
Red Sea ports for staging maritime attacks are also
deeply worrisome. Freedom of movement of the
personnel of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement must be ensured to facilitate
the constant monitoring and reporting of any possible
misuse of Al-Hudaydah’s ports, which remain the
primary gateway for Yemen’s humanitarian aid and
commercial inputs.
As outlined in resolution 2624 (2022), adopted
last month, we demand the urgent release of the crew
members of the vessel Rwabee, whose on-board crew
includes seven Indian nationals. They continue to
be detained unlawfully. Regular access to them and
updates on their condition must be ensured by Ansar
Allah until they are released.
We welcome the signing of the memorandum of
understanding on the FSO SAFER tanker. Swift action
is now required to ensure the operationalization of the
memorandum of understanding to avert a potential
environmental, maritime and humanitarian catastrophe
in the Red Sea.
We call upon all parties involved in Yemen to
move from the battlefield to the negotiating table, in
line with resolution 2624 (2022). We emphasize the
need for sustained and focused diplomacy to bring
political discussions back on track. In that regard, we
note the commencement of the wide-ranging, inclusive
consultations being carried out by Special Envoy
Grundberg to finalize a comprehensive framework for
a peace process. Such a framework should consider and
address the legitimate aspirations of all Yemenis. We
call upon all parties to engage with the Special Envoy
in those consultations, without any preconditions.
In that context, the resumption of consultations
between Saudi Arabia and the Southern Transitional
Council is a notable development and a move in the right
direction. Sustained dialogue between the Government
of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council is
also essential for resolving issues that are related to
the implementation of the Riyadh Agreement. We
note that the multitrack approach of the consultations,
initiated by Special Envoy Grundberg, includes an
economic track. India has repeatedly underscored
the need to address the disruption to key segments of
Yemen’s economy and its fragmentation. A sustained
solution to the unfolding humanitarian crisis lies in
concrete economic measures that benefit the people of
22-28765

15/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen. Progress on the economic track can also build
confidence among the parties and feed into the political
and security tracks. I request that the Special Envoy
give due attention to that aspect in his consultations
with the Yemini parties.
Pending an economic recovery and the cessation
of the military conflict, humanitarian aid operations
are the only lifeline for millions of Yemenis, yet are
currently at risk owing to severe funding shortfalls.
Yemeni women and children are particularly bearing
the brunt of the closure and scaling down of major
United Nations aid programmes. We hope that
tomorrow’s high-level pledging conference will result
in garnering enhanced support for the 2022 United
Nations humanitarian response plan for Yemen.
India has centuries-old relations with Yemen and
our people-to-people ties remain very strong even today.
We have extended humanitarian support for Yemen
in the past and we remain deeply committed to doing
so today. Our doors are open to the people of Yemen,
even during the tough times of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Thousands of Yemenis receive treatment in
our hospitals every year and several thousand students
continue to pursue their studies in India. Last year alone,
we issued more than 6,000 medical visas for Yemenis
and more than 400 student visas to Yemeni students.
Let me conclude by reiterating India call for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire across Yemen,
which must be followed by a robust and inclusive
political process that fully respects Yemen’s unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. We
believe that with the effective international pressure by
regional and international actors on Yemeni parties,
a lasting an inclusive political settlement in Yemen
is achievable.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings.
We are deeply concerned about the current level of
food insecurity and hunger in Yemen. Food assistance
is urgently needed by nearly 13 million Yemenis,
including children suffering from malnutrition, as well
as pregnant or nursing mothers. And 2 million children
under the age of five are stunted — a condition that will
permanently influence their mental development.
The

That human-made tragedy is truly unacceptable.
recent closure of humanitarian assistance

S/PV. 8995

programmes in Yemen owing to the lack of funding
is the opposite of what is needed. The high-level
pledging event on the humanitarian crisis in Yemen to
be held tomorrow presents an important opportunity
to mobilize attention and financial support for the
deteriorating humanitarian situation.
Turning to security developments, we continue to
be greatly alarmed by the serious military escalation of
the conflict in Yemen by all parties. Let me underline
Norway’s strong call on all parties to exercise restraint
and let me stress once again that it is the children who
pay the highest price as violence escalates. In the first
two months of 2022, 47 children were killed or injured.
We wish to remind parties of their obligations to
respect international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, in particular their obligations to
protect civilian lives and infrastructure. We reiterate
the importance of ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
De-escalation, a nationwide ceasefire and a
turn towards a political solution represent the only
path forward to end the cycle of violence. Norway
welcomes the Special Envoy’s consultations on the
framework for an inclusive multitrack process. His
recent and upcoming meetings with leaders of Yemeni
political parties, the security and economic sectors
and civil society, as well as regional and international
stakeholders, will be essential to building a coalition
for a peaceful settlement.
We call on all parties to prioritize the needs and
interests of the Yemeni people by fully cooperating
with the Special Envoy, without preconditions and
without delay. We also commend the emphasis that
Mr. Grundberg has placed on women’s meaningful
contribution to the framework consultations.
The recent United Nations Global Assessment
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, which details
lessons learned from women’s leadership in mediation
over communal water resources, showcases how
inclusion is not a talking point but a smart approach to
building peace, boosting livelihoods and strengthening
community resilience.
Lastly, we wish to welcome the progress made in
mitigating the threat caused by the FSO SAFER oil
tanker. It is a positive step that Ansar Allah has signed
a memorandum of understanding with the United

22-287657/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

Nations. We urge continued momentum to quickly
resolve the issue.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, I
would like to thank Special Envoy Hans Grunberg and
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
informative briefings on the overall difficult situation
in Yemen. I also welcome the participation of the
representative of Yemen at this meeting.
The prevailing situation in Yemen reinforces the
need for the Security Council and the international
community to continue to support efforts aimed at
finding a lasting and peaceful resolution to the conflict,
while also responding to the worsening humanitarian
crisis to bring a respite to the suffering people of
that country.
We take note of the matters raised in the briefings
and wish to emphasize the following points.
First, we condemn, and call for an end to, the
unremitting targeted attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure in blatant disregard for the
precepts of international law and international
humanitarian law. The ordinary people of Yemen
continue to suffer needless deaths and casualties
from the unabated hostilities and military escalations
in the Ma’rib and Hajjah governorates and across
several conflict lines in the country. Those dangerous
escalations have resulted in the highest civilian
casualties in at least three years, including the killing
of 47 children in January and February alone.
We therefore strongly support the call for a
nationwide ceasefire, which is most urgent now. The
conflicting parties must end the hostilities and commit
to working together in good faith to forge common
understandings for a political settlement of the conflict.
Finding common ground in the highly fragmented
society of Yemen has proven to be difficult and will
require the implementation of enhanced trust and
confidence-building measures among the people.
The facilitating role of the Special Envoy in that
context is vital to ensure an inclusive political process
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We therefore welcome and express our
support for his ongoing consultations with all parties
and stakeholders as part of the framework for a
comprehensive peace process. We stress the importance
for the parties to provide the space for the full, effective
and meaningful participation of Yemeni women at
8/19

15/03/2022

all stages of the peace process, noting their longdemonstrated willingness and capacity to engage in
communal and national efforts to resolve the conflict.
Secondly, we wish to highlight the urgent need for
funding in support of humanitarian operations. Worse
than the harrowing humanitarian situation itself would
be the failure of the international community and
donor partners to meet the challenge of an imminent
humanitarian catastrophe. We are hopeful that the highlevel pledging event that will be held tomorrow under
the benevolent auspices of the Governments of Sweden
and Switzerland will extend a lifeline to the millions of
Yemenis on the brink of starvation.
Thirdly, we stress the need for urgent measures to
stabilize the fast-deteriorating economy. We continue
to advocate for the lifting of import restrictions, in
accordance with the Stockholm Agreement, in order to
facilitate commercial imports and lessen the reliance
on humanitarian aid. Far-reaching measures, including
the peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine, are
needed to curtail significant import shocks, as 30 per
cent of Yemen’s wheat imports come from Ukraine.
We look forward to receiving further insights on the
implementation strategy for the economic framework
proposed by the United Nations to address the
underlying problems of poverty in Yemen.
We take note of the progress of the signing of the
memorandum of understanding among relevant parties
to enable work to proceed on the FSO SAFER tanker.
We urge continuous and open engagement among all
concerned parties with the sole objective of averting or
mitigating any environmental accident.
Finally, we affirm our support for a Yemeni-led,
Yemeni-owned political process under the auspices
of the United Nations, with the objective of finding a
comprehensive and lasting peace in Yemen.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
informative briefings.
Brazil welcomes the first round of bilateral
consultations held by the Special Envoy with Yemeni
stakeholders, and we reiterate our support for the Special
Envoy’s efforts aimed at establishing a structured and
inclusive political process. Brazil encourages all relevant
parties to engage fully and without preconditions, and
we also urge regional actors with direct influence in
22-28765

15/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen to do their utmost to support this initiative. We
take this opportunity to recall that unity of purpose and
unequivocal support are the main assets that we as the
Security Council can provide to the Special Envoy.
On the issue of inclusiveness, we note that
stakeholders and social groups that are not actively
involved in the conflict will nonetheless be essential to
achieving and sustaining peace. We therefore reiterate
our support for making women, youth and civil society
representatives an integral part of the consultations. It
is encouraging to see that all delegations that have met
the Special Envoy thus far have included women.
While these initial consultations are encouraging,
the situation on the ground keeps deteriorating. The
conflict rages on at almost 50 front lines, with record
numbers of unacceptable attacks against civilian
targets. The civilian population of Ma’rib, which
includes a million internally displaced persons, is
still under threat from the Houthis, who continue to
disregard international humanitarian law. The economy
is still on the path of implosion and fragmentation.
As we have heard from Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths, the humanitarian situation is desperate, and
the response underfunded. Special Envoy Grundberg
has correctly assessed that we cannot wait for a political
solution to tackle these issues. The international
community can and must do more.
With regard to the economy, Brazil supports
the implementation of the United Nations economic
framework for Yemen and reiterates its call for easing
restrictions on the Yemeni Red Sea ports and on
Sana’a airport. Imports are the lifeblood of the Yemeni
economy, and any unnecessary constraints should be
avoided. It is also essential to maintain the civilian
nature of the Al-Hodeidah ports and to ensure that they
are kept open for unimpeded entry of humanitarian
aid, as we have heard from the Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement.
Brazil also encourages other proactive measures,
such as foreign-exchange injection into the Yemeni
Central Bank.
We have yet to witness the full effects on Yemen of
the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, but shocks to oil, wheat
and other commodities’ international prices make it all
the more urgent to bolster the economy now before the
brunt of the crisis reaches Yemen. The parties on the
ground also have pressing responsibilities in this regard
and should refrain from imposing internal economic

S/PV. 8995

barriers or employing predatory economic practices,
which is an especially acute problem in Houthicontrolled areas.
On the humanitarian front, Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths has yet again painted a dismal
picture. The need for urgent aid keeps on expanding at
unsustainable rates. We commend Sweden, Switzerland
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for convening tomorrow’s pledging event in
Geneva, to which Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
referred. In the light of the numerous crises demanding
the world’s attention, we must do all we can to keep
Yemen at the top of the agenda. As with similar events
convened in previous years, Brazil will reiterate its
solidarity with the Yemeni people by announcing a
financial contribution.
Humanitarian aid is urgent and essential, but it is
not a solution. The need for ever-growing humanitarian
appeals will only subside when Yemen’s economic and
political woes are over. Supporting the economy and
moving the political process forward are as urgent as
sustaining the emergency humanitarian response.
Finally, we are encouraged by developments with
regard to the FSO SAFER tanker and urge the Houthis
to maintain their engagement with the United Nations
Resident Coordinator.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank our briefers, Special Envoy Grundberg
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, for their
tireless efforts, and I welcome the participation of the
Yemeni Permanent Representative at today’s meeting.
Today I want to address four aspects of the situation
in Yemen. Progress toward an inclusive political peace
process, the outrageous detention of United States and
United Nations locally employed staff, the results of the
Council’s latest resolution on Yemen (resolution 2624
(2022)), and the situation related to humanitarian fuel
and the FSO SAFER tanker.
First, the United States welcomes Special Envoy
Grundberg’s launch of an inclusive consultative process
to work towards a resolution of this heartbreaking
conflict. We applaud his work to incorporate the
perspectives of a wide range of Yemeni political and
civil society groups. The Security Council must
maintain unified support for his efforts, which offer a
valuable opportunity for Yemenis to develop a renewed
vision for political resolution of the conflict.

22-287659/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

We all know that this conflict has created significant
fractures and altered the balance of power on the
ground. For a peace process to be successful, it must
reflect these shifts and incorporate the perspectives and
the grievances of Yemenis across the country, including
calls for justice and accountability. We therefore call
on all parties to the conflict to take part fully and
meaningfully in the United Nations consultations.
That requires permitting Special Envoy Grundberg to
visit all the relevant cities, including Sana’a, without
preconditions. He has held in-person consultations
with senior leaders from the other key parties, and
a visit to Sana’a is long overdue. We also call on the
parties to ensure that delegations to these consultations
include diverse civil society representatives — women,
youth, people with disabilities and members of other
marginalized groups. These perspectives are essential
to identifying a durable resolution that improves the
lives of all Yemenis.
Secondly, we are saddened to confirm that the
Houthis have detained yet another member of our local
staff, who was abducted while shopping at a Sana’a
market on 15 February. This is unjust and unacceptable.
We call loudly and clearly for the immediate release of
our current and former Yemeni employees — and for
them to be released unharmed. It is time for the Houthis
to cease all threats against them and their families and
to release the United Nations staff and others they have
also detained.
Thirdly, we welcome the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2624 (2022), which renews the existing
travel-ban and asset-freeze measures for another year
and applies the arms embargo explicitly to the Houthis
as a group. The resolution includes strong language
condemning the illicit transfer of weapons to the
Houthis and the group’s cross-border terrorist attack on
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
Stopping the illegal flow of weapons from Iran
to the Houthis is a top priority. Those weapons are
only fuelling the war, destabilizing the region and
exacerbating the suffering of Yemenis. We cannot
stress enough the need for all Member States to strictly
implement the arms embargo.
Resolution 2624 (2022) includes strong language,
emphasizing the importance of facilitating humanitarian
assistance, remittances and unhindered imports of
critical goods like food and fuel. That language clearly
conveys the Security Council’s intent to ensure the
10/19

15/03/2022

new measures do not target humanitarian activity or
legitimate trade. We are grateful for the work that aid
organizations and commercial importers are doing to
stabilize Yemen’s economy and ensure the population
can meet its basic needs. We reiterate that the language
of the resolution is not intended to prevent that work
from proceeding.
That leads me to my fourth and final point about the
humanitarian, fuel and FSO SAFER tanker situations.
Sadly, Yemen remains one of largest humanitarian
crises in the world, as evidenced by the latest highly
concerning food insecurity data. Funding gaps have
already forced aid organizations to make significant
cuts to life-saving assistance, impacting millions of
Yemenis. Donors have an opportunity to change that on
16 March at the virtual 2022 high-level pledging event.
The United States is planning to make a significant
contribution, but it will take all donors working together
to meet Yemen’s dire needs. We must address Yemen’s
humanitarian crises now, otherwise the path to peace
will narrow.
Fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah port were up
in February but unfortunately due to actions by all the
parties, including Houthi stockpiling, the blockage of
imports from southern Yemen and the manipulation
of prices, Yemenis are still suffering from severe fuel
shortages. A comprehensive solution is needed to
address the fuel crisis facing Yemenis.
We encouraged by the signing on 5 March of a
memorandum of understanding to allow a vessel to
temporarily store oil from the FSO SAFER oil tanker
until a permanent solution is agreed. We urge all
parties to abide by that agreement in order to prevent
a humanitarian and environmental disaster. We think
the Netherlands for its work towards a solution and
encourage donors to provide the necessary funding to
implement that plan and forestall a tragic outcome.
The situation in Yemen remains dire. I sincerely
hope, as we all do, that the Special Envoy’s efforts
towards an inclusive peace process prove successful.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg for his detailed briefing. We commend his
efforts to overcome the current political impasse and
find a sustainable solution to the conflict in Yemen.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
the information he provided, once again giving us
the full picture of the devastating humanitarian and
22-28765

15/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

dire economic situations, in particular with regard to
food security.
The protracted conflict in Yemen has had a
devastating impact on civilians across the country, as
they suffer from destroyed critical infrastructure, a
lack of basic services, widespread abuse and weak and
fragmented governance. Nearly 400,000 Yemenis have
died during seven devastating years of war, in many
cases killed by indirect causes such as hunger. Seventy
per cent of the fatalities are children under 5 years old.
That is why reaching every one of them is critical.
Yemen must not become and then remain a forgotten
war due to inertia and fatigue, as Mr. Griffiths rightly
mentioned. In that respect, we hope that the conference
in Geneva will restore due attention to the Yemeni
people and their urgent needs.
There is no military solution to the conflict in
Yemen. Only a comprehensive and inclusive political
process can restore peace to the Yemeni people. We
fully support the consultation process launched by
Mr. Grundberg and call on all political actors and
stakeholders to engage meaningfully. He must be
granted full access throughout the country, including
Sana’a, and he must be able to meet all political actors
and stakeholders everywhere. The Council needs to be
united in support of the work of the Special Envoy and
his consultation process.
Yemen belongs to all its citizens. An inclusive
and credible process requires the full engagement and
participation of civil society actors, women and young
people, as well as marginalized groups, to move ahead
from the infernal and never-ending spiral of violence
towards a durable solution to the conflict. Regional
actors play a key role in the resolution of the conflict
in Yemen. In that respect, we welcome reports that the
Gulf Cooperation Council is considering inviting all
political actors in Yemen for consultations. That is the
news I heard this morning.
Agreeing to a ceasefire and respecting it is the
starting point for seeking a different outcome of the
situation in Yemen. That must be a priority. International
humanitarian law is a centrepiece of international
law that must be respected in every situation and in
any conflict, including in Yemen. Civilians must be
protected. The adoption of resolution 2624 (2022)
represents a concrete commitment to peace and security
in Yemen. Full respect for the arms embargo is a must
if we want to stop the proliferation of arms in Yemen

S/PV. 8995

and avoid the danger of them ending up in the wrong
hands or being used in cross-border terrorist attacks by
the Houthis in neighbouring countries, as we have seen
repeatedly, including last month.
Let me conclude by reiterating three key issues.
First, we praise the work of the Resident
Coordinator in Yemen and the Dutch authorities in
finding a sustainable solution to the issue of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker in the Red Sea. The memorandum of
understanding signed on 5 March must be implemented
by all the parties without delay.
Secondly, I reiterate that the kidnapping and
detainment by the Houthis of Yemini nationals
affiliated with the United States and the United Nations
must cease immediately.
Thirdly, I reiterate our condemnation of the seizure
and detention of the United Arab Emirates-flagged
merchant vessel and call on the Houthis to release the
ship and crew, as the Council requested on 14 January.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, for their respective briefings. I
welcome the participation of the representative of
Yemen in this meeting.
The briefings we just heard from Mr. Grundberg
and Mr. Griffiths highlight a deplorable situation that is
now spilling over into the region. The recent launch of
a missile in the busy waters of the Red Sea exacerbates
the insecurity of international shipping and highlights
the strong propensity of the crisis to flare up.
There is no doubt that the conflict in Yemen is
multidimensional, but I will focus my statement on two
aspects: first, the impasse in the security situation and
secondly, its humanitarian consequences.
In addition to being a threat to the region, the
escalation of the conflict in Yemen puts the lives of
millions of people at risk. Indeed, daily life for the
Yemeni people has been marked in recent months by
the multiplication of front lines and a record increase
in the number of civilian casualties. The escalation of
violence is most alarming given the continuation of
fighting that is spreading to neighbouring States, which
risks destabilizing the region further. It is clear that
the implementation of the Stockholm and Hudaydah
Agreements has been slow to materialize.

22-2876511/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

The lack of progress on the political front
contributes to the continuation of hostilities and hinders
the restoration of State authority throughout Yemen,
which is under severe strain. Only an inclusive dialogue
involving all segments of the Yemeni population,
including women, will put an end to the suffering
caused by the conflict to the civilian population.
We urge all parties and actors to cease hostilities
and exercise maximum restraint. The solution in
Yemen is a political, not a military one. But that cannot
be done without restoring trust and the willingness of
all to compromise.
We also denounce the indiscriminate use of
landmines, particularly on the west coast, whose
long-term consequences are appalling. Every year,
anti-personnel landmines kill and maim tens of
thousands of civilians, including children. Their
multiple impacts cause long-term injuries, as well as
severe psychological trauma.
The ongoing sexual violence and repression against
women, particularly women who are active in both
the professional and the political spheres, are of the
utmost concern to us. We condemn in the strongest
terms the systematic use of arrest, detention, torture,
sexual violence and rape against prominent women in
Yemeni society.
The humanitarian toll of the conflict is devastating
and has an impact on the livelihoods of millions of
Yemenis, while the country’s economy and basic
services continue to collapse. Famine, disease,
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
and internal and cross-border displacement remain
real concerns.
While we are aware of the many challenges
facing the international community, this situation
calls for its renewed commitment. In that regard, we
welcome tomorrow’s holding of a high-level pledging
conference under the auspices of the Secretary-General
to assist Yemen. However, as people’s survival cannot
depend on the generosity of donors in the long term,
the international community must also address the
underlying factors of this crisis.
I take this opportunity to once again call for the
accountability of all perpetrators of violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law in Yemen.
We also call for the access of the Special Envoy to all
parts of the country.
12/19

15/03/2022

We welcome the signing of an agreement between
the United Nations and the Houthis on the situation
of the FSO SAFER tanker, which gives real hope of
containing the environmental and humanitarian threats
posed by that ship.
Finally, we would like to express our support for
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg for his tireless efforts
in a complex environment. We positively note his
engagement with all stakeholders in this crisis — national,
regional and international actors — with a view to a
political settlement of this crisis.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
I welcome the presence of the representative of Yemen
at our meeting.
The seven-year conflict has brought irreparable
harm to the people of Yemen and caused immeasurable
damage to the country. The situation on the battlefield
over the past seven years has repeatedly proved that
there is no such thing as winner takes all and a military
approach cannot achieve the expected goal.
A Yemeni-led peace process is the only way
forward. Special Envoy Grundberg recently had
consultations with the relevant parties on political,
security and economic issues. China welcomes that
development. Having noted that the parties at the
meeting emphasized the need for a nationwide ceasefire
and the urgency of resuming negotiations, we call on all
parties to the conflict to heed the call of the Yemini
people from all sectors of society, cease all hostilities,
actively cooperate with the mediation efforts of the
Special Envoy, adhere to the general direction of a
political settlement, set reasonable expectations, show
the necessary flexibility and commit to resolving
differences through diplomatic means to achieve peace.
We hope that the countries that have influence over the
situation in Yemen will play a positive and constructive
role in that regard.
Last month, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2624 (2022), on sanctions against Yemen and
the extension of the mandate of the Panel of Experts
of the Committee established pursuant to paragraph
19 of resolution 2140 (2014) (see S/PV.8981). China’s
position on the sanctions is consistent. We pay close
attention to the impact of the sanctions. We hope
that such measures will help to encourage the parties
to the conflict to renounce the military option and
22-28765

15/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

return to the right track of political negotiations at an
early date. The Panel of Experts should carry out its
work in strict accordance with its mandate, maintain
objectivity and impartiality and provide accurate and
unbiased information.
We condemn all attacks targeting civilians and
civilian facilities, urge the immediate cessation of
cross-border attacks and security threats against the
United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia and support
the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia in their
efforts to safeguard their national security.
The Government and the people of Yemen need
the help of the international community, as UnderSecretary-General Griffiths has just told us. Yemen
is mired in a multiple humanitarian crisis. The
conflict is escalating. The pandemic is raging, and the
deteriorating economic situation is making life worse
for ordinary people.
China supports the Yemeni Government’s efforts
to stabilize the currency and build back its economy.
We support the efforts of the United Nations to promote
a short-, medium- and long-term economic framework
in Yemen. The parties to the conflict should ensure
the import, transport and supply of oil and essential
commodities and provide access for and facilitate
humanitarian relief operations.
I am pleased to hear that progress has been made on
the issue of the FSO SAFER tanker. I hope that the oil
in the tanker will be removed as soon as possible and
that the potential threat to the regional ecology will be
eliminated as early as possible.
The United Nations humanitarian projects in Yemen
are life-saving projects that must be sustained. I wish
tomorrow’s humanitarian pledging conference success.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I too would like to thank Hans Grundberg and
Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
As the Special Envoy said, the intensity of the
fighting on the ground is decreasing. But let us make
no mistake: that relative lull will be short-lived, since
the warring parties continue to favour the military
option, even though that will lead nowhere. As the
month of Ramadan approaches and in view of the
current de-escalation, France reiterates its call for a
nationwide ceasefire.

S/PV. 8995

I would also like to condemn the holding in
captivity by the Houthis of 13 people who work or
have worked for the United States Embassy in Yemen.
France calls for their immediate release and expresses
its solidarity with the United States and the Yemeni
families concerned.
As we know, the current conflict has consequences
for peace and security in the entire region. In that regard,
I would like to condemn the Houthi attack on a refinery
in Saudi Arabia. Such missile attacks are irresponsible
and unacceptable and must stop immediately.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen continues to
worsen. The threat of famine is increasing, particularly
due to the loss of supplies from Ukraine. Humanitarian
actors are warning of the imminent risk of their
assistance being cut due to funding difficulties.
The donor conference scheduled for tomorrow,
which was mentioned by Martin Griffiths in particular,
should enable the humanitarian needs to be met.
France will be there. We will continue to increase our
contribution to the humanitarian response in Yemen.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian
personnel and civilian infrastructure, is an obligation
for all parties. It is essential to allow all United
Nations and humanitarian personnel to move without
fear of being targeted or arrested. In that regard, we
condemn in the strongest terms the abduction of
humanitarian personnel and the arbitrary arrests of
United Nations staff. We call for their immediate and
unconditional release.
Full humanitarian access to all people in need must
be guaranteed. We reiterate our call for the removal of
all bureaucratic obstacles.
On the political front, France welcomes the holding
of the first round of political consultations in Amman
under the auspices of the Special Envoy, to whom we
give our full support. We therefore support his efforts
to maintain an intra-Yemeni political process despite a
security context that remains adverse. France welcomes
the cooperative attitude of the Yemeni parties, which
held talks with Mr. Grundberg this week and presented
their vision of the Yemen of tomorrow. I welcome the
participation of Yemeni women in those exchanges.
We call on the Houthis to stop their prevarication and
bargaining and to also participate in the consultations
in the coming weeks. It is time for them to face up to
their responsibilities.

22-2876513/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

We call on regional actors and the members of the
Council to support the work of the Special Envoy. It is
also essential to ensure that Yemeni civil society and
women have a voice in all future negotiations.
Finally, we welcome the signing of a memorandum
of understanding on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Urgent
action is needed to avoid an environmental disaster that
would have a devastating effect on Yemen and on the
region, as a whole.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths for their briefings. I also welcome
the participation of the representative of Yemen in
this meeting.
Kenya remains concerned about the intensified
hostilities between factions across several front lines.
This unfortunate trajectory, if it is not stopped, will
erode any peace gains and threatens to sink the country
deeper into conflict from which it will be more difficult
to emerge. We particularly condemn the targeting of
civilians and civilian infrastructure, noting that the
vulnerable, including children, women, the elderly and
people living with disabilities, bear a disproportionate
impact of such atrocious acts.
We reaffirm our support for the ongoing relentless
efforts of Special Envoy Hans Grundberg in search of
a sustainable political solution to the Yemeni crisis. We
urge all the parties to engage constructively with the
Special Envoy and commit to cessation of hostilities, at
a minimum, in order to create an environment conducive
for negotiations towards the desired political solution.
Kenya regrets that the fighting has displaced around
20,000 people since the start of this year alone. That is
exacerbating the already dire humanitarian situation
that is becoming increasingly costly and burdensome.
The restrictions on commercial ships bringing fuel
into Al-Hudaydah is further aggravating the grim
humanitarian and economic situation. Kenya calls on
all stakeholders that have control of infrastructure
necessary for humanitarian access, particularly parties
to the conflict, to ensure that such infrastructure is
protected and availed for humanitarian use.
With approximately a third of Yemen’s wheat grain
imports originating in Europe, the ongoing armed
conflict in Ukraine is likely to result in worsening food
shortages, as noted today by Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths. There is an urgent need for the relevant United
14/19

15/03/2022

Nations agencies to consider innovative approaches to
mitigate that shortage.
We are worried that the increasing demand for
humanitarian assistance from current and emerging
conflict zones across the world is resulting in huge
funding gaps for Yemen’s humanitarian needs. The
deeply disturbing scaling down and closure of at least
26 out of 41 major United Nations humanitarian and
development programmes in Yemen due to inadequate
funding attests to that.
We appeal to the international community to take
urgent action to avert the looming famine by surging the
necessary support, including through participating in
tomorrow’s high-level pledging conference on Yemen.
The parties to the conflict have a critical role to
play in humanitarian action. They must de-escalate and
provide safe corridors in order to ensure that assistance
reaches all in need.
Kenya notes the positive developments on the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, and we encourage the United Nations
agencies to keep coordinating with the stakeholders
towards the urgent finalization of the project.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to
working closely with members of the council and all
stakeholders of goodwill in support of efforts to restore
peace and stability to Yemen and to allow its people to
rebuild their lives.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings today.
The conflict in Yemen has caused unthinkable
suffering for too long. Yemenis have endured more
than seven years of conflict, which has savaged their
country. As we heard from Mr. Griffiths, they continue
to battle everyday with extreme levels of hunger. And,
as we know from the Integrated Phase Classification
report, 19 million people across Yemen will face acute
food insecurity, with 160,000 living in famine-like
conditions — the highest number in years.
The humanitarian community is providing
life-saving assistance on the ground in challenging
circumstances. We commend their efforts. However,
we are increasingly concerned that a lack of funding
is forcing many humanitarian programmes to scale
back or shut down entirely. That risks leaving millions
without access to food, water and other life-saving
22-28765

15/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8995

services. Half of those who need life-saving assistance
are children.

reiterate our call for the release of the vessel Rwabee
and its crew.

The high-level pledging event taking place
tomorrow is therefore very welcome, and Ireland
is pleased to participate. It is clear that Yemen still
needs the strong support of the international donor
community. It is also clear that sustainable solutions are
required. The United Nations economic plan for Yemen
provides that opportunity, and we call for progress in
its operationalization. Ultimately, however, only an end
to the conflict can truly lead to long-term stability and
prosperity for the Yemeni people.

Innocent civilians have suffered for too long. Air
strikes and all other attacks where civilians and civilian
objects bear the brunt of the impact are unacceptable.
Let me take this opportunity to once again remind
parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

Yemenis rely upon commercial and humanitarian
imports for up to 90 per cent of their food, medicine
and fuel. That is a reality that we are all familiar with
here. We know that the timely and unimpeded flow of
those commodities through Yemen’s ports is essential.
We call on all actors to ensure this, without delay. As
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths said today, that is
particularly vital at a time when tragic events elsewhere
in the world are, unfortunately, likely to push Yemenis
further into hunger.
We fully support the Special Envoy’s work and
welcome the launching of his consultations last week
with a broad range of Yemeni actors. We reiterate our
call on all parties to meaningfully engage with him
towards establishing an inclusive framework.
Only a negotiated political settlement will bring
peace to Yemen. We reiterate that all efforts to that
end must include the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and extensive engagement with
civil society. Young people, who have the right to shape
their own future, should also be central to those efforts.
The exclusion of those groups from the table over recent
years is simply inexcusable.
Furthermore, we believe that negotiations towards
peace can only take place when there is a serious effort
towards de-escalation in violence, including an end to
the Houthi offensive on Ma’rib. We condemn in the
strongest terms the cross-border attacks against Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
Ireland also condemns the detention of Yemenis
who are currently or formerly employed by the United
Nations or by the United States. We call for their
immediate and safe release and that, at a minimum,
they be afforded contact with their families. We also

Finally, we welcome the recent progress made on
the United Nations-coordinated proposal to address the
threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which we
have often referred to in the Council as a “ticking time
bomb”. The memorandum of understanding signed
last week was a positive first step towards stopping
the clock, and we hope that momentum continues.
The humanitarian and environmental imperatives are
indisputable, and the vital livelihoods of many Yemenis
rely on it.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Hans Grundberg, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
for their overview of the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen.
We regret to note that the Yemeni Republic continues
to experience an acute military and political crisis,
accompanied by a wholesale escalation of violence and
an intensification of hostilities on all fronts.
The epicentre of the armed clashes remains in
Ma’rib, Shabwah, Al-Jawf and Al-Hudaydah. We are
concerned about attacks on civilian infrastructure,
both in the Republic of Yemen itself and outside its
borders in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates. We firmly urge all warring parties to
strictly comply with the provisions of international
humanitarian law. We are convinced that further
confrontation could expand the scope of the armed
conflict far beyond the region. The ongoing impasse in
the political settlement process brings us closer to the
point of no return, after which restoring Yemen’s unity
would simply be impossible.
Moreover, the crisis in the Republic of Yemen
strengthens the position of terrorist groups. In that
context, we would once again like to underscore that
there is no alternative to a peaceful political solution to
the Yemeni conflict. The United Nations and Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Grundberg continue to

22-2876515/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

play a central role in the settlement process. At the same
time, a reference point in such efforts should be the
principle of inclusivity. The end goal is a comprehensive
and long-term settlement of several issues faced by the
country’s population, which, in large part, also affect
neighbouring States.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy and
urge him to step up his mediation role to bring the
parties to the conflict in Yemen back to the negotiating
table. In that context, we note the start of consultations
in Amman with the representatives of Yemeni political
forces. It was particularly important today to hear
Mr. Grundberg’s assessment of the contact he has had
with the Yemeni parties. We trust that, going forward,
the proposed negotiating platform, under the auspices
of the United Nations, will provide Yemenis with a
good opportunity to discuss the paths for a political
solution to the conflict and allow the Special Envoy to
develop a new comprehensive peace settlement plan
that could reconcile the many competing players on
Yemen’s internal political landscape.
For our part, we intend to continue to encourage
the Yemeni authorities, as well as the leadership of
the Ansar Allah movement, to take a constructive
approach. We are convinced that the issue concerning
the FSO SAFER tanker can and must be resolved
through compromise. In that context, we welcome the
agreement reached between the Ansar Allah movement
and the United Nations with regard to addressing the
threat posed by the floating oil tank.
A subject of particular concern remains the dire
humanitarian situation in Yemen. As we heard from
Mr. Griffiths, the situation worsens day by day and
increasingly resembles a full-fledged humanitarian
disaster. In that regard, we place our hopes in the
international conference on humanitarian assistance to
Yemen, at which paths to providing assistance to the
Yemeni people will be discussed. At the same time, we
recall that humanitarian assistance must be impartial
in nature.
In conclusion, we would like to note that States in the
region can continue their mediation and humanitarian
efforts as part of the Yemeni settlement. We also recall
resolution 598 (1987), as well as other initiatives that
are focused on stabilizing the subregion, including the
updated Russian collective security concept for the
Persian Gulf.
16/19

15/03/2022

Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): First and foremost, we thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings.
Today, I will focus my statement on three issues:
first, the political process; secondly, the humanitarian
situation and respect for the humanitarian space and,
thirdly, the impact of the conflict in Yemen on women
and girls.
First, with regard to the political process, we
thank the Special Envoy for sharing information on the
structured consultations that were held with various
Yemeni actors. We trust that those exchanges will help
move the political process forward. We acknowledge
the importance of those consultations and the fact that
they were inclusive and allowed the voices of Yemeni
women to be heard. We hope that the Special Envoy
will be able to meet shortly with the Houthis.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, we are
deeply concerned about the ongoing violence reported
in Ma’rib, Hajjah and other regions. We once again call
for a national ceasefire. Prolonging the conflict has led
to a considerable increase in humanitarian needs, which
have not been met with sufficient financial resources.
In addition, we must consider the fact that, as UnderSecretary-General Griffiths mentioned, approximately
40 per cent of Yemen’s wheat imports are from Ukraine
and Russia. Some 60 per cent of the Yemeni people
are already suffering as a result of food insecurity
and the number of people suffering from hunger has
tripled in the past year. There are signs that grains will
be increasingly scarce and, as a result, the number of
Yemenis facing food insecurity will increase, and that
is regrettable.
United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations alike are facing a series of bureaucratic
obstacles, intimidation, restricted access and
insecurity, which is also regrettable. The work of those
organizations is vital for the survival of a large segment
of the population and for progress in building peace.
Mexico strongly condemns the fact that medical
and humanitarian personnel are the target of deliberate
attacks. Such acts are serious breaches of international
humanitarian law. We also condemn the harassment of
United Nations personnel and of those who worked for
the United States Embassy in Sana’a.
22-28765

15/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

In the light of the worrisome situation, we are
encouraged by the recent signing of a memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations and the
Houthis to address the issue of the FSO SAFER tanker.
With regard to gender issues, we deplore the
conflict’s heavy toll on women and girls, such as
limited access to education for girls; the lack of access
to reproductive health services; the increase in early
marriage and harassment and detention of activists and
human rights defenders, just to mention a few issues.
In conclusion, we once again condemn the
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, in Yemen and neighbouring countries
alike. Such attacks are serious breaches of international
law, in particular international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I would like to thank Mr. Grundberg and
Mr. Griffiths for their briefings.
In recent years, many regional and international
attempts have been made to achieve a comprehensive
political settlement to the Yemeni crisis that would
meet the aspirations of the Yemeni people. The United
Arab Emirates has been eager to support all United
Nations mediation efforts and peace initiatives, based
on our firm conviction that this is the only way to put
an end to the crisis.
However, the Houthis have not taken advantage of
those initiatives to reach a peaceful settlement. They
have used them to continue their hostilities, undermine
stability and expand their military presence on the
ground. By continuing to choose violence over peace
and imposing their control over millions of Yemenis by
force, the Houthis have demonstrated that they do not
want the war to end.
While the Houthis continue to reject calls for a
ceasefire and pursue their grave violations against
civilians, Houthi leaders in Sana’a continue to refuse
to positively engage with the United Nations and with
efforts to end the war. The Houthi escalation has reached
the level of launching terrorist attacks on neighbouring
countries and threatening maritime navigation. Such
actions foretell the future that will befall the region if
the Houthis are not deterred and their grave violations
do not come to an end.

S/PV. 8995

In the light of this intransigence and these escalatory
actions, my country welcomes the adoption of resolution
2624 (2022) and calls on all Member States to abide by
it. However, we would like to clarify that the ultimate
goal is not to impose sanctions, but to end the crisis
through a political solution. That, in turn, requires the
international community to use all means at its disposal
to continue putting pressure on the Houthis to stop their
violations and hostilities, return to the negotiating table
and seriously engage in the political process.
We stress that the previous initiatives and
negotiation frameworks, especially the Saudi initiative
to end the war, provide a solid basis for the resumption
of the political process. What is lacking, however, is
a revitalized diplomatic approach and the genuine
political will of the Houthis to engage in such initiatives.
In that regard, we note the importance of ensuring the
meaningful and active participation of women in the
political processes.
The United Arab Emirates condemns the continued
attacks launched by the Houthi terrorist group,
including the recent drone attack against a refinery in
Riyadh, as well as their repeated attacks against Abha
airport and the missile launched towards the Red Sea.
Such violations confirm once again the urgent need for
Member States to strictly implement their obligations,
as provided in the arms embargo imposed by resolutions
2216 (2015) and 2624 (2022). That requires redoubling
efforts to combat the smuggling of weapons and their
components to Houthis via land and sea routes.
We reaffirm that the continued imposition of
sanctions on the Houthis is necessary until they realize
that there is no alternative to a political solution chosen
by the Yemeni people.
We reiterate our deep concern about the seriousness
of the humanitarian situation in Yemen and the suffering
of millions of Yemenis, especially women and children,
who lack basic services. Furthermore, the health system
is collapsing amid the worsening economic situation in
Yemen. The exacerbation of those conditions is closely
related to the Houthis’ continued military escalation
and their acts of violence against civilians in Yemen.
The Houthis’ obstruction of humanitarian aid shipments
and confiscation of food supplies confirm the extent to
which the Houthis have ignored and exacerbated the
needs of the Yemeni people.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we
commend the tireless efforts of the United Nations

22-2876517/19

S/PV.8995

The situation in the Middle East

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in facilitating the most recent agreement and we
appreciate the role of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
We hope that the agreement will prevent a disaster
from occurring. To that end, we must make all efforts
to pressure the Houthis to honour their commitments
and cease their strategy of procrastination.
We note that any agreement with the Houthis on the
issue must take into account their pattern of behaviour.
As we have seen over the past four years, the Houthis
have made insincere promises as a negotiation strategy,
while at the same time completely ignoring the warnings
of an imminent environmental disaster in the event that
urgent maintenance work is not completed.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates will
continue working with the members of the Security
Council to support a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned
peaceful solution that will achieve security, stability
and prosperity for the brotherly Yemeni people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me, Mr. President, congratulate you and the United
Arab Emirates, a sisterly country, on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month. I wish you
and your delegation every success. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
for his country’s successful presidency of the Council
last month. I thank as well Mr. Hans Grundberg and
Mr. Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
The suffering of the Yemeni people has continued
for eight years, owing to the continued military
escalation by the Houthi militias, their refusal of
any initiative leading to a political solution and
the obstacles that they have placed in the path of all
peace efforts made by the United Nations through its
Special Envoy. Nearly 24 million Yemenis are still in
dire need of humanitarian assistance from the United
Nations and other international partners, on which their
survival depends.
I would be remiss were I not to mention the
importance of the donor conference to be held tomorrow
under the sponsorship of the Kingdom of Sweden,
Switzerland and the United Nations to provide financial
support for the 2022 United Nations humanitarian
response plan for Yemen.
18/19

15/03/2022

We call on all sisterly and friendly countries, as
well as international donor organizations, to participate
in that important event and pledge generously, while
honouring their commitments to reduce the funding
shortfall affecting humanitarian operations. In the light
of the events and crises currently facing the world,
which have resulted in complicating the economic
and humanitarian situation in Yemen, it is important
that Yemen remains at the top of the international
community’s priorities. The international community
must not abandon Yemen.
The Yemeni Government once again welcomes
resolution 2624 (2022), adopted in February to
extend the sanctions regime in Yemen. The resolution
designates the Houthi militias as terrorists. For years,
those militias have chosen the path of terrorism and
violence, which justifies their designation as terrorists
given the crimes and unprecedented violations that they
have committed against the Yemeni people.
They continue to target civilians and civilian
structures in Yemen, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates. They pose a threat
to the security and safety of commercial vessels and
international navigation lanes. The resolution is
an important step towards ending Iranian military
support for the Houthis, which is prolonging the war,
complicating the humanitarian crisis and undermining
political efforts to establish peace in Yemen.
Based on its political competence, the Government
is making significant efforts to return to normalcy
and is implementing many reforms and development
projects, as we cannot await the restoration of peace to
relaunch development in Yemen.
We call on the international community to support
the economic efforts of the Government and its recovery
programmes and work to establish sources of revenue,
as an essential way to resolve the humanitarian crisis
without solely relying on emergency assistance. The
reforms undertaken by the Government will make
a significant contribution to achieving economic
stability, controlling inflation, stabilizing the exchange
rate of the national currency and thereby improving the
humanitarian situation.
While we appreciate the efforts of sisterly and
friendly countries to reduce humanitarian suffering, we
reiterate that Yemen remains in great need of economic
support to enable it to resume the level of economic
growth it had achieved prior to the coup carried out
22-28765

15/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

by the Houthi militias. The relevant 2019 international
reports indicate that Yemen has lost two decades of
development, which could become as many as four
decades if the militias continue their war and efforts to
abort the prospects for peace.
The Yemeni Government is aware that ending
humanitarian suffering, restoring security and
stability, and returning to the path of development will
be possible only by ending the crisis that Yemen is
experiencing today as a result of the coup d’état carried
out by the Houthi militias. The Government, under the
leadership and guidance of His Excellency Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, President of the Republic,
therefore remains committed to the peace process,
under the auspices of the United Nations, with a view
to achieving a just and lasting peace.
The Government has made many concessions to
ensure the success of the missions of the successive
United Nations Special Envoys. The Government
currently continues to support the work of Mr. Grundberg
and to facilitate his task in leading the peace process
on the basis of the agreed terms or reference for
a political solution, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). Despite all that,
the Houthi militias, supported by Iran, have continued
their escalation and war, while hindering efforts to
achieve peace.
They continue to refuse to receive the Special
Envoy in Sana’a. They have chosen war as a means of
achieving their ambitions, seizing power and either
governing or killing Yemenis in order to change
the nature of Yemeni society and introduce obscure
traditions and values that do not match the aspirations
of the Yemeni people, who wish to build a civil and
modern State based on security, stability, development,
justice and the rule of law.
We call on the international community and the
Security Council to understand the various root causes

S/PV. 8995

of this destructive war and its repercussions, of which
the principal cause was the coup d’ état by the Houthi
militias against the constitutional legitimacy, State
institutions and national consensus.
The Houthi militias must be aware that there is no
way to resolve the crisis other than through a political
solution. They must cease killing Yemenis, avoid
further bloodshed and stop this war, which has caused
the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. These
militias must understand that peace is the only way out
of the current situation.
We call on the Security Council to put more
pressure on those terrorist groups and we call on the
rogue regime of Iran, which supports them, to stop
the military escalation and to engage positively in the
efforts of the United Nations to achieve a comprehensive
and lasting peace and bring an end to the conflict.
In conclusion, we have taken note of the United
Nations efforts to resolve the situation concerning the
FSO SAFER oil tanker. Despite the commitment of the
Yemeni Government to support and facilitate those
efforts in order to avoid an environmental, humanitarian
and economic disaster that would affect Yemen and the
countries of the region and jeopardize international
maritime navigation routes, we once again warn against
the methods and manoeuvres being adopted by of the
Houthi militias to hinder those efforts, renege on their
commitments and make false promises to deceive the
international community.
We call on the Council to continue to put pressure
on those militias in order to avoid an imminent
catastrophe. We thank the Netherlands and the United
Nations for their efforts in that respect.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion of the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-2876519/19
