S/2006/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 17 January 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the statement by the President of the Security Council of
13 July 2005 (S/PRST/2005/31), I have the honour to transmit to you the final
investigation report of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, concerning the events that took place on 9 July 2005 in the
village of Kabingu in South Kivu.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my grave concern about
continuing human rights abuses in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As the
Security Council has noted in several of its resolutions and presidential statements
pertaining to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, impunity must be brought to an
end, and perpetrators of crimes such as those highlighted in the attached report (see
annex) brought to justice.
I should be grateful if you would make the present letter and its annex
available to the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-21479 (E) 310106

*0621479*

S/2006/28

Annex
Investigation report of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
attack on Kabingu village in South Kivu on 9 July 2005
I.

Summary
1.
From 12 to 20 July 2005, a multidisciplinary team from the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
conducted an investigation into an attack that took place on the evening of 9 July
2005 by a group of armed Rwandan elements against the village of Kabingu,
localité of Mamba, groupement of Fendula, collectivité of Kalonge, in Bunyakiri
territory, approximately 60 km north-west of Bukavu in the province of South Kivu.
2.
Based on the testimony gathered, the team was able to confirm that over 50
civilians were killed in the attack. Over 40 victims, mostly women and children,
were either burned alive in their huts or killed by machete blows while trying to
escape. Fifteen others were injured, six of whom later succumbed to their injuries at
local health centres, and 11 women were raped during the course of the attack.
Widespread looting was also reported.
3.
Eyewitnesses indicated that the perpetrators were a group of approximately 30
well armed Rwandans from an area near Kahuzi-Biega National Park,
approximately 20 km north-west of Bukavu. Local sources accused the same group
of being responsible for a massacre in Nindja, Ihembe groupement, in Kabare
territory, on 23 May 2005, during which at least 14 civilians were killed.
4.
Local witnesses suggested that the attack on Kabingu may have been a reprisal
against the population for having collaborated with the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) and MONUC. During June and July
2005, armed Rwandan militiamen had reportedly carried out a series of attacks in
the collectivité of Kalonge, in Bunyakiri territory, and MONUC military had carried
out a routine patrol in the area of Kahuzi-Biega National Park on 7 July.
5.
It is estimated that over 10,000 civilians were displaced following the attacks
in Kalonge. The residents of Kabingu have been unable to return to their village and
have requested assistance in rebuilding their homes.

II.

Methodology
6.
During the investigation, the MONUC team carried out three field missions to
Kabingu and to the neighbouring groupements of Chifunzi and Rambo on 12, 16 and
20 July 2005. The team conducted over 60 interviews, including with victims,
eyewitnesses, community leaders, the FARDC 1012th Battalion Commander, other
FARDC officers and local policemen. The team also interviewed 11 survivors at
local health centres (six at the hospital of Chifunzi on 16 July and five at Panzi
Hospital in Bukavu on 13 and 19 July). In addition, written reports were received
from the Chief of Kalonge, the Administrator of the territory of Bunyakiri and a
local non-governmental organization, the Comité d’encadrement des femmes et des
enfants, veuves et orphelins of Kalonge.

2

S/2006/28

7.
It should be noted that many residents of Kabingu fled following the attack
and were unavailable for the interview when the team visited the village.

III.

Crimes perpetrated
Killings, abduction and rape of civilians
8.
The village of Kabingu was reportedly attacked by a group of approximately
30 Rwandan militiamen on the evening of 9 July 2005. Witnesses said that the
assailants were armed with machetes, automatic weapons, grenades and torches and
most wore military uniforms. The assailants reportedly came from the direction of
Kahuzi-Biega National Park, an area currently under the control of the Democratic
Liberation Forces of Rwanda (FDLR) and Rasta armed groups.
9.
In the weeks prior to the attack on Kabingu, there had been a series of attacks
by armed Rwandan groups elsewhere in the territory of Bunyakiri. Two villages in
the collectivité of Kalonge, Rwamikunda and Chamusi, had been attacked on 2 July
and several civilians were reportedly killed or abducted. On 5 July, FARDC troops,
guided by some local villagers, were able to track down the militiamen in KahuziBiega National Park, capture several of them and retrieve some of the looted items.
Owing to the generally unstable security situation, the residents of Kabingu had
begun spending nights in the forest. On 9 July, while most of the village men were
out patrolling the area or in hiding, a majority of the women and children, weary of
sleeping in the forest, had decided to return to Kabingu and were gathered in three
huts located in the outskirts of the village. It is believed that the attack on the village
of Kabingu was a reaction to the actions taken by FARDC and MONUC.
10. Eyewitnesses described how the attack was carried out. The armed men
reportedly looted and set fire to the first row of huts (more than 30), starting with
the hut belonging to the village chief. One survivor, who was forced out of his home
while it was being looted, heard the assailants speaking Swahili and Kinyarwanda
and saw them setting fire to other huts. According to another eyewitness, when the
attackers reached the three huts where the women and children were hiding, they
called out in Swahili asking who was inside and then blocked the doors of the huts
and set them afire. A witness said he heard cries of help coming from the burning
huts but was unable to assist those inside. A number of victims managed to escape
the fire. One female survivor said that the assailants locked her and her six children,
along with another 30 villagers, inside their hut, before setting fire to the roof. As
she escaped through a window, she was stabbed with a bayonet. She was unable to
rescue her children. A 13-year-old girl said that two of her younger brothers tried to
escape but were hurled back into the flames by a militiaman. Another woman said
that she tried to flee with her 16-month-old baby but was caught by an assailant,
who flung her baby into a burning hut. The militiaman then raped and wounded her
with a bayonet. She also claimed to have witnessed other women, who were hiding
in her house, being raped by the assailants, an account later confirmed by other
witnesses. A report from the Chief of the collectivité of Kalonge indicated that a
total of 11 women had been raped.
11. As they left Kabingu, the armed men abducted several villagers, including four
young girls. Three of them were subsequently stabbed to death and their bodies
found near the village. The fourth victim, aged thirteen, escaped from her captors
along with three other minors on 4 August. She alleged that she was held in the

3

S/2006/28

forest with a boy and several other girls (approximately fourteen years old) who had
been abducted from neighbouring villages. According to this victim, during their
captivity, all the girls were repeatedly raped and compelled to serve as “wives” for
the militiamen. They were also subjected to beatings and forced to walk for hours in
the forest carrying sacks of looted items.
12. Another victim told the team that he and his wife were abducted and made to
transport looted items to Kahuzi-Biega National Park, before eventually managing
to escape. Before being taken away, the couple allegedly witnessed the assailants
beating their two children, aged three and five, to death at their home.
13. On the morning of 10 July, several survivors and FARDC soldiers based in
Mamba arrived in Kabingu. The local FARDC Commander ordered the villagers to
bury the dead, and several witnesses who took part in the burial stated that they
were able to retrieve over 40 bodies, mostly women and children. Most of the
bodies were so badly burned that they could not be identified; others bore signs of
machete wounds. The bodies were buried in two mass graves. Fifteen wounded were
brought to local health centres for medical treatment and six later succumbed to
their injuries.
14. The exact number of victims remains unknown as most of the villagers had not
returned to Kabingu at the time of the investigation. However, based on the
testimonies gathered, the team was able to establish that:
(a) Over 40 victims, mostly women and children, were either burned alive in
their huts or killed by machete blows while trying to escape;
(b) Fifteen civilians were injured, six of whom later died from their injuries
at local health centres;
(c)

Eleven women were subjected to rape during the course of the attack;

(d) At least six civilians were abducted from the village; three of whom were
subsequently killed.
Looting and destruction of civilian homes
15. The consistent testimonies of the eyewitnesses and victims indicated that,
during the attack on Kabingu, the assailants burnt down numerous homes. Others
recounted how they managed to escape from their burning homes. During the field
mission, the investigation team was able to confirm that at least 42 dwellings had
been burned down and it discovered two fresh mass graves near the village chief’s
house.
16. Local sources indicated that the same armed group had carried out the attacks
and looting reported in other villages in the area in June and early July 2005. This
information was corroborated by the account of the three minors, two of whom
claimed to have been abducted from the village of Kwamikundu. The children also
claimed that they had witnessed the armed men looting supplies in other villages.

IV.

Alleged perpetrators
17. Eyewitnesses indicated that the perpetrators were Rwandans from the area of
Kahuzi-Biega National Park, located approximately 20 km north-west of Bukavu.

4

S/2006/28

The attackers were allegedly well-armed, approximately 30 in number, with braided
hair, and spoke Kiswahili and Kinyarwanda. An FARDC source claimed that a man
known as Kyombé was the leader of the armed group and alleged that the assailants
had left a letter pinned to one of the bodies warning that they would continue to
carry out attacks against the local community if FARDC interfered in their actions.
18. Rwandan armed groups intensified their activities in the localités of Mamba
and Ntulo in the month of June. In one incident in late June, armed Rwandan groups
allegedly kidnapped over 50 civilians along the Bukavu-Kalonge axis, and the
whereabouts of those individuals is still unknown.
19. The team was unable to establish whether the armed group that perpetrated the
attack on Kabingu was in any way linked with FDLR or with one of the Rasta
groups operating in the area. The FDLR stronghold is located in Ekingi and the
group is said to have positions in Namuhembe, an area close to the collectivité of
Kalonge, in Bunyakiri territory.

V.

The humanitarian situation
20. Following the attacks on the collectivité of Kalonge, an estimated 10,000
civilians fled their homes. Humanitarian assistance has been delivered to the
internally displaced persons in several villages and many of the wounded have
received medical treatment at health centres in the groupements of Chifunzi, Rambo
and Mule.
21. On 15 September, during another field mission to Kabingu, MONUC child
protection officers observed that the village remained deserted. According to the
village elders, the residents have not returned to Kabingu because they have been
unable to rebuild their homes. Recently, the villagers declined food aid provided by
the non-governmental organization, CARITAS, and instead requested assistance to
rebuild their village.

VI.

Response of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Congolese authorities
22. Although a FARDC platoon (comprised of 12 soldiers) of the 1012th Battalion
had been deployed near Kabingu, the assailants met no FARDC resistance when
they attacked the village. Allegedly, the soldiers positioned in the hills overlooking
the village fled after the arrival of the militiamen. Two FARDC soldiers told the
team that their unit did not defend Kabingu because they feared the armed group’s
Commander, Kyombé. The local FARDC Commander explained that his troops were
poorly equipped and too few in number to guarantee the security of the population
in Kalonge. However, since the attack, FARDC has increased its presence in the
area and has established a base near the Kabare-Rwamikundi axis.
23. On 12 July, MONUC facilitated a visit of the Deputy Prosecutor of South Kivu
to the site of the massacre and the team also communicated the findings of its
investigations to the Prosecutor of Bukavu. MONUC has actively supported the
local judiciary in Bukavu to initiate an investigation into the massacre in Kabingu.
On 25 July, a delegation headed by the Security Adviser to the President of the

5

S/2006/28

Democratic Republic of the Congo arrived in Bukavu, tasked to support a judicial
investigation into the Kabingu massacre. To date, however, no arrests have been
made among those believed to be responsible for the attack.
24. MONUC continues to closely monitor the armed groups operating in the area.
Attacks on other villages and numerous cases of abductions of civilians by these
armed groups have been reported since mid-July and MONUC has increased its
military presence in the area in an attempt to stabilize the security situation. From
6 to 9 September, the MONUC South Kivu Brigade and FARDC troops carried out a
joint operation, involving over 1,000 troops, in an effort to search the northern
portion of Kahuzi-Biega National Park for rebel groups. MONUC will continue to
do all it can to support the Congolese authorities in their efforts to bring those
responsible to justice.

6
