United Nations

A/S-20/PV.9

General Assembly

Official Records

20th Special Session

9th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 10 June 1998, 7 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 7 p.m.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
General debate
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency The
Honourable Andrew Scott, Solicitor-General of Canada.
Mr. Scott (Canada): Like many countries, Canada
views its drug problem as serious. Canada considers the
drug problem to be a major health and public safety issue.
We are particularly concerned about drug abuse among our
young people. We are dealing with our drug problem
through a balanced approach aimed at reducing the supply
of drugs as well as the demand for them.
Canada’s approach to the drug problem is outlined in
a document entitled “Canada’s Drug Strategy”, which has
been distributed to members. The long-term goal of this
balanced strategy is to reduce the harm to individuals,
families and communities associated with drugs and
alcohol. This strategy is led by Canada’s Ministry of
Health, which in itself speaks to our approach to dealing
with this problem.
We are also well aware that drugs feed organized
crime. Just as the United Nations is strengthening its efforts
to combat organized crime, so are we. The Government of
Canada has made organized crime its top law-enforcement
priority. Our approach is aimed at taking the profits out of
drug-trafficking.

98-85460 (E)

Although Canada’s climate precludes the cultivation
of either coca bush or opium poppy, we do produce
cannabis, especially that which is grown indoors. Indeed,
we have become an exporting country. Cannabis is the
most commonly used illicit drug in Canada, followed by
cocaine and heroin, with a moderate use of synthetic
drugs. We are also concerned about the availability of
raw materials used in the manufacture of synthetic drugs
and the fact that information about their manufacture is
freely available, including on the Internet.
Therefore, as a result of the challenges we face, the
Government of Canada has established a number of
priorities within our national drug strategy. These include
development of responses to address the significant harm
associated with injection drug use. In this regard, Canada
is experiencing a particularly serious health crisis in
Vancouver, with a high level of overdose deaths and one
of the highest rates of HIV infection in developed
countries. We are working closely with our provincial and
local partners to identify innovative approaches to
prevention and treatment.
Another priority focuses on enhancing our efforts,
and involving youth in finding solutions, to prevent the
use of drugs by young people. Canada is also enhancing
its focus on large-scale trafficking and the seizure of the
proceeds of crime. Through the introduction of key
legislation, we have provided the police with the tools
required to deal effectively with organized crime. We are
also working on a national strategy on organized crime.
As part of our efforts in that area, we will introduce

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
20th special session

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998

legislation in our Parliament this fall to deal with
mandatory suspicious-transaction reporting.

human security, as well as discuss the appropriateness of
supply and demand reduction strategies.

Here at the special session, Canada is particularly
pleased to see consideration of the Declaration on the
Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction. Demand
reduction is an essential part of a balanced approach to the
drug problem, something that we have long practised in
Canada and advocated in the United Nations and elsewhere
for some time. We believe that the Declaration is important
in that it will mark the first time an international agreement
has been reached on the basic principles of demand
reduction.

At this United Nations special session, Canada is
pleased to be able to announce that we have increased our
financial support to UNDCP by 25 per cent over the last
two years. Canada will work closely with the United
Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs and with UNDCP
in the coming months to follow up on the commitments
contained in the Political Declaration and the associated
documents — on precursors, amphetamine-type
stimulants, judicial cooperation, money-laundering,
demand reduction and alternative development — that we
will adopt today.

Canada was honoured to have been the host of the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
(UNDCP) youth event, Youth Vision Jeunesse, which
brought more than 200 energetic young people from more
than 24 countries to Banff, Alberta, in April to identify best
practices in youth substance-abuse prevention. The “Vision
from Banff” is a powerful one, coming from the young
people themselves. I hope that everyone has heard the
message and had a chance to see the video and read the
document. Working to prevent substance abuse among
young people is one of the priorities of UNDCP, and one
which Canada will continue to support.

Finally, Canada wishes to offer its congratulations to
the many countries and individuals whose vision and hard
work have resulted in these documents. We welcome the
leadership and coordinating role of UNDCP in
implementing these undertakings. Canada strongly
supports the principle of shared responsibility and the
process of working together to evaluate and address drug
problems with our global, bilateral and multilateral
partners. I am confident that this special session has
generated the international momentum which will provide
the basis on which we can all address, with renewed
vigour and capacity, the serious threat of illicit drugs.

(spoke in French)
Canada believes that regional cooperation is a crucial
tool in combating the global drug problem. In this regard,
last month Canada was elected to the chairmanship of a
working group within the Organization of American States
Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission.
(spoke in English)
That group has been tasked by leaders in this
hemisphere with developing a multilateral evaluation
mechanism that will evaluate national and international antidrug efforts. This work may serve as a useful example for
the United Nations in efforts to develop a global evaluation
mechanism.
Furthermore, our Finance Minister has committed
himself to convening, this year, a group of Foreign
Ministers from this hemisphere to discuss the impact of the
drug problem. The Ministers can link the drug problem not
only to transnational organized crime but also to other
foreign policy issues such as its economic and social costs,
the violence associated with drugs and their impact on

2

The President: I thank the Solicitor-General of
Canada for his statement.
I give the floor to His Excellency The Honourable
Charles Margai, Minister for Internal Affairs and Local
Administration of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Margai (Sierra Leone): I shall preface my
address by extending, on behalf of my President and of
the Government and the people of Sierra Leone, my
condolences to General Abdulsalam Abubakar, head of
State of Nigeria, as well as to the Government and the
people of that sister Republic, on the sudden demise of
General Sani Abacha, his predecessor, an illustrious son
of the soil of Africa and a great contributor to the
maintenance of international peace and stability, as
exemplified by his uncompromising stance in the
restoration of democracy to Sierra Leone. This irreparable
loss will be mourned by all. May his soul rest in perfect
peace.
I bring you greetings, Mr. President, from President
Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and from the Government
and the people of Sierra Leone.

General Assembly
20th special session
It is gratifying to see us assembled here today, united
in spirit, effort and determination, to address the perennial
problem of drug abuse, which, if not contained, may have
devastating social consequences for our various societies.
Like many other countries, Sierra Leone is
experiencing acute problems associated with the illicit
production, consumption and trafficking of dangerous drugs.
This session, therefore, could not have been convened at a
more appropriate time, as we approach the next millennium
with a concerted and determined effort to rid the world of
dangerous drugs.
The consumption and trafficking in Sierra Leone of
the plant Cannabis sativa, although introduced by the
former Government of the All People’s Congress, assumed
alarming proportions with the emergence of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the senseless rebel war
and subsequent junta misrule by the National Provisional
Ruling Council and the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC).
According to information supplied by the Drug
Enforcement Unit of the Central Investigations Department,
there has been a tenfold increase in the number of arrests
associated with the possession and trafficking of Cannabis
sativa. In 1996 and 1997, a total of 563 kilograms of herbal
cannabis was seized at Lungi international airport. This is
a clear indication that the drug is not only consumed in the
country, but trafficked across its borders.
Prior to the inception of the RUF rebel war in 1991,
the cultivation of Cannabis sativa was restricted to the
northern and western areas of Sierra Leone. The rebel
incursion and the two aforementioned military regimes
encouraged widespread cultivation and abuse of dangerous
drugs country-wide. Energetic young farmers who were
once engaged in rice farming — rice is the country’s staple
food — and the cultivation of other cash crops, have now
diverted their attention to the cultivation of cannabis in a
bid to quickly enrich themselves.
The traditional methods of trafficking drugs — in
commercial cargoes, luggage, body cavities and so forth —
remain the most common. Illicit trafficking by sea is posing
a major concern, particularly when small unregistered and
unseaworthy vessels are involved in such coastal exercises,
as well as in transshipments of consignments from larger
vessels. This method of trafficking is made easier because
of Sierra Leone’s expansive coastal areas and numerous
rivers, which are penetrable, and therefore susceptible to
serving as entry points.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
It is indeed disheartening to note that those who
suffered most during the seven-year rebel war and
subsequent misrule in my country by the junta were
children forcibly conscripted as soldiers by the
AFRC/RUF junta. This is an issue needing urgent
international attention, through carefully formulated and
coordinated programmes. The attendant consequences of
the events flowing from the rebel incursion and the junta
misrule are a clear manifestation of how drug abuse can
undermine democracy and the socio-economic fabric of
society.
The anti-narcotics squad of the Criminal
Investigation Department is the main organ responsible
for the enforcement of drug laws in Sierra Leone. Apart
from its role in supply reduction, the squad collaborates
with other agencies, such as the Pharmacy Board, nongovernmental organizations, youth groups and the
Ministry of Education, to enhance demand reduction
campaigns. Before the junta interruption, the Government
adopted new measures to cope with the challenges posed
by drug abuse and illicit trafficking at the national level.
Centralized inter-ministerial coordinating bodies
comprising personnel from different agencies were
established to galvanize resources and improve
coordination between law-enforcement agencies,
particularly customs, the police and the judiciary, to
achieve greater complementarity between drug lawenforcement agencies responsible for demand reduction
campaigns. Notwithstanding these measures, there is an
urgent need for the establishment of a drug enforcement
agency with international support, particularly in the form
of equipment, training and finance.
Mindful of the fact that drug abuse is a crime that
permeates international borders, the Government of Sierra
Leone has introduced legislation to deal with the problem,
such as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1960 and the
Pharmacy and Drugs Act of 1988, which introduced
stiffer penalties. The Government is determined to
relentlessly pursue the fight against drug abuse and has in
consequence ratified all United Nations conventions
relative thereto.
Technical assistance is therefore required from
UNDCP and other international agencies to help
harmonize our national legislation with these conventions,
especially the 1988 Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, to enable us
to tackle international crimes associated with drugtrafficking or money-laundering. Furthermore, UNDCP
and other agencies should encourage third world countries

3

General Assembly
20th special session
to enter into bilateral agreements with Member States in the
area of the trafficking of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, and to address the question of extradition.
An urgent appeal is therefore made by the Government
of Sierra Leone to UNDCP, all Member States and
institutions possessing technical skills, logistics and
financial means to assist it to participate fully in this
concerted global war to combat the trafficking and abuse of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, which has been
accentuated by the effect of seven years of rebel war and
junta misrule that have totally destroyed the fabric of our
society.
Permit me to take this opportunity on behalf of the
President, the Government and the people of Sierra Leone,
to express my sincere gratitude and appreciation to the
United Nations, the Secretary-General, Member States and
other international organizations for the unwavering support
given to us in our quest for the restoration of democracy
and constitutional order in our country.
The President: I thank the Minister for Internal
Affairs and Local Administration of Sierra Leone for his
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency The
Honourable Chitalu Sampa, Minister of Defence of Zambia.
Mr. Sampa (Zambia): Marking the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of the United Nations Convention against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances gives us an opportunity to assess our successes
and identify the challenges we need to overcome in order
for us to make serious headway towards a drug-free world.
This, we believe, is an achievable goal. But we must all
galvanize the political will to undertake the necessary
action.
The implementation of the Declaration will require a
comprehensive approach. It is the considered view of my
delegation that the problem of drugs is a development
matter which needs to be an integral part of all
development policies. The reality of the world we live in
today is that it would be unrealistic to try to deal with the
world drug problem in isolation. It is also unproductive to
engage in finger-pointing. It is a well-established fact that
organized criminal groups, particularly the drug lords and
their illegal families, the cartels, are spreading their
operations around the world.

4

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
We, the developing countries, have become their
prime targets, especially in relation to their moneylaundering activities. We are undertaking serious efforts
to restructure our economies and are making every effort
to attract much-needed private investment. In our genuine
need to open up our economies, we may unwittingly have
exposed ourselves to the evils of international crime,
particularly money-laundering, because of our weak
institutions and the fact that our justice systems are not
yet sufficiently developed to prevent and control
organized transnational crime.
The framework for international cooperation in
combating the drug problem must therefore be widened to
ensure assistance to Governments in drafting and
implementing national drug-control laws and regulations.
These should include training for law-enforcement
personnel, judges, magistrates and prosecutors, as well as
the provision of necessary technical expertise and
equipment.
It is an indisputable fact that reducing the demand
for drugs is key to solving the global drug problem. There
is certainly a need for stronger demand reduction efforts
that are community-based and include a wide umbrella of
actors: parents, teachers and churches all need to get
involved. The demand reduction programmes should
cover all areas of prevention, from discouraging initial
use to reducing the negative health and social
consequences of drug abuse.
We also see an urgent need to focus demand
reduction strategies on young people, who in our view
need special attention. These programmes should be ageappropriate, relevant and accessible to these groups,
which are most at risk, and they should as a matter of
course take into account the different socio-economic
factors.
Social deprivation and poverty in most parts of the
world are breeding grounds for drug abuse. The sense of
helplessness and isolation due to unfavourable social and
economic factors makes people — especially young
people — more vulnerable to drug abuse and drug-related
risk-taking behaviour. These unfortunate people are also
open to exploitation by drug lords.
I would like to take this opportunity to share with
members the situation in Zambia in relation to the drug
problem. Zambia has been used as a transit port for drugs
coming from the Far East. It has unfortunately emerged
as an important distribution point for illicit narcotic drugs

General Assembly
20th special session
and psychotropic substances. The geopolitical position of
Zambia in the southern African region, and particularly the
centrality of the Lusaka international airport, makes Zambia
easily accessible to all of its neighbours both by air and by
road networks.
The tragic result of this interaction is that today drug
abuse, which was virtually unheard of in Zambia, is on the
rise. A worrying percentage of our youth have become
victims of drug and substance abuse. This new trend is also
linked to the social and economic difficulties that the
country is going through. In addition, some of our youth
have been the victims of drug barons, who have recruited
them as couriers. It is actually this exposure that has led to
the consumption of drugs.
It is a declared policy of the Zambian Government to
fight the scourge of drugs with utmost vigour through the
work of its Drug Enforcement Commission. Our long-term
strategy is aimed at preventing the use of drugs. We have
identified the need to raise awareness of the dangers of
drug abuse at the community level, especially in schools
and colleges. Our experience has shown that communitywide participation and a partnership approach are crucial to
the success of the programme. Collaboration among
Government, non-governmental organizations, teachers,
employers and the private sector is also essential. But it is
of utmost importance that family responsibility be stressed.
Parents and a stable family environment are indispensable
in the war against drugs.
In addition to formulating a national drug control
master plan which is in accordance with the United Nations
Global Programme of Action, Zambia has already
undertaken very specific measures to curb drug trafficking.
First, we have ratified all United Nations conventions which
deal with issues of the control of illicit narcotic drugs,
including the 1988 United Nations Convention against the
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances.
Secondly, we enacted the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act No. 37 of 1993, whose
provisions comply with the 1988 Convention. Stiffer
penalties are prescribed under this law, in which trafficking
in narcotic drugs carries a penalty of 25 years; there is no
bail for drug offences under that act.
Thirdly, all drug offences are extraditable offences.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
twice the prescribed penalty. This is to ensure that our
officers stay above board in drug interdiction efforts.
Fifthly, Zambia is currently preparing documentation
for the ratification of the Southern Africa Development
Community (SADC) protocol on cross-border trafficking
within the subregion. This process will be completed
before the summit of heads of State of SADC countries
later this year.
Finally, my Government is also taking measures to
fight the emerging incidences of money-laundering. An
anti-money-laundering bill will be presented to the
National Assembly for enactment into law when
parliamentary business resumes in July this year. The
Zambian Government fully supports the initiative taken
by the United Nations with the global programme against
money-laundering for 1997 to 1999, and we stand ready
to participate in that programme.
On the emerging debate on whether or not to
legalize the use of cannabis and other substances that are
termed “soft” drugs, the position of the Zambian
Government is that we are against legalizing cannabis or
any other so-called soft drug, and will continue to
prescribe stringent measures to deal with those who break
the law on the prohibition of cannabis trafficking,
possession or smoking. The Zambian position on this
matter will remain consistent with the decision taken by
the heads of national drug law enforcement agencies of
Africa in April 1998 in Abuja, Nigeria, and the African
position adopted in Nairobi, Kenya, which rejected
arguments for the legalization of cannabis in Africa. We
shall also support the southern region drug control
programme approved by regional law enforcement experts
meeting in Botswana early this year.
No one, and certainly no country, is immune to the
devastating consequences of drug abuse and illicit
trafficking. As we enter the twenty-first century, let all of
us gathered here today resolve to truly commit our
Governments to implement the strategies set out in the
draft declaration before us. We can make a difference.
The President: I thank the Minister of Defence of
Zambia for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Hussein
Ali Haithem, Vice-Minister, Ministry of the Interior of
Yemen.

Fourthly, a drug enforcement officer or a police officer
who commits a narcotic drug offence automatically receives

5

General Assembly
20th special session
Mr. Haithem (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of Yemen is grateful to you, Sir, for your
efforts in convening this special session to spur
international cooperation in combating drugs. This session
represents a turning point in bolstering and developing
international relations with a view to confronting this
frightening phenomenon, which is a source of fear and
anxiety in every home and family in the world. The drugs
problem is not a regional problem or a problem for any
single country or people; it is a world-wide problem that
persists, and that in a sense moves in step with each
country’s development and progress.
Hence, no State can be spared this dangerous
epidemic. For example, in my country, the Yemen Arab
Republic, we had few such problems before 1935. But, like
every other country in the world, we are now the victim of
drug problems. Now, traffickers frequently use our country
as a transit point, which adds to the gravity of the situation.
But in spite of its limited means, our country has been able
to frustrate many attempts to transfer drugs through Yemen
to other countries. As we know, drugs may be grown in
one country, manufactured in another and transferred
through a third, for consumption in yet another country.
No State, however wealthy, can hope to eliminate this
phenomenon alone, which is why it is so critical to spur
international cooperation in this field. My Government,
which has ratified international conventions on combating
drugs and psychotropic substances, has worked vigorously
to bolster these agreements, within a legal framework. We
have adopted a law on fighting narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, which covers all illicit contacts
relating to drugs and psychotropic substances, and which
provides for penalties commensurate with the crimes
specified in that law. Its annexes cover all illicit drugs, as
designated on international lists.
On the technical side, we organize training courses for
personnel working in this area. These courses take place
both within Yemen and outside it. This reflects my
country’s interest in consolidating international cooperation
and the ability to take action in this sphere.
We view this historic special session also as a starting
point: a springboard in the struggle against drugs. We
urgently appeal to all countries and to all international
organizations involved in combating drugs to close ranks
and support countries, including my own, that lack the
technical and material means to wage the struggle. Let us
form a single front against the amoral gangs that lack
human values and that have created this scourge.

6

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
This is a grave, multi-faceted and multilateral
problem indeed, but we have the firm hope that we will
leave this world forum having adopted practical
programmes to eliminate this scourge world-wide.
The President: I thank the Vice-Minister, Ministry
of the Interior of Yemen for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Maurice
Randrianame, Director-General in charge of the
Interministerial Campaign against Drugs of Madagascar.
Mr. Randrianame (Madagascar) (interpretation
from French): The delegation of Madagascar welcomes
the convening of this special session of the General
Assembly, which is fresh proof of the determination of
the international community to combat the many-faceted
problem of drugs. This session coincides with the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations
Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, and provides a new
opportunity to adopt innovative approaches that can meet
both current challenges and those of the next millennium.
The scourge of the illicit traffic in drugs has become
a global problem, and it can be eliminated only through
international cooperation based on partnership and active
solidarity. Accordingly, the Government of Madagascar
wishes to pay tribute to the efforts of the United Nations
carried out through its specialized agencies, including the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
(UNDCP), and hopes that this special session will give
fresh momentum to translating global strategies and
policies into concrete action at the national, regional and
international levels.
My Government welcomes this session also because
it will reaffirm, in the draft political declaration before it,
the determination of the international community —
previously expressed at the International Conference on
Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, held at Vienna in June
1987, and at the seventeenth special session of the
General Assembly, held at New York in February
1990 — vigorously to combat drug abuse, illicit drug
trafficking and related activities, including moneylaundering and corruption. This combat will be waged
individually at the national level, and in cooperation with
other States at the regional and international levels, on the
basis of shared responsibility. Indeed, there is no longer
any distinction between producer countries and consumer
countries: both are affected by the same problems. All
States must therefore accede to the relevant legal

General Assembly
20th special session
instruments, which provide an ideal framework for
cooperation.
Mindful that any effort to combat drugs will be
condemned to failure without a sound organizational
structure and a solid, appropriate legal environment, and
faithful to its commitments, Madagascar has participated in
international conferences and has maintained and
strengthened its Interministerial Campaign against Drugs,
which is responsible, inter alia, for coordinating anti-drug
activities by governmental and non-governmental bodies, in
a spirit of synergy and effectiveness. We have promoted
cooperation with other countries and regional and
international organizations.
Madagascar has harmonized its national legislation
with the spirit and letter of the international conventions in
force, by promulgating on 4 December 1997 a law on the
control of narcotics, psychotropic substances and
precursors; this was carried out with legal assistance from
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
(UNDCP). This legislation was necessary to clamp down on
the illicit traffic in drugs other than cannabis, which are
beginning to make inroads in Madagascar. The law also
enables us to prosecute those who in any way encourage
others to consume controlled substances. Its therapeutic
provisions permit the judge to substitute treatment for
incarceration. Finally, the law makes it possible to place
under control substances not under international controls
that nonetheless pose a threat to individuals and society —
such as Catha edulis, whose synthetic derivatives cathine
and cathinone are, oddly enough, covered.
Since 1996, my Government has been engaged in talks
with Council of Europe with a view to acceding to
European convention on judicial cooperation, and the
Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and
Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime. We recently
requested the UNDCP to provide legal assistance in drafting
a law on money-laundering. A similar initiative has been
taken with respect to the Universal Postal Union on holding
a training seminar for postal, customs and law enforcement
agents, in view of the possible use of the postal service by
traffickers.
In tandem with the adoption of the new legislation,
and based on the framework drafted by the UNDCP,
Madagascar has begun to prepare a national anti-drug plan
focused principally on demand reduction. To that end, an
epidemiological survey has been carried out with the
assistance of the Institute for Training and Drug Control
and of INSEM in Paris, to identify the real trends in drug

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
abuse and, indirectly, in illicit trafficking as well as to
identify the best target group for a prevention programme
for young people.
One of the plan’s objectives is the elimination of
illicit cannabis crops. Operations carried out by our
national police since June 1997 in the northern part of
Madagascar, which is known to be one of the areas in
which illicit crops are grown, discovered large illicit crops
of cannabis extending over several dozens of hectares.
The police destroyed scores of tons of cannabis and
arrested hundreds of farmers involved in growing and
production. This should be extended to other parts of the
country, but that requires major financial resources. The
regional representative of the UNDCP at Nairobi, Kenya,
has been informed of this. These operations have
definitely enabled us to remove from the illicit market
large quantities of cannabis which would have done great
harm to users.
Yet, without in any way condoning these illicit
practices, I must note that families whose living
conditions already leave much to be desired will suffer
from this because of the loss of earnings that these
operations entail. Pursuant to the principles of the
humanistic and environmentally friendly republic we have
established in Madagascar, about which our President
spoke at length at his inauguration before the supreme
court, our Government’s major concern, with a view to
reconciling individuals with their brethren — for,
according to Hobbes in his De Cive, “Man to Man is an
arrant Wolfe”, “homo homini lupus,” and, according to
Jean-Jacques Rousseau in Du Contrat social, man is born
good but society corrupts him — and with their
environment, is the eradication of poverty. It is a fact that
poor people are often prompted to commit reprehensible
acts, even crimes, that in normal circumstances their
conscience would condemn.
With this concern in mind, Madagascar’s national
anti-drug plan stresses, in the framework of integrated
rural development, a programme of replacing illicit crops
with other viable, profitable crops. But this programme
requires considerable human and financial resources, for
it is not enough to raise a crop: the substitute crop must
find its way from the farm to the market. This requires
reliable, well-built roads that will make year-round
transportation feasible.
The measures that Madagascar plans to implement
at the national, regional and international levels in the
context of its commitment to the fight against the scourge

7

General Assembly
20th special session
of drugs require human and financial resources that we
hope to find through other States and through international
governmental and non-governmental organizations — if the
international cooperation in eradicating this scourge, of
which we are constantly speaking here, is not an empty
phrase. That cooperation must also include condemnation
by the international community of all lax policies adopted
by certain States, including the liberalization and
decriminalization of any activity related to cannabis, and
the distribution of drugs to addicts for any reason. Such
policies could weaken the entire international anti-drug
system and could consequently impede the cooperation for
which that system is the only suitable framework.
The President: I thank the Director-General in charge
of the Interministerial Campaign against Drugs of
Madagascar for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. BaboucarrBlaise Jagne, chairman of the delegation of the Gambia.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Let me at the outset, on behalf
of the Gambian delegation, convey our heartfelt
condolences to the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria on the untimely demise of the former head of State,
General Sani Abacha. General Abacha contributed
immensely to strengthening the excellent relations that have
always existed between the sister republics of Nigeria and
the Gambia. He also did a great deal to give concrete
expression to the lofty ideals of pan-Africanism and,
indeed, African solidarity and brotherhood. May his soul
rest in perfect peace.
There could not have been a better forum in which to
address the world drug problem than this special session. It
is our fervent hope that through sustained, concerted
international effort, our common goal of a drug-free world
can be achieved. There is no need to emphasize the fact
that the drug menace has already assumed monumental
proportions, to such an extent that today no society is safe
from its lethal and tenacious tentacles. Quite apart from the
violence associated with drugs, the very fabric of society
itself is destroyed in the process, and the most precious
asset of any nation, young people, are always,
unfortunately, the first victims. As the young are the future
of all nations, we all have a vested interest in protecting
them. It should therefore be our common resolve to deal a
death-blow to the drug problem in all its forms.
The first step in this regard is the adoption of the draft
political declaration, which is also, in a way, our mission
statement. We are confident that, with determination, the

8

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
necessary political will and adequate resources, the job
can be done in the long run, the dimensions of the
challenge notwithstanding.
Let me take my own country as an example. We all
know that many countries here present have been used as
transit points by drug traffickers in their extensive
networks. The Gambia was no exception to the rule, but
since the advent of the new Government in July 1994
under the leadership of His Excellency President Yahya
A. J. J. Jammeh and since his immediate declaration of
war on drugs, the problem has been drastically reduced.
The National Drug Squad established in 1991 has stepped
up its activities, including airport and seaport
reinforcement exercises, monitoring and information
gathering, screening of suspects, identification, raids,
arrests and conviction of pushers, dealers and traffickers.
We could have done better with more resources but, all
the same, we are hopeful that with the momentum
generated by this special session we can count on the
assistance and cooperation of other countries to help us
with logistics, including training, and material support.
At this juncture, allow me to express my
delegation’s sincere appreciation of the timely offer made
by President Clinton concerning the establishment of a
fellowship programme that would enable officials from
other countries to come to the United States for further
training in the fight against drugs.
In addition to the Drug Squad mentioned earlier, a
National Drug Control Programme has also been
established in the Gambia, with two main objectives
envisaged, namely to control the menace of drug
trafficking and its associated problems and, secondly, to
strengthen the existing institutions associated with the
treatment of drug addicts. An integral part of our National
Drug Control Programme is its drug control laboratory,
where samples of seizures are analyzed. It was with the
active support of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme (UNDCP) that the laboratory was set
up primarily for the quality control of pharmaceuticals.
But because of an acute shortage of resources, we are
compelled to try to kill two birds with one stone. My
country is therefore most grateful to the UNDCP for their
cooperation.
Nor must we forget the invaluable contribution of a
number of non-governmental organizations. I am in our
case referring to a local organization, the Youth Front
Against Drugs and Alcohol, which has been working very

General Assembly
20th special session
hard not only to get young people away from drugs, but
also to open more attractive outlets for them.
In conclusion, I would like, on behalf of my
Government, to thank President Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico
for the initiative taken to convene this special session
devoted to the world drug problem. President Jammeh
himself would have liked to attend this important meeting
in person, but due to the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity currently
taking place in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, he could not
come. Nonetheless, he will continue to follow this matter
closely with undiminished interest and give the necessary
directives to all those who are concerned with the fight
against drugs in the Gambia for a coordinated and vigorous
follow-up.
This special session will no doubt rekindle the interest
that we all share in the fight against drugs. We all crave a
drug-free world. It is a daunting task, to say the least, but
we must take up the challenge because the stakes are so
high that we cannot afford to be complacent.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the delegation
of the Gambia for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Percy
Metsing Mangoaela, Chairman of the delegation of Lesotho.
Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): It is a singular honour for
me to address this twentieth special session of the General
Assembly, on behalf of the recently elected Government of
Lesotho, on a problem whose enormity is not in dispute.
The problem of drug abuse and attendant social
consequences poses a severe challenge to the
resourcefulness of humankind to respond collectively to a
common menace.
A sound and comprehensive framework for drug
control activities was established in the existing
international drug control treaties. The United Nations
International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) has been
coordinating all drug control activities within the United
Nations system and has also been providing effective
leadership in promoting international cooperation in drug
control. The International Narcotics Control Board has been
engaged in relentless efforts with Member States to ensure
the comprehensive implementation of the provisions of the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
Some major events have taken place, including the
International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit
Trafficking, held in Vienna in June 1987, and the
seventeenth special session of the General Assembly, held
in 1990, which was devoted to international drug control
issues and at which the Assembly adopted a Political
Declaration and Global Programme of Action. The
Assembly also proclaimed the 10-year period from 1991
to 2000 as the United Nations Decade against Drug
Abuse.
Despite all these efforts and others aimed at drug
control, all countries are now affected by the devastating
consequences of drug abuse. In fact, the drug problem has
bypassed national borders and has become a global threat.
The drug scourge has become increasingly complex. The
efforts of the international community to combat the
escalating problem are undermined by the production of
new drugs. The illicit use of and traffic in drugs continue
to pose a serious threat to the health and welfare of our
peoples and they also adversely affect the economic,
cultural and political foundations of our societies. Profits
made from illicit trafficking are being used to destabilize
Governments, corrupt officials and influence Government
decisions.
Lesotho is a party to the existing treaties on drug
control, namely, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol, the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 and the United
Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988. At this
special session, the Government of Lesotho wishes to
renew its commitment to give effect to the provisions of
those Conventions. We also reaffirm our commitment to
achieve concrete results on all the objectives set out by
the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
The Government of Lesotho is concerned that, in all
parts of the world, those who are mainly affected by the
drug problem are children and youth. The age of initiation
into drug abuse is falling almost every year. Article 33 of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which 191
States are parties, emphasizes the need to protect children
from abuse of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic
substances. Hence, at this special session, which marks
the tenth anniversary of the 1988 Convention, my
delegation reiterates that the participation of all nations,
communities and families is essential if we are to
successfully protect our children and win the fight against
drugs.

9

General Assembly
20th special session
It is disturbing to note that the extended family, which
occupies a central position in African societies, is rapidly
disintegrating due to factors such as poverty, drought, civil
war and political and ethnic conflicts, which, in turn, lead
to famine and massive displacement of populations.
Unfortunately, the erosion of the African family structure
has led to the drift towards drug abuse, especially among
children and young people. We therefore call upon all
members of the international community to address the
problem of drugs in Africa, taking into account factors that
contribute to the disintegration of the African family.
In this context, my delegation wishes to stress the
importance of the participation of families in any given
society in the fight against drugs. Families are the principal
means for the transmission of values, culture, attitudes and
patterns of behaviour. It is usually young people in
especially difficult circumstances, such as street children,
who are particularly vulnerable to drug abuse and
drug-related risk-taking behaviour. We recall that the
General Assembly, in its resolution 47/237 of 20 September
1993, proclaimed 15 May as the International Day of
Families. We are convinced that the international
community, by annual observance of this day, attaches
great importance to families as basic units of society.
However, we would still like to see the importance of the
participation of families in the fight against drugs being
highlighted at this session.
My delegation is very pleased that representatives
from 130 Governments who attended the final preparatory
session, which was held in Vienna from 16 to 21 March
1998, agreed to the Political Declaration proposed for
adoption at this special session. The Declaration sets out a
comprehensive global strategy designed to tackle
simultaneously all aspects of the drug problem. It is also
very important that target dates have been set. Lesotho also
welcomes the provisions set out in the Declaration on the
Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction”, “Measures
to promote judicial cooperation” and “Countering
money-laundering”.
My delegation cannot overemphasize the importance
of the principle of shared responsibility for addressing the
demand and supply aspects of drug-trafficking. We would
therefore welcome an assessment of the international drug
problem and the development of a forward-looking strategy
for the twenty-first century centred on the basic principle of
a balanced approach between supply and demand reduction
and, in particular, with full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, and non-intervention in
internal affairs of States.

10

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
In Lesotho, although we cannot claim not to be
affected by the scourge of drugs, we do not know the
extent of drug abuse and trafficking in the country. What
we do know is that cannabis is produced in the country,
albeit in small quantities. It grows in the mountain regions
with difficult road access. Most of the producers are the
poorest of the rural poor. They often export their produce
to neighbouring South Africa in order to earn money for
their sustenance and their other economic needs. These
people, who feed their families from the proceeds of their
illegal produce, who get arrested by the police and serve
long sentences in prison or who get mugged by criminals,
are not criminals themselves. They are heads of families
faced with abject poverty. We therefore agree that
alternative development is the answer to these intractable
problems.
Of equal concern to my Government is the link
between illicit traffic in drugs and organized crime. The
illicit drug trade is associated with illicit traffic in arms
and with money-laundering. The Government of Lesotho
has realized the prevalence of corruption in the country.
Research undertaken with the assistance of the Danish
Centre for Human Rights and the Governments of
Botswana, South Africa and the United Kingdom has
shown the incidence of economic crime to be on the
increase in the country and to involve senior officials in
the civil service and other Government institutions. The
Government has also recognized that its control strategies
cannot succeed without legislation against moneylaundering, and is thus in the process of enacting such
legislation. My delegation believes that the drug problem
can be effectively dealt with only through international
cooperation. We are therefore appreciative of the
cooperation we have received from some of our
neighbours, such as Botswana and South Africa, as well
as from those farther afield, such as Denmark and the
United Kingdom.
Finally, the Government of Lesotho wishes to
express its appreciation for the contribution made by
UNDCP in the subregion. UNDCP has been involved in
raising awareness and strengthening law enforcement to
halt the flow of illegal drugs across national borders in
the subregion. Just last month it funded a regional
conference in Nairobi, Kenya, in which officials from 15
southern and eastern African countries participated.
UNDCP’s efforts are complementary to the initiatives
taken by the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), of which Lesotho is a member, to combat drugtrafficking within the Community. In this regard, SADC
has adopted a Protocol on combating illicit drugs.

General Assembly
20th special session
The challenge posed by the drug abuse problem is not
for the faint-hearted, and the international community, when
it decides to act in concert, has never been known to be
faint-hearted. Such conviction underpins our faith in our
collective capacity to rise to the challenge.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the delegation
of Lesotho for his statement.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. William Bull,
Chairman of the delegation of Liberia.
Mr. Bull (Liberia): Permit me at the outset, on behalf
of my Government, to reiterate our heartfelt condolences to
the Government and the people of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria on the passing of General Sani Abacha. He was an
outstanding son of Africa, and his passing is a tremendous
loss to the subregion.
The Government of Liberia welcomes the convening
of this twentieth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to the world drug problem.
It is to be regretted that over the years the appeals
from this rostrum and other international forums for
concerted international action to address the drug problem
have not received the support they deserve. Yet our
participation in this session reflects a growing awareness of
the complexity of the problem and the need to take global
action to combat the illicit drug scourge, which is having a
detrimental impact on millions of lives throughout our
world.
A comprehensive approach to the drug problem must
address both the demand and supply of drugs and the
impact it has had on the socio-economic development and
infrastructure of countries, particularly those of the
developing world.
In this regard, our universal Organization is the best
forum to sensitize people and help formulate measures to
address the world drug problem. We pay a deserved tribute
to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his leadership and
consistent efforts to focus attention on the urgent need for
decisive action to reverse the present trend. We
acknowledge the very important contributions of the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP),
under the capable leadership of Mr. Arlacchi, in helping
mobilize international action and assistance to combat the
drug problem.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
In Africa, there is a growing recognition of the need
to arrest the problems of drug abuse in order to prevent
the diversion of scarce resources from socio-economic
development to law enforcement and other measures to
combat drug-trafficking. Thus, various forums, at both the
regional and subregional levels, have been making
concerted efforts at drug control. The plan of action of
the Organization of African Unity, adopted in July 1996
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government,
established guidelines to ensure coherence of action in
drug control at the national and regional levels. Many of
the countries have also entered into bilateral and
multilateral cooperation agreements aimed at drug control.
At the subregional level, the member States of the
Economic Community of West African States have
worked together since 1993 to implement a unified drug
control programme aimed at the eradication of illicit
drugs from their countries.
In the case of Liberia, which experienced seven
years of war until last July, when democratic elections
were held, the incidence of drug abuse had reached
alarming proportions. In 1995, the then interim
Administration established an Inter-Ministerial Drug
Committee headed by an Executive Director. The
Committee sought for the first time to formulate national
programmes and policies for the prevention, treatment and
rehabilitation of drug users. It also sought to harmonize
policies with other countries in the subregion to stem
drug-trafficking.
Upon taking office in August 1997, President
Charles Taylor, in his first nationwide address, stressed
his Government’s determination to combat trafficking in
illicit drugs and to prevent drug traffickers from using
Liberian territory as a safe haven.
In collaboration with UNDCP, friendly Governments
and other groups, the Liberian authorities have developed
a two-year recovery plan, estimated to cost $2 million,
aimed at anti-drug sensitization of the population. This
includes institutional capacity-building through training,
seminars, mass media education, and radio and television
programmes, among other things.
A strategy for the rehabilitation of ex-combatants
who are drug addicts has been designed by the
Government. The estimated cost for the implementation
of this programme over a three-year period is $3 million.

11

General Assembly
20th special session
It is clear that in spite of the modest efforts of Liberia
and other like-minded countries to institute national
programmes and policies to combat illicit drug-trafficking
and drug abuse, only concerted international action can
reverse this trend. This is why my Government fully
endorses the time-specific declarations and programmes
which will be adopted at this special session.
In this connection, it is imperative that adequate
support be given to the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme and to countries such as Liberia, which
lack the resources to fully implement national programmes
aimed at combating the drug problem.
The Government of Liberia is committed to the global
strategy to comprehensively address the drug problem
confronting our world. It is our hope that the decisions
reached here will send a clear message of the resolve of the
international community to bring an end to this menace
facing mankind.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the delegation
of Liberia for his statement.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vladimir
Galuška, Chairman of the delegation of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Galuška (Czech Republic): I do not think that
anyone will be surprised when I start by saying that now,
near the end of the twentieth century, drugs are one of the
major problems of our planet. They affect political
institutions as well as the social welfare, health and security
of populations in virtually all countries of the world. This
supranational phenomenon, which transcends the boundaries
of States, regions and geopolitical areas, is a typical global
issue that can be addressed only by sustained international
cooperation. The Czech Republic is convinced that the
necessary prerequisite for an effective anti-drug action, on
the domestic and international level, is the political will of
each State concerned. The ratification and implementation
of the three international drug control Conventions of 1961,
1971 and 1988 is an indispensable precondition for an
effective fight against drugs.
For the Czech Republic, the main purpose of this
special session is to strengthen those Conventions, which
the international community considers to be basic legal
instruments, by adopting the recommendations contained in
the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (A/S20/4). The draft Political Declaration, reflecting the world
community’s awareness of the variety of drug problems,

12

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
strengthens its effort to reach concrete targets and for the
first time in history sets the dates for implementation.
The Czech Republic greatly appreciates the
Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand
Reduction. We fully agree with the idea that demand
reduction programmes must cover all preventive
measures — those intended to deter young people from
using drugs as well as those designed to minimize the
damaging health and social impact of drug abuse. The
Czech Republic considers that the texts prepared for this
session offer a good basis for enhanced international
cooperation and believes that we will soon reach a
consensus on their adoption.
Not to dwell on formal proclamations, I will now
cite several examples of the Czech Republic’s resolve to
confront the growing drug problem. This February, the
Government approved a new anti-drug strategy for the
years 1998-2000, introducing an integrated and balanced
approach that is in keeping with the Action Programme
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly. A
balanced approach to demand and supply reduction is the
key to effective drug control. This strategy is applied at
two basic levels: the central level and the local
community level. This decentralized system delegates
responsibility to district anti-drug coordinators. Our
experience has shown that involvement of the local
community in drug control projects is of vital importance.
Over the last three years, the Czech Republic has
introduced many laws which are fully consistent with the
relevant United Nations conventions and the European
Union acquis. The most important ones are: the law
against money-laundering; the amendment to the criminal
code declaring possession of drugs for personal use a
criminal act; and a law regulating verification of the
legitimate end-use of narcotic and psychotropic
substances, including precursors. The main thrust of the
Czech Republic’s anti-drug strategy is to broaden and
strengthen existing cooperation at the subregional and
regional level. In this process we appreciate the role of
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
(UNDCP), which remains the main coordinating body for
the efforts of the world community in the implementation
of its far-reaching goals.
It is not necessary to graduate with a degree in
economics to notice that in today’s world, drugs also
represent an economic problem. It is alarming that the
international drug trade now accounts for up to 5 per cent
of world trade, and that the profits from organized crime

General Assembly
20th special session
have reached hundreds of millions of United States dollars.
The overall price which the world’s population has to pay
is overwhelming and perhaps disproportionate to the energy
invested in drug-control action. It is alarming also that the
AIDS epidemic, spreading within the community of drug
addicts, has grown into a major public-health risk which
already has had, or in the near future will have, a ruinous
effect on national budgets.
Drugs are clearly a chronic problem of the modern
world. Some say that the underlying cause is the new social
context, or the specific biological and psychological
inclination of drug addicts. However, with realistic goals
and a balanced, coordinated approach, there is hope that we
will bring this growing problem under control. Sustained
international cooperation is necessary, as no country will be
able to overcome this problem alone. I think that this
session is not only an exceptional opportunity to reaffirm
our determination to honour international drug control
commitments but also a chance for the international
community to take at least a small step towards solving this
major problem.
Let me conclude by saying that the tasks we are facing
are difficult but clearly and realistically stated. It is now up
to Member States as to whether, to what extent, and how
quickly we will accomplish them. Clearly, the results of our
joint effort will shape the face of the world on the threshold
of the next millennium.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the delegation
of the Czech Republic for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mohammed Al-Sameen,
Chargé d’affaires of Oman.
Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic):
I should like first of all to express to you, Sir, on behalf of
the delegation of my country, our warm thanks for your
excellent organization of the work of this session. I should
like also to express my appreciation for the work of the
Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme (UNDCP) for the successful
preparation of the work of the session.
The General Assembly has convened at this special
session to consider an issue of great importance to the
international community. This international manifestation
and consideration of the drug problem and the problem of
illicit drug trafficking is yet further proof of the importance
attached by the international community to eliminating this
dangerous transnational scourge. It is certain that the

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
scourge of drugs affects all peoples and that it is a
catastrophe for societies.
Through the damage it inflicts on the development
strategies of countries — not to speak of the resulting
threats to international peace and security — international
cooperation to face the threat of drugs and of illicit drug
trafficking is an absolute necessity which imposes on us
the need for coordinated efforts to achieve tangible results
aimed at eliminating this problem in all its dimensions.
The international conventions and relevant
resolutions adopted by the international community have
greatly contributed to promoting efforts to fight this
scourge. Now more than ever it is up to us to implement
these conventions and promote them through mechanisms
that can succeed.
My country hails the international efforts to combat
drugs and all related activities. My country would also
like to state once again its firm commitment to joint
cooperation to eradicate this phenomenon. This is because
we are fully aware of the danger of drugs and their
negative impact on the health and prosperity of humanity
throughout the world. My country’s Government is
convinced of the importance of promoting international
efforts in this framework. We have therefore participated
with the international community in the elaboration of
effective solutions to remedy the problems of drug abuse
and illicit drug traffic. Consequently, my country has
worked to promulgate strict national laws to address this
phenomenon and contain it. In addition, my country’s
Government has established a specialized body to combat
drugs, carry out training, and, develop and promote
scientific research efforts and studies aimed at addressing
and resolving this problem.
We wish to reiterate the importance of the role of
international action in combating drugs. Therefore we
stress the importance of shared responsibility, which
should be applied on a firm and integrated basis, keeping
in view the principle of respect of national sovereignty
and territorial integrity of countries and of noninterference in their affairs. On this basis my country has
acceded to all the international conventions and protocols
on the fight against drugs. Furthermore there is joint
cooperation among all of our national agencies and bodies
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(Interpol) in this context.
On the regional level, my country has participated in
the elaboration of the draft of the unified law on drug

13

General Assembly
20th special session
crimes of the Gulf Cooperation Council. My country also
participated in the formulation of the Arab strategy to fight
drug abuse. In addition, it has also cooperated with the
Arab Office to Fight Narcotic Drugs of the Council of Arab
Ministers of the Interior.
Finally, my country is pleased with the
recommendations of the preparatory body for the session.
We would also like to reiterate the importance we attach to
action in the context of a new partnership to apply the
principle of shared responsibility and promote the legal
framework. This is in addition to emphasizing the
importance of coordinating efforts among countries to adopt
legislation aiming at implementing an international strategy.
These efforts will be insufficient unless they are
harmonized with actions to reduce supply from the
producer countries. This should be accompanied by
energetic efforts to reduce the demand for drugs, including
the so-called soft or sweet drugs.
We should also not overlook the need to forfeit the
funds generated by illicit drug trafficking and to prevent
money-laundering. We need a mechanism for the
strengthening of cooperation among States through the
exchange of information in the context of the anti-drug
struggle.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the delegation
of Oman for his statement.
Before I begin calling on Observers, I should like to
thank the representatives of Yemen, the Gambia and the
Czech Republic, whose statements did not exceed six
minutes, for their compliance with the decision of the
General Assembly that statements would be limited to
seven minutes. Everyone knows how difficult it is to make
a short statement.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Ruth
Dreifuss, Federal Councillor and Vice-President of the
Swiss Confederation.
Mrs. Dreifuss (Switzerland) (interpretation from
French): By devoting its deliberations to the fight against
the illicit production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the General
Assembly is echoing the concerns of the international
community.
No society is today spared by drug abuse and the
traffic in illicit drugs. A distinction between producer and
consumer countries can no longer be made. Given this

14

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
trend, the international community must assume a shared
responsibility and adopt a common strategy. My country
supports the efforts made in recent years by the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme to
strengthen international cooperation and to develop
multidisciplinary strategies at the national level.
Switzerland has formulated and implemented an
enhanced drug strategy because of 1980s phenomena such
as the AIDS epidemic, an increase in the number of drug
users, the marginalization and obvious desperation of drug
addicts, and an increase in the use of drugs in public
places and in drug-related crime. Given the magnitude of
these problems and aware of the fact that there is no
single solution to resolve them, the Government of
Switzerland has opted for a pragmatic, coherent policy to
reduce drug addiction and its negative consequences, and
to combat organized crime. That policy consists of a
global, multidisciplinary approach based on four
principles that promote confidence and cooperation among
all players: prevention, treatment, risk reduction and
suppression.
The first principle is prevention, to which we attach
a high priority, as does the Declaration on the Guiding
Principles of Demand Reduction. This initiative requires
a long-term commitment to young people because they
are increasingly confronted with the opportunity to use
illicit drugs. Prevention activities are essential within all
social structures - in the family, in schools, in the area of
leisure and sports, and so on.
The second main principle is the treatment and
social rehabilitation of dependent persons, where it is
essential to offer a broad range of care. It was to take into
account particularly severe dependency cases that did not
respond to other therapeutic methods that Switzerland,
began in 1994 to carry out scientific studies involving the
medical prescription of narcotics to severely dependent
persons. These studies are just a very small component of
the treatment measures that are used in my country. The
prescription, under strict State control, of heroin,
morphine and intravenous methadone, is but one element
in a broader medical and social care programme.
I wish to repeat this loud and clear here: Switzerland
is not moving towards drug liberalization — quite the
contrary. Heroin remains a banned substance in
Switzerland and can be prescribed only in specialized
institutions, with special authorization from the
Confederation.

General Assembly
20th special session
These studies have elicited great and often very critical
interest. Switzerland wants to act very openly and will
make available the scientific results of these trials to all
interested persons. Our country has received several foreign
delegations and is happy to continue to provide information
about its approach.
The results of these trials indicate that the medical
prescription of narcotics makes it possible to treat severely
dependent drug addicts who have already tried other forms
of treatment without success. Their state of health and
social situation have improved considerably. Criminal
activity among these persons is decreasing sharply.
However, withdrawal requires a relatively long period of
time.
The prescription of heroin to severely dependent drug
addicts within the framework of a well-developed health
system, such as my county’s, has proved to be an
interesting possible complement to the various forms of
drug dependence treatments. We stress that many conditions
have to be fulfilled in order to ensure that this form of
treatment does not do more harm than good.
The third basic principle involves risk-reduction and
survival measures for drug-dependent persons during the
active phase of their addiction to drugs in order to prevent
their physical and psychological deterioration, or even their
deaths. Needle-exchange programmes, for example, seek to
reduce the risk of transmitting AIDS or hepatitis.
Finally, the fourth basic principle involves suppressing
the illicit production, sale and consumption of drugs, as
well as the money-laundering that stems from these
activities. With regard to the police, the Confederation has
strengthened its coordination and intelligence in recent
years, at both the national and international levels.
Accordingly, Switzerland set up this spring a specialized
unit that serves as a communications centre on moneylaundering. This is one of the direct consequences of the
entry into force on 1 April of the new law on moneylaundering.
Likewise, the Confederation has increased its efforts
to control the production of psychotropic substances,
precursors and essential chemicals. Switzerland, which is a
major producer of chemicals, is aware of its responsibility.
It is through the effective control of primary chemicals and
a relentless struggle against money-laundering that
Switzerland intends to reach an important stage in the fight
against organized crime.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
The drug policy of the Swiss Government was
debated at length last autumn. In a vote on 28 September,
the people of Switzerland rejected by an overwhelming
majority of 70 per cent the proposals of those who
championed a more traditional and narrower approach.
This result gives a very strong democratic legitimacy to
the Government’s drug policy.
The success of any drug policy is measured by facts.
Allow me, in conclusion, to recall briefly some
encouraging signs that have emerged in Switzerland. The
number of drug-related deaths has decreased steadily. The
number of new cases of HIV and hepatitis infection has
also decreased dramatically. The number of new harddrug users in Switzerland is decreasing, and the number
of regular drug users has remained stable since 1990. The
average age of drug addicts is rising. Most drug addicts
eventually succeed in breaking their dependency. Finally,
illicit drug seizures doubled between 1995 and 1996,
while confiscations of drug-related money quadrupled last
year.
I should also like to reaffirm here Switzerland’s
solidarity with international efforts to combat drugs. My
country recognizes the importance of international
coordination in the area of drug addiction because illicitdrug related problems cannot be solved within a single
country. International cooperation and coordination are
essential. The three days that we have spent here together
will make it possible for us to strengthen them.
The President: I thank the Federal Councillor and
Vice-President of the Swiss Confederation for her
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Archbishop
Javier Lozano Barragán, President of the Pontifical
Council for Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Lozano Barragán (Holy See)
(interpretation from Spanish): I bring the greetings of
Pope John Paul II, who strongly supports our work in the
struggle against drug abuse. The Holy See fully supports
the fight against illegal drug traffic.
Some of the leading causes of drug use among
young people and adults are the lack of clear, convincing
motivations in life, the absence of values, the conviction
that life is not worth living, a sense of loneliness and
inability to communicate, the lack of a close relationship
with God, the lack of strong human and spiritual

15

General Assembly
20th special session
principles, escapism in order to forget and an unsatisfying
social structure based on a materialistic and destructive
view of human needs. The pursuit of money takes
possession of the hearts of many people, and by way of the
drug trade turns them into traffickers in the freedom of
their brothers and sisters. This pursuit becomes entangled
with major economic and even political interests.
Drug abuse is totally incompatible with the basic
principles of dignity and human coexistence. Those who
traffic in drugs are merchants of death who assault mankind
with the deceit of false freedoms and prospects for
happiness in a nefarious form of commerce.
As for liberalization, it must be remembered that drugs
are not overcome with drugs; drugs are an evil, and
concessions should not be made to evils. Experience has
shown that liberalization is not a solution, but a surrender.
The distinction between hard and soft drugs leads into a
blind alley. Drug addiction is not a question of drugs, but
of what motivates an individual to take them.
To remedy this scourge, we suggest three courses:
prevention, suppression and recovery. With respect to
prevention, we must restore the human values of love and
life, the only ones able to give full meaning to existence,
especially when they are illuminated by religious faith. It is
incumbent on public institutions to insist on a serious policy
that aims to correct situations of personal and social
disorder, among which the crisis of the family,
unemployment among young people, housing problems, the
lack of social and medical services and the shortcomings of
the school system stand out as prime considerations. A
serene conviction concerning the immortality of the soul,
future resurrection and eternal responsibility for one’s
actions is the surest method for such prevention.
As for suppression, it is a necessary element, but not
a sufficient one by itself. The international commercial and
financial structure of the drug trade must be combated. A
solid front must be created that is committed to denouncing
and legally prosecuting the merchants of death and
eliminating the networks of social and moral disintegration.
The expansion of the market in addictive substances must
be effectively checked. The interests of those speculating in
this market must be brought to light. The instruments and
mechanisms they employ must be identified so as to
proceed to dismantle them in a coordinated and effective
fashion.
I would like to quote Pope John Paul II, who said:

16

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
“My fervent exhortation and admiration ... for the
heads of Government and citizens [who] have
endeavoured to combat the production, sale and
abuse of drugs, perhaps paying a very high price,
even sacrificing their physical integrity ... I invite
civil authorities, those with economic decisionmaking power and everyone with social
responsibilities to continue and intensify their efforts
to perfect legislation at all levels for the fight against
the different kinds of drug addiction and to oppose
all the forms of the drug culture and of drug traffic.”
As regards recovery, it is necessary to know the
individuals who take drugs, understand their inner world,
lead them to discover or rediscover their own dignity and
help them as active participants to bring about the reemergence and growth of the personal resources that
drugs have buried. This should be done by way of a
confident reanimation of the will towards noble, stable
ideals. The fear of the future and of commitments to adult
life that is observed in young people today makes them
particularly fragile. They have a tendency to withdraw
into themselves. The forces of death push them to give in
to drugs and violence, and sometimes even to suicide.
Behind what might appear to be a fascination with
destruction we find a call for help from these young
people and a deep thirst for life that needs to be
understood so that the world will know how to radically
modify points of view and ways of like.
Young people who have overcome drugs represent
hope and bear witness to the fact that victory is possible.
To a society concerned about the drug phenomenon, they
constitute a new impetus for continuing the battle and
committing all our energies and goodwill. Many types of
action are needed to combat drug abuse effectively, but
there is one central action without which nothing can be
achieved: to restore fully the conviction of the
transcendent, unique value of man and his responsibility
for free self-fulfilment.
The President: I thank the President of the
Pontifical Council for Pastoral Assistance to Health Care
Workers of the Holy See for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Manuel Marín, VicePresident of the European Commission.
Mr. Marín (European Commission) (interpretation
from Spanish): These 15 months of intensive and fruitful
work have demonstrated the international community’s

General Assembly
20th special session
interest in and concern about the very complex issue of the
fight against drugs.
If one concept could summarize the spirit of this
special session, it would be that of shared responsibility.
The seriousness and international dimensions of the fight
against drugs make everyone’s cooperation necessary. There
are no easy solutions, nor is there room for unilateral
measures: the problems are shared and their solution must
be as well.
The attitude of the international community and public
opinion with regard to the fight against drugs has come a
long way. Today, the simplistic and artificial distinction
between consuming and producing countries has lost all
credibility. Moreover, all countries are affected by the same
problems directly associated with drug-trafficking, such as
money-laundering and the diversion of chemical precursors.
Because the challenge is global, an essential component of
this shared responsibility is the focus on multilateral
approaches, of which this special session is a telling
example.
In addition, the fact that the problems of drug
production and consumption can be solved only by reducing
economic and social marginalization is a fundamental
element that must not be forgotten and that must guide
international action. It must therefore be addressed as one
of the social and economic dimensions of sustainable
development. Likewise, we will not be able to put a stop to
the cultivation of narcotic drugs without helping to ensure
viable livelihoods for rural communities in developing
countries, which often lack other economic alternatives.
Allow me to say a few words now about the European
Community’s strategy. We are fighting against three
scourges. We are fighting against poverty and the
hopelessness that it engenders, which gives rise to drug
consumption and trafficking; we are fighting against drugs,
which destroy homes and communities; and we are fighting
against crime, which finds in drug-trafficking a vast and
fertile terrain. We seek to strike a reasonable balance
between the control of supply and the reduction of demand.
We are fighting against social and health problems
associated with drugs and the criminality they generate.
This strategy is embodied in a number of initiatives
and approaches. First, the European Community is putting
its own house in order, through policies for growth and job
creation, through its fight against social exclusion, through
the prevention of drug addiction and through its global
action plan against drugs, which allows us to react quickly

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
to new trends in drug production and consumption. This
is important with regard to synthetic drugs, for which we
have set up an early warning system that allows us to
respond effectively to rapid changes in the design and use
of these drugs. In this effort we are relying on the
valuable expertise of the European Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction. The European Union is ready
to share its experience in this regard.
Secondly, in its actions abroad the European
Community is a staunch supporter of both regional and
multilateral approaches. In this regard, we support the
agencies of the United Nations, particularly the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, as a
centre of expertise.
Thirdly, we are helping strengthen our fight against
the scourge of drugs through our political dialogue and
other external policies with third countries. This political
dialogue is particularly important in connection with the
countries of Central and Eastern Europe, which are both
producing and transit countries and also have a serious
problem with synthetic drugs. The European
Community’s agreements with these countries were the
first to include a drug clause. We are making considerable
efforts to help them harmonize their laws and policies
with ours and consolidate their civil societies, with a view
to their future accession to the European Union.
Another result of political dialogue are the
agreements to prevent the diversion of chemical
precursors that we have signed with the United States and
other countries.
One fruit of our dialogue with Central America and
Andean countries has been the establishment of a special
drug regime within our Generalized System of
Preferences. In this manner, we have encouraged and are
encouraging the diversification of their economies away
from drug cultivation. In addition, we support alternative
development efforts, such as the successful Chapare
project in Bolivia.
I also wish to emphasize the growing attention given
to drugs in our dialogue with Asian and African countries
and with the Caribbean. The Action Plan for the latter
region will strengthen maritime cooperation and the fight
against money laundering, which is essential to reduce
drug trafficking.
Let us not forget that, however, as important as
international cooperation is, the individual efforts of every

17

General Assembly
20th special session
nation to mainstream drug concerns into its social and
economic policies are equally crucial.
Let me conclude by highlighting the strong support of
the European Community for the Political Declaration and
all its accompanying documents. In particular, we subscribe
to all commitments relating to matters of Community
competence.
The President: I thank the Vice-President of the
European Commission for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Raymond E. Kendall,
Secretary-General of the International Criminal Police
Organization.
Mr. Kendall (International Criminal Police
Organization): Ten years have elapsed since we met in
Vienna to finalize and adopt the 1988 United Nations
Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances. It was a major step forward in
international diplomacy and focused the attention of the
entire world community on the global plague of drug
trafficking and abuse. Now, 10 years later, it is only fitting
that we use this special session to take stock of what we
have accomplished since then, individually and collectively,
in controlling this scourge.
The organization which I represent is an international
intergovernmental body, the main objective of which is to
ensure and promote the widest possible mutual assistance
between all criminal police authorities within the limits of
the laws existing in the different countries and in the spirit
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This year,
the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) is
marking its seventy-fifth year of providing such assistance
to its member countries.
The organization has assisted its member countries,
from its inception, in combating all aspects of international
crime, but it is in the fight against drug trafficking that this
organization has played a leading role and invested the
greater part of its resources. Our first resolution against
drug trafficking was adopted in Berlin in 1926 and
advocated central drug services to exchange information. It
is interesting to see how much progress has been made
since then.
Realizing that a modern communications system is
essential to effective international cooperation, we have
spent during the last 10 years over $20 million to ensure
that our 177 member countries have the services at their

18

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
disposal necessary to conduct investigations outside their
normal jurisdiction and across borders. This system
allows for the transmission of textual messages and also
enables law enforcement services to instantly transmit
photographs and fingerprints essential in identifying
suspects and criminals operating internationally.
We are perhaps the only international organization
which has the capability of transmitting criminal
information to the law enforcement agencies of 177
countries in a rapid and secure way. Last year, about two
million criminal messages were exchanged through the
network, about 50 per cent of which were related to drug
offences. As a result of the criminal information
exchange, thousands of traffickers have been arrested and
tons of illicit drugs have been seized.
In addition to communications, another requirement
for successful transnational organized crime investigations
is intelligence. Only when criminal intelligence is
assembled in one place or one database and then
systematically analyzed can the relationships, hierarchy
and membership of organized criminal groups be
identified and eventually immobilized. In a special
operation conducted by us over the past two years, a
major trafficking organization operating in virtually every
region of the world was unmasked and many of its
members were arrested. The organization specialized in
smuggling drugs through the international postal service.
The method facilitated the smuggling of hundreds of
kilograms of cocaine and heroin across the globe.
Through a systematic analysis of thousands of drug
records, we were able to identify several key members of
the trafficking organization, who were subsequently
arrested.
In our efforts to provide an appropriate response to
the drug problem, we have always attached great
importance to the need for close cooperation with other
international and regional organizations concerned by the
same problem.
A special working relationship with the United
Nations Economic and Social Council Commission on
Narcotic Drugs was established in 1948. Since then, we
have attended all its meetings as observers. This special
long-standing relationship was formally recognized in
October 1996, when we were granted observer status to
this Assembly.
In accordance with both the spirit and
the letter of various resolutions, there has been an
unprecedented increase in the level of cooperation
between Interpol and the Economic and Social Council,

General Assembly
20th special session
together with other United Nations bodies. We have also
developed cooperation with other international and regional
bodies.
I would like to say that, although law enforcement is
the raison d’être of Interpol, we do not consider it as a
panacea for all ills associated with the drug problem. The
problem is too complex and needs to be addressed in social,
medical and educational terms, as well as in terms of law
enforcement, which means that, for us, the subject of
demand reduction is particularly important.
We are adamantly opposed to any form of legalization
of drugs, which would confer the status of legitimacy to
illicit drugs or their abuse. On the other hand, we are
entirely supportive of the notion of providing, as an
alternative to punishment, the treatment, rehabilitation and
social reintegration of drug-abusing offenders, as is
recommended in the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand
Reduction in the papers which were prepared for this
meeting. Such a multifaceted approach is likely to wean the
drug users away from crime, disease and misery, ensure
better deployment of scarce resources, and give us, the law
enforcement authorities, a reasonable chance to deal with
the drug barons and their illicit activities by concentrating
on the distribution networks, down to street level.
Many speakers have referred to commitment and
political will over the past three days. Whilst I am greatly
encouraged by such statements, we in law enforcement
have noted that there is often a considerable delay in
translating words into effective policies and action
programmes. There are many examples which I would
quote, such as the recommendations arising from the Lyons
meeting of the G7 group of nations concerning transnational
crime. Many have yet to be implemented. How many
countries have signed and ratified the 1988 Convention and
still not created the appropriate domestic legislation? The
Convention was adopted 10 years ago — how long does it
take? There are police forces and customs units which are
ill-equipped and ill-trained and receive little or no pay. This
is not a mark of efficiency — it is an open invitation to
corrupt practices.
As the main voice of law enforcement in this General
Assembly, I would call upon the representatives of the
nations of the world gathered here today to act in the
principle of the Action Plan that is being proposed, with
date limits to ensure that the action takes place in
appropriate conditions and in the appropriate time. I believe
that the time for a truly action-oriented approach has

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
arrived and gives us the opportunity to begin again,
perhaps with some new motivation.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General of the
International Criminal Police Organization for his
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mokhtar
Lamani, Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic
Conference) (interpretation from French): It is an honour
and a pleasure for me to address this Assembly on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).
Allow me at the outset to convey the greetings and best
wishes for success of Mr. Azeddine Laraki, SecretaryGeneral of the OIC, as well as his regret at being unable
to attend this important session of the General Assembly.
We must first welcome the unity and solidarity
shown by the Members of the United Nations in
confronting the scourge of drugs. The massive presence
of member countries of the OIC and, especially, their
level of representation bear witness to the importance that
our Organization attaches to this problem and its harmful
effects upon socio-economic progress, family structures,
and all the dimensions of our modern society.
The OIC has always placed this important question
amongst its key concerns, as can be seen in the various
resolutions adopted by the organization at the summit and
ministerial conference levels. Thus, in 1988, the OIC
organized a meeting of experts in Istanbul to address the
use, production, illegal processing and sale of
psychotropic substances. The group of experts proposed
measures aimed at countering this scourge. Those
measures are essentially inspired by the provisions of the
three international Conventions on drugs: the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 and the United
Nations Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988.
The development of modern techniques and the
globalization of the world economy have set a new
challenge in the struggle against this growing scourge
because it is no longer possible for any single country to
control this phenomenon. It can be effectively fought only
by strengthening cooperation and the shared utilization of
technological and human resources that only the United
Nations and regional organizations can bring together.

19

General Assembly
20th special session
That is why our organization favours a global
approach to this question, an integrated international
approach that takes into account all aspects, including the
socio-economic, of the question.
The documents submitted to this session deserve our
keen attention. The shortfalls in the financing of the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme must be
corrected. However, we welcome the work done by the
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention under the
leadership of its Executive Director, Mr. Pino Arlacchi. We
support strengthening law enforcement legislation against
money laundering, as well as the proposal of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs that certain international
financial institutions should take bolder steps to incorporate
the drug dimension into their development programmes.
The countries that constitute the largest markets for
narcotics need to strengthen their presence in United
Nations machinery and in their assistance to and
cooperation with the South. Assistance in this area should
target not only law enforcement machinery — the judiciary,
customs and police — but also the banking sector, in order
to curb money laundering linked to drug trafficking.
The machinery of the United Nations and of regional
and national groups are the appropriate frameworks for
facing this issue. Our organization will spare no effort to
participate actively in all forms of information exchange
and multilateral arrangements aimed at developing technical
assistance programmes to respond to the complexity of this
phenomenon and to fight this scourge.
The abuse of and illegal traffic in drugs have
devastating effects on our States and societies. They
encourage the rise of crime, violence and corruption. They
severely drain human, natural and financial resources that
could otherwise be used for economic and social
development.
One new aspect of this trend is that it has spread to
countries that lack the means to combat it and are thus the
ideal targets of the drug multinational. The weakness of
State machinery, civil wars and the disorganization of
traditional structures are elements that make international
drug crimes difficult to combat. The sales figures of this
traffic are sometimes literally mind-boggling in comparison
with the budgets of many developing countries.
That is why we welcome the options discussed by the
international forums and regional arrangements aimed at
attacking the phenomenon at various stages. The

20

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
programmes should cover prevention as well as
consumption. They should seek to promote judicial
cooperation, to strengthen the fight against money
laundering and to develop viable alternatives in order to
eliminate the planting of drug crops by promoting
replacement crops.
On the eve of the twenty-first century, we are
entitled to believe in the firm resolve of the international
community to give shape to the common will to eradicate
this scourge forever.
The President: I thank the Permanent Observer of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference for his
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Bin Mohamed Al-Salem, Secretary-General, Arab Interior
Ministers’ Council, League of Arab States.
Mr. Al-Salem (League of Arab States)
(interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased
to extend my sincere thanks to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations for his kind invitation to the Arab
Interior Ministers’ Council to attend this special session
of the General Assembly devoted to countering the drug
problem, which harms the souls and bodies of millions of
people, tears at the fabric of societies and countless
families and brings many tragedies and lots of pain to
humanity as a whole.
I am also pleased to convey the greetings of His
Royal Highness, Prince Nayif ibn ’Abd al-’Aziz Al Sa’ud,
the Interior Minister of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
Honorary President of the Arab Interior Ministers’
Council. His colleagues, Their Royal Highnesses and
Excellencies, the Arab Interior Ministers, assure this
Assembly of their absolute and sincere support for any
international effort to curb and stem this phenomenon and
limit its negative human and material impacts on
mankind.
The Arab Interior Ministers’ Council, established in
1982, is a regional security body in which all Arab
countries are members. Its main objective is to develop
cooperative and coordination efforts among its member
States in the fields of internal security and crime control.
In this context, the Council seeks to promote the security
and safety of the individual in the Arab homeland,
protecting his rights and properties regardless of his
nationality, religious beliefs or ethnic background.

General Assembly
20th special session

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998

In order to achieve this noble goal, the Arab Interior
Ministers’ Council has designed many strategies, plans and
programmes in the brief period since its inception. A close
look at the agenda of this session will show that our
Council has already addressed many questions included on
it through the implementation of the items and components
of the Arab Strategy against the illicit use of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances, adopted by the Council in
1986.

secretariat. Our twelfth conference was held a few days
ago in Tunisia. Our specialized office for drug affairs also
periodically reviews the unified Arab blacklist of
traffickers in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
It also defines and modifies the unified Arab schedule of
drug substances, under international control, and prepares
the quarterly and annual statistical reports on the volume
and dimensions of the drug phenomenon in the Arab
world.

The Strategy is aimed at tackling the drug problem in
its various dimensions and trends and at the local, regional
and international levels.

As for Arab international cooperation, the Council
encourages and calls upon Arab States to promote
cooperation and coordination with other countries in order
to combat this phenomenon collectively and effectively.
The outcome of this cooperation has been 15 bilateral and
multilateral agreements among the Arab countries and
between them and others, as well as the accession of 17
Arab countries to the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971 and the ratification by 13 Arab States
of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988.

At the national level, each Arab country has
established a specialized drug-control unit, while many have
high-level national committees for the same purpose. The
member States seek to enhance the efficiency and
performance of the staff working in drug-control units, who
benefit from training courses and scientific seminars and
symposiums held in this field, which are organized by the
Naif Arab Academy for Security Studies, the scientific
organ of the Arab Interior Ministers’ Council. In some Arab
countries, private volunteer associations have been
established to promote awareness of the harmful effects of
drugs. Specialized treatment clinics and rehabilitation and
social integration centres, have been set up.
Arab members of our Council and the Arab Security
Information Office affiliated with our secretariat wage antidrug media campaigns in order to prevent our children from
falling victim to drugs. We consider the addict to be a
patient in need of treatment, rehabilitation and corrective
measures.
Local measures against drugs cannot bear fruit unless
they are accompanied by policies and action at the regional
and international levels. We in the Arab countries are well
aware of this. In the context of promoting regional Arab
cooperation, many countries have reviewed and developed
their national legislation and drug laws in the light of new
international developments, guided by the unified model
Arab drug law previously adopted by our Council.
On the other hand, the Arab Convention against the
illicit use and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, adopted by the Council in 1994, is an effective
legal coordination tool among our Arab countries in
combating this phenomenon. To promote procedural and
technical cooperation among the member States, the heads
of the national drug-law enforcement agencies in the Arab
homeland meet annually under the umbrella of our

While we seek today to enhance regional and
international cooperation to counter a phenomenon that is
deeply rooted in societies and hits hard at individuals and
groups at every level, from this rostrum we assure the
whole world that we, as Arabs and Muslims, are in the
vanguard of nations that stand firmly and decisively
against crime in all its forms. Our Islamic principles and
moral values are the main impulse behind our struggle
and call for virtue, goodness and the rejection of
corruption and evil behaviour.
We have come here today to contribute to shielding
humanity from dangers and scourges of every kind. We
have come to support all actions and measures to reduce
the illicit supply of and demand for narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and oppose any effort to legalize
any kind of drug, regardless of the justification. We have
come to enhance and increase cooperation with the
specialized agencies of the United Nations and to pursue
the follow-up implementation of the General Assembly’s
resolutions with regard to providing financial and
technical support for some Arab States in order to assist
them to combat the production, traffic and consumption
of drugs. The Arab world belongs to the larger world,
which benefits from our efforts as much as we benefit
from its efforts in the struggle against a problem that
plagues us all. We are all working together to eradicate
the illicit cultivation; limit the illicit deviation of
precursors; implement controlled delivery operations;
target, pursue and apprehend members of distribution and

21

General Assembly
20th special session
trafficking gangs and cartels; and undertake other
constructive and fruitful measures of cooperation.
We wish this session every success and reaffirm our
commitment to working together for a drug-free world.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General, Arab
Interior Ministers’ Council of the League of Arab States,
for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Christopher Bakwesegha,
Chairman of the delegation of the Organization of African
Unity.
Mr. Bakwesegha (Organization of African Unity):
Allow me first of all to reiterate the condolences recently
expressed by Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity, on the sudden death
of General Sani Abacha of Nigeria. May his soul rest in
peace.
In their interventions before this special session of the
General Assembly on drugs, participants have illustrated
that the drug problem is tearing at societies and that no
nation, however powerful, can feel secure in the presence
of this menace. They have argued that the drug problem
threatens human values, engenders crime, spreads AIDS
and undermines our social and economic development
endeavours. Above all, participants have pointed out that
drugs kill. Therefore, the drug problem is not something
that we can walk away from. Indeed, history will judge us
harshly if we simply wash our hands and say we have
nothing to do with it.
On behalf of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), therefore, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for convening the present
session to enable nations near and far to exchange views,
share their experiences, plan together and work out
strategies which could help improve the international
community’s response to the problem of drugs. We concur
that, in order to remain effective in our enduring struggle
against the drug menace, we must pull together and we
must strengthen our existing drug mechanisms and dovetail
them into international drug control strategies. Indeed,
cooperation and partnership offer the best prospects for the
eradication of the drug menace, due regard being given to
the new and imaginative partnerships of cooperation at the
subregional level as well as at the level of civil society.
Deeply concerned with the drug problem, the African
heads of State and Government adopted a Plan of Action

22

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
on drug abuse and illicit trafficking control in Africa in
1996. The Plan of Action addresses, inter alia, the issues
of reducing the illicit demand for drugs, the suppression
of illicit drug trafficking, international cooperation,
bilateral and multilateral cooperation agreements, as well
as community mobilization. It also highlights the role of
the regional economic communities and the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) in monitoring international drug
treaties. It further provides a framework for a coordinated,
comprehensive and concerted international approach to
combat drug abuse and illicit trafficking in Africa and
helps increase the commitment of Governments to
identify priority actions for drug eradication and related
problems.
For the purposes of implementing the Plan — and
realizing the need for international cooperation for
combating illicit drug-trafficking — Member States have
now entered into bilateral and multilateral cooperation
agreements and are forging technical cooperation to
mobilize action for controlling drug abuse and illicit
trafficking at national, subregional and regional levels.
Along with this, efforts have been deployed to develop
human resources to successfully deal with drug cases and
for Africa to effectively use its existing institutions to
train drug-law-enforcement officers.
Allow me now to draw the attention of this body to
the African common position, which was formulated
during the African group of experts meeting, and which
was adopted by the African Ministers of labour and social
affairs and endorsed by the OAU Council of Ministers at
the recently concluded thirty-fourth Assembly of Heads of
State and Government.
This African position underscores the multifaceted
drug problems of the continent and makes
recommendations that should be implemented within the
African context. This Assembly is therefore urged to
consider those issues that are peculiar to Africa or that
affect Africa more than the other continents. As African
States establish national drug-control administrations for
coordinating, monitoring and controlling drug activities,
the international community and, in particular, the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme are called
upon to assist those administrations in devising drugcontrol programmes and in providing technical assistance
for their implementation.
For its part, the OAU will continue with its activities
relating to the monitoring of the implementation of the
African Plan of Action, as well as of the common

General Assembly
20th special session
position, and deploy efforts to promote accession to the
international treaties. In this regard, it should be noted that
out of the 53 member States of the OAU, 43 are parties to
the 1961 Convention, 41 are parties to the 1971 Convention
and 37 are parties to the 1988 Convention. Efforts are also
being deployed to ensure that those States that have not yet
done so do accede to the conventions.
In conclusion, it is now my pleasant duty to inform
the Assembly that OAU Secretary-General, Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim has agreed to be a member of the Committee
of Wise Men established by the United Nations SecretaryGeneral in his endeavour to eliminate the scourge of drugs.
As the United Nations Secretary-General once said,
the fight against drugs requires vision and perseverance. I
wish to pledge that the OAU will spare no effort in
working with vision and perseverance and in tandem with
the international community in our common endeavour to
free the world of the drug menace.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
(a) Judicial cooperation
national legislation

We have heard the last speaker in the general debate,
and thus we have concluded our consideration of agenda
item 8.

Agenda items 9, 10, 11 and 12
Review of international drug control instruments
(a) Adherence to and implementation of international
drug control treaties
(b) Review of General Assembly resolution S-17/2 of 23
February 1990, adopted by the Assembly at its
seventeenth special session, in particular progress
made in implementing the Global Programme of
Action annexed thereto
Measures to promote implementation of the
international drug control treaties and to strengthen
international cooperation in the fight against the illicit
production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and related
activities, including corruption; and proposals for new
strategies, methods and practical activities in addressing
the problem of drug abuse and illicit trafficking, with
due regard to the gender perspective, in particular

strengthening

of

(b) Prevention of the diversion of chemicals used in
the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, and measures to
strengthen control of the manufacture of and
trafficking in stimulants and their precursors
(c) Reduction of the illicit demand for drugs,
including the draft declaration on the guiding
principles of demand reduction and its
implementation
(d) Prevention, sanctioning and action against
money-laundering
(e) International cooperation in illicit
eradication and alternative development
(f)

The President: I thank the Chairman of the delegation
of the Organization of African Unity for his statement.

and

crop

Coordination within the United Nations system in
the fight against drug-trafficking and related
organized crime, against terrorist groups engaged
in drug-trafficking and against illicit arms trade

(g) Promoting regional cooperation
Review of the international drug control regime:
strengthening United Nations machinery for drug
control
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of
the Twentieth Special Session (A/S-20/11)
Adoption of the final documents of the twentieth
special session and follow-up measures for their
implementation
The President: I now request Mr. N. K. Singh of
India, Vice-Chairman and Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Twentieth Special
Session, to introduce the report of the Committee.
Mr. Singh (India), Vice-Chairman and Rapporteur
of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole: I have the
honour to present to the General Assembly today the
report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the
Twentieth Special Session of the General Assembly,
which is contained in document A/S-20/11.
The Ad Hoc Committee held two meetings, on 8 and
9 June, to consider the three agenda items allocated to it

23

General Assembly
20th special session
by the General Assembly, namely, items 9, 10 and 11. In
paragraph 23 of its report, the Ad Hoc Committee
recommends three draft resolutions to the General
Assembly for adoption, and in paragraph 24, it recommends
one draft decision.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
Draft resolution II was recommended by the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Twentieth Special Session
for adoption.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution II?

I thus submit the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of
the Whole of the Twentieth Special Session to the General
Assembly for its consideration and adoption.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution S-20/3).

The President: I thank the Vice-Chairman and
Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the
Twentieth Special Session for the introduction of the report.

The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Measures to enhance international cooperation to counter
the world drug problem”. The text of draft resolution III
is contained for the time being in document A/S/20/4,
chapter V, section A.

If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, I shall take it that the Assembly will not discuss
the report.

Draft resolution III was recommended by the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twentieth Special
Session for adoption.

It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited to
explanations of vote, but I hope that there will be no such
statements.
The Assembly will now proceed to take a decision on
the three draft resolutions recommended by the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Twentieth Special Session
in paragraph 23 of its report (A/S-20/11), and the draft
decision recommended by the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole in paragraph 24 of the same report. I hope that
Members are in possession of the report of the Committee.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution III?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution S-20/4).
The President: We next turn to the draft decision
recommended for adoption by the Ad Hoc Committee of
the Whole in paragraph 24 of its report. The draft
decision is entitled “Documentation considered by the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision?

We turn first to the three draft resolutions.
The draft decision was adopted.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Political Declaration”.
The text of draft resolution I is contained for the time being
in document A/S-20/4, chapter V, section A.
Draft resolution I was recommended by the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Twentieth Special Session
for adoption.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution I?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution S-20/2).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand
Reduction”. The text of draft resolution II is contained for
the time being in document A/S-20/4, chapter V, section A.

24

The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda items 9, 10, 11 and 12.
Statement by the representative of the SecretaryGeneral
I now give the floor to Under-Secretary-General
Pino Arlacchi, as the representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
Mr. Arlacchi (Executive Director of the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme): It is my
great honour to address this concluding meeting of the
twentieth special session of the General Assembly on
behalf of Secretary-General Kofi Annan.

General Assembly
20th special session
The end of this session marks the start of a new
chapter in global drug control. We have sent the world a
message of hope this week. The decades of nations pointing
fingers at each other are finished.
We are not starting a new “war on drugs”; in fact,
there never was one. The better analogy for the
international community is that of a doctor facing a deadly
disease. Drugs, quite simply, kill people, and it is our
responsibility to help find the cure.
With the adoption of the Political Declaration and the
action plans, we have taken further steps towards a drugfree world. Member States should be proud of what they
have accomplished in New York during these three days.
But the real work begins tomorrow. The international
community must take this spirit of accomplishment and
meet the deadlines of 2003 and 2008 to eliminate or
significantly reduce the consumption and production of all
illegal drugs. And we must foil the money launderer and
the drug trafficker at every turn.

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
defence. We will treasure this in every moment of our
work. However, we should not forget that the notion that
drug use is a kind of human right is inherently immoral,
as it suggests that human lives are not worth saving from
the devastation of addiction.
At the international level, the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme will continue to be
there every step of the way, assisting Governments and
non-governmental actors in meeting goals and working
towards a more civil society.
Let us all go forward with the resolve that the
commitment we have made to work for a drug-free world
will be met with actions and the resources needed to
ensure real and measurable results. Together we can meet
this challenge. Now, let’s get to work.
The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Pino Arlacchi for his statement.
Statement by the President

Some have said that the special session was diplomatic
business as usual. It is imperative that we prove otherwise.
Our work cannot simply be left on a piece of paper in this
Hall. We cannot pat ourselves on the back and move on to
other issues. There is always room for improvement. There
is always more that can be done. This means continuing to
listen carefully to those who provide constructive criticism
on how we can create a drug-free world. No one has a
monopoly on the truth.
The responsibility to keep moving forward now
depends on Member States’ commitment to take full
ownership of these plans and their desire to achieve
concrete results. Pledges must turn into implementation,
actions and results. The eyes of the world are upon us. This
is not the time to sit on the sidelines. We intend to fully
succeed — and we will certainly never give up.
We must heed the examples set by other important
United Nations conferences — on the environment,
women’s issues, population and social development — and
move forward with a sense of purpose and action. The
drug-control issue has now been similarly raised to the top
of the global agenda. This means building on the political
momentum while constantly remembering the framework of
international cooperation and respect for sovereignty, as
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.

The President: We are about to conclude the
twentieth special session of the General Assembly. When
it opened the day before yesterday, by one of its first
actions the Assembly approved the official title of the
special session as “Twentieth special session of the
General Assembly devoted to countering the world drug
problem together”. Stylistically, this represents a welcome
departure from some of the longer and more formalsounding United Nations names. Substantively, however,
this title, I think, expresses the key motif that
characterized this session: the United Nations
membership’s togetherness in confronting a common
menace.
Significantly, this spirit of togetherness was
established from the very beginning and, as a direct
result, the preparatory process yielded crucial agreement
on all the underlying political issues, despite the
occasional divergence of views and the sensitivity of
some of the problems.
We have witnessed an involved and pragmatic
discussion of future action, follow-up and implementation.
The three days of intensive and businesslike work have
also demonstrated the unswerving commitment of
Member States to the task of eradicating the peril of
narcotic drugs from the face of the earth.

The concepts of tolerance and solidarity for human
rights are precious, and we must remain vigilant in their

25

General Assembly
20th special session
The strong showing of world political leaders is bound
to give an impetus to international drug-control efforts. At
the same time, the presence at the session of senior
Government officials directly involved in the fight against
drugs has benefited greatly the work of the session. A total
of 158 speakers took part in the general debate, including
23 heads of State, eight Prime Ministers, one VicePresident and seven observers. Meanwhile, joining the
discussions in the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole were
several United Nations agencies and programmes, as well
as representatives of non-governmental organizations
designated by their constituencies.
The past three days have given us a rich and thoughtprovoking picture of the state of national efforts in different
parts of the world to tackle the drug problem, as the
speakers described their programmes, offered perceptive
analyses and made sound suggestions.
Many delegations not only spoke about their own
experiences dealing with the drug menace but also offered
to share them with others in combating this dangerous
phenomenon. At the same time, while acknowledging the
primary responsibility of national Governments, they have
stressed the importance of enhancing concerted international
actions in this sphere — first of all, under the auspices of
relevant United Nations agencies. In this context, many
speakers underscored the need for a more coordinated
approach among various United Nations bodies to address
the drug problems effectively. They gave full backing to the
strategy pursued by the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme, which is based on a balanced and
multidisciplinary approach, with an increased focus on
demand reduction.
The globalization of today’s world has been mentioned
numerous times in this Hall. But the fact that the term may
have already become a cliché should not in anyway
diminish the true significance of the concept itself. If
anything, the success of the twentieth special session
reflects the growing realization throughout our planet that
we are all in the same boat. This has compelled a
fundamental rethinking and a growing convergence of
views on measures to combat drug abuse and illicit drugtrafficking.
The Political Declaration and other documents we
have just adopted represent a new departure for a
comprehensive, global strategy to tackle simultaneously all
aspects of the drug problem. By putting forward a bold
objective — a drastic reduction of both supply and demand
for drugs by the year 2008 — the Political Declaration

26

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
signifies a global consensus on the shared responsibility
of all countries for the successful outcome of the fight
against drug abuse and illicit trafficking. It spells out the
obligations for all groups of countries, setting clear target
dates to take action in agreed-upon areas.
So, as the result of this special session, we have
before us a well-designed strategy and a package of
measures and goals to be achieved within precise timeframes. We have three agenda-setting political documents
that enjoy unanimous support. What is needed, then, for
this session to go down in history as a truly watershed
event is to make sure that all of these plans are translated
into practical deeds. By working together we can launch
a new period in countering the drug problem and send a
strong positive message that the United Nations is capable
of successfully tackling one of the most dangerous threats
in today’s world.
Before closing, let me once again extend my sincere
thanks to all delegations for their cooperation during the
past three days. I would like to express special gratitude
to the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole
and to the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly, whose
constant support made my task much easier. I think it is
also very symbolic that addressing the General Assembly
this evening on behalf of the Secretary-General was
Mr. Pino Arlacchi, the Executive Director of the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, who has
made a valuable contribution to the success of this
session. Finally, I would also like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Secretariat and the General Assembly
division, as well as to the interpreters, translators and all
Conference Services staff and other staff who often
remain unseen, but without whom the smooth functioning
of the session would have been impossible. I thank you
all.
Agenda item 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: We have come to the end of the
twentieth special session of the General Assembly.

General Assembly
20th special session

9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998

May I invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
Closure of the twentieth special session of the General
Assembly
The President: I declare closed the twentieth special
session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 9.55 p.m.

27
