S/PV.7043

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7043rd meeting

Wednesday, 16 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2013/582)

13-51326 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1351326*

S/PV.7043

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the coup d’état and the collapse of national institutions.
A decisive step was taken to restore constitutional order
and the country’s stability.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Mali (S/2013/582)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Cheick Oumar Diarrah, Minister for Reconciliation
and Development of the North of the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Albert
Koenders, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/582, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koenders.
Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure and an honour for me to address the Security
Council today. The second report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Mali, which is before the
Council (S/2013/582), follows up on resolution 2100
(2013). I wish to offer an overview of the political and
security situation in Mali, the progress made since my
briefing at the end of June (see S/PV.6985) and the
challenges that lie ahead.
At the outset, it is important to underscore two
important achievements. In July and August, the
Malian people massively and calmly participated in
the presidential elections. The transitional authorities,
political actors and all the national stakeholders rallied
to ensure the success of the elections throughout the
national territory. Through that exemplary event,
Malian men and women demonstrated their desire to
turn the page after the disturbing events of the recent
past — the occupation of the north by extremist groups,

2/6

16/10/2013

The second major achievement concerns the
successful, although incomplete, establishment of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). On 1 July,
we welcomed the troops of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali. Although MINUSMA had
just been established, it still actively contributed to
ensuring the safety of the presidential elections and
creating favourable political conditions for holding the
elections.
The elections were held across the national
territory thanks to the preliminary agreement, adopted
on 18 June in Ouagadougou by the Government and
the armed groups in the northern regions of Mali.
The agreement paved the way for elections in the
north, and will be followed by inclusive talks on a
comprehensive peace settlement, which will start 60
days after the establishment of a new Government.
The United Nations has played an important role in the
negotiations, in close collaboration with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union. I welcome the critical contributions of
those organizations in those endeavours.
The implementation of the agreement has moved
forward, in particular with regard to beginning of
the process of the cantonment and the adoption
of confidence-building measures, particularly in
terms of measures to facilitate the start of a gradual
return of the State administration and the army in
the north. MINUSMA accompanied those processes
by strengthening its presence on the ground. We
opened offices in Kidal, Timbuktu, Gao and Mopti.
That is where we want to fully play our role with the
communities and the people of Mali.
Those developments are positive signs for
the restoration of peace and security in Mali. The
inauguration ceremony of the new President in the
presence of several Heads of State demonstrates that
Mali is back in the concert of nations. President Keita,
by forming his Cabinet, has already sent a strong signal
by creating a ministry in charge of reconciliation and
the development of the northern regions, and we have
the honour to have the Minister in the Council today.
He also said that reconciliation and security would be
the immediate priorities of the Government.

13-51326

16/10/2013

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7043

Despite those advances, it is clear that the real
work is just beginning. National reconciliation, the
implementation of the preliminary agreement, the
holding of legislative elections, the launching of
inclusive peace talks to address the root causes of the
Malian crisis, the restoration of the authority of the
State, the consolidation of security throughout the
territory, progress in the fight against corruption and
bad governance are priorities .

the upcoming organization of the States-General of the
decentralization and the establishment of the north. It is
important to note that the Government has implemented
confidence-building measures. It released 23 prisoners
and announced the lifting of several arrest warrants.
That clears the way for coordinated dialogue so that
the parties to the conflict and the Malian nation may
overcome the causes that led their country to division,
so that the past will not happen again.

The authorities announced the holding of the
first round of legislative elections on 24 November,
with a second round scheduled for 15 December. That
would allow the establishment of a new Parliament
and, ultimately, the conclusion of the electoral cycle.
However, it is important that all political parties and
stakeholders be involved in discussions on the holding
of those elections in order to achieve an inclusive
national consensus.

(spoke in English)

In addition, in order to maintain a peaceful
and secure environment, the full implementation
and adherence of the signatories to the preliminary
agreement is crucial. On the ground, the Mouvement
national pour la libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) and
the Haut Conseil de l’Azawad continue to occupy the
governorship and the public radio station, the Office
of Radio and Television of Mali, in Kidal, despite the
calls by authorities for their return. The return of basic
services in Kidal is becoming urgent. The issue of
cantonment sites and the coordinated deployment of
Malian forces also remain on the agenda.
I organized two meetings of the Monitoring
and Evaluation Committee since the adoption of the
agreement. However, during the second meeting, held
on 18 September, representatives of the MNLA and the
Haut Conseil de l’Azawad announced the suspension
of their participation, citing the non-implementation of
confidence-building measures, in particular the release
of prisoners. The Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad also
endorsed that decision.
Since then, we have increased our contact and the
number of meetings, making use of my good offices
with the representatives of the armed movements
in Kidal and Ouagadougou. All those efforts have
helped to ease the situation and led to the return of
the signatory movements within the Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee. For its part, the Government
called for the efforts under way in order to reach a
lasting settlement to the crisis in the north, including

The recent and worrying security incidents in
Mali are, in my view, also an important wake up call.
After a period of calm, which facilitated the holding
of the presidential elections and the cantonment of
armed groups in Kidal, increasing tensions and acts of
provocation resulted in clashes throughout the month of
September in various localities in the north. There is a
need for a wake-up call.
The pursuit of tactical operations by the parallel
French forces, along with the gradual increase of
the Malian forces and the strategic deployment of
MINUSMA in some localities, positively impacted the
overall security situation in northern Mali. However,
the effective stabilization of the northern regions
remains challenging partly due to the complex nature
of the conflict, including the threat of asymmetric
attacks by extremist elements, which should not be
underestimated.
On 28 September, a vehicle laden with explosives
attempted to enter a Malian Defence and Security
Forces camp in Timbuktu. The attackers detonated
the vehicle at the entrance of the camp, killing four
individuals, including the driver and passenger, and
injuring many more. On 30 September, Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb claimed responsibility for the attack.
On 7 October, shells were fired at the city of Gao. The
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa claimed
responsibility.
In addition to the security threat from armed groups
and terrorists, which mainly affected the northern
regions, the authorities had to contend with tensions
within the armed forces. On 1 October, sustained gunfire
was heard in the garrison town of Kati, the stronghold
of General Sanogo, approximately 30 kilometres from
Bamako. The mutineers were peacefully neutralized
following a strong stance by the Minister of Defence
and an address to the nation by President Keita. Yet that
incident is a sobering reminder of the urgent need to

13-513263/6

S/PV.7043

The situation in Mali

quickly and effectively re-establish discipline and the
chain of command in the armed forces and to undertake
security sector reform in earnest.
The human rights situation, including violations of
sexual rights, remain of concern in spite of a decrease
in violations particularly in the north. Our humanrights teams continue to register cases of abuses and
violations committed by all parties. They include
illegal arrests and detentions by the Malian defence and
security forces, extrajudicial executions and pervasive
impunity for various actors. On 24 September, the
MNLA released 30 individuals it had illegally detained
in Kidal. I will ensure that our work in the human
rights area receives all necessary attention, and we will
continue to underline the need for an end to impunity so
that justice may prevail.
Despite such security challenges, which are an
important wake-up call for the Security Council, I
can assure the Council that the overall improvement
of the situation in Mali has also opened up new
prospects for the country’s recovery and longer-term
perspectives. But Mali’s development and humanitarian
needs remain daunting. I am shocked by the country’s
malnutrition levels. Scores of displaced people and
refugees are returning home, and an action plan for
the northern regions for the next few months has been
developed by the United Nations development and
humanitarian country teams to guide the international
response to the most urgent humanitarian and early
recovery needs. However, international support for
the humanitarian emergency in Mali has been timid,
with the humanitarian appeal funded at 37 per cent, or
$177 million out of $477 million required, leaving a gap
of $300 million. With this month marking the start of
a new school year, needs in the education sector are
particularly pressing.
The near-collapse of the Malian State last year was
not a mere coincidence. The country has been facing
recurrent crises for the past few decades. Nor should we
lose sight of the regional dimension of the Malian crisis;
we must make progress in implementing an integrated
Sahel strategy. As we move forward, it is important to
avoid repeating the errors of the past and to address the
root causes of the challenges facing Mali, which also
include the manner in which international partners have
traditionally provided political and financial support.
The time may be right for a critical reassessment
of our engagement. We may consider forging a new
compact or new deal between the Government and the

4/6

16/10/2013

donor community, on the basis of an agreed set of key
priorities and a clear accountability framework, that
will lead the country and international actors towards
a more transparent and focused partnership, combating
bad governance and corruption and with Mali in the
driver’s seat.
While the United Nations is striving to support
the Malian Government and people, we are faced with
a number of severe challenges. I have mentioned the
wake-up call of the security risks. The Mission lacks
critical enablers, such as helicopters, for facilitating
rapid deployment and access to remote areas to ensure
the protection of civilians. Troop generation must
accelerate. I call on Council members and troop — and
police-contributing countries to do their utmost to
promote the rapid deployment of additional enablers and
battalions to Mali in order for MINUSMA to discharge
its mandate speedily and effectively. Enablers are also
particularly important within the context of our security
and logistical support for the forthcoming legislative
elections, and in the light of the risks of asymmetric
threats.
The new authorities are dealing with numerous
challenges that must be addressed urgently in order
to enable Malian men, women and children to live in
security and to benefit from peace dividends. I remain
concerned about the fragile security situation, notably
in the North. Progress on the political front is key in
that respect, and I urge all actors and parties to refrain
from acts of provocation and violence that could easily
jeopardize the gains achieved so far. I encourage them
to formulate a transparent and agreed-on road map for
inclusive talks without hesitation and as a matter of
priority.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the people
of Mali on the journey they have begun so splendidly.
They can count on the support of the international
community in their search for sustainable solutions to
the challenges facing their country. Those solutions can
come only from them. I also thank the African Union,
ECOWAS and other international partners for their
commitment to addressing the Malian situation and for
their respect and support for MINUSMA.
The President: I thank Mr. Koenders for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Reconciliation
and Development of the North of the Republic of Mali.

13-51326

16/10/2013

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7043

Mr. Diarrah (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
Azerbaidjan’s presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October, and to welcome your initiative in
holding this important meeting on the situation in Mali.
My Government is also very grateful for SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for the commendable efforts he
has continued to make to resolve the Malian crisis.

that we have ordered that the political mandate of various
persons who were members of the National Assembly
be lifted as soon as possible. On 15 and 16 September
in Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal and throughout the national
territory, we also held sensitization forums, as provided
in the preliminary agreement signed in Ouagadougou.
Various intra-community forums are currently being
held in several regions of the country.

Since the Council’s 25 June briefing on the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/338), much has
happened in my country. On 18 June in Ouagadougou,
the transitional authorities and armed groups signed a
preliminary agreement on the presidential election and
inclusive peace talks in Mali. On 1 July, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) became operational,
absorbing the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali. On 29 July and 12 August, with the support
of its outside partners, Mali held the most transparent
presidential election since its democratic process
began in 1992. The election reflected an exceptionally
high participation rate that testified to our people’s
willingness to take charge of their own destiny and to
emerge from the swamp of the multidimensional crisis
that the country has been wallowing in since January
2012. By an uncontested landslide vote of 77.6 per cent,
the Malian people entrusted Ibrahim Boubacar Keita
with the task of guiding our country’s future.

The new National Commission for Dialogue,
Truth and Reconciliation will shortly be organizing
inter-community forums while conducting thorough
investigations into violations of human rights and the
consequences of the occupation of three regions in
the North. The Commission will visit refugee camps
and displaced populations in order to be informed of
all issues concerning their reintegration into their
places of origin, and will make recommendations to
the Government on how to ensure that from now on
justice will prevail and an end be made to the culture of
impunity in our country.

Since beginning work on 8 September, the
Government, led by Prime Minister Oumar Tatam Ly
under the authority of President Keita, has thrown itself
into solving the problems of the North. While pursuing
an intensive dialogue with all the parties involved in
the crisis, it has implemented a series of efforts aimed
at preparing for the negotiations stipulated in the
preliminary agreement of 18 June within a 60-day time
frame.
Without going into detail, I will mention the
following actions: the meeting of armed groups held
in Bamako from 15 to 17 September; the audience
granted by the President to the armed groups in
Koulouba on 17 September, during which the Head of
State established the framework for future discussions,
specifying that apart from the issues of autonomy
and independence, everything was negotiable within
the framework of a united and pluralist Mali; and the
implementation of confidence-building measures,
beginning with the freeing of several detainees on
18 September and 3 October. I should also emphasize

From 21 to 23 October, in the framework of
preparations for the national conference on the North,
which will be held by the end of this month, the
Government will conduct a forum on decentralization,
aimed at creating institutional mechanisms enabling
the strengthening of the powers of the decentralized
collectives so that they can better respond to the basic
aspirations of the people.
At the same time, the Government is preparing a
plan for the accelerated development of the northern
regions, the first version of which was approved on
Monday, 14 October, during a ratification workshop
held with the Government and our technical and
financial partners. The recommendations of the
decentralization forum and the content of plan for
accelerated development of the northern regions appear
on the agenda of the national conference on the north,
which will bring together all the social components of
our nation so that together we can forge a definitive and
lasting solution to the crisis that has shaken the country.
The aim of our Government is to reconcile Malians
among themselves and with themselves, because a
nation cannot move forward if it is not united and in
agreement about a common vision for its future. With
determination and wisdom, we will rebuild a new social
contract in order to recreate the conditions of living
together as Malians aong all Malians.

13-513265/6

S/PV.7043

The situation in Mali

In his speech on 27 September 2013, at the general
debate of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly (see A/68/PV.15), President Boubacar Keita
showed his unshakeable determination to complete
the electoral process by organizing the first round of
legislative elections on 24 November and the second
round on 15 December. Mali has embarked on the path
of building the rule of law, while resolutely fighting
against corruption and impunity. The nation is primarily
a space of solidarity founded upon justice and equity.
Although the deployment of Malian Defence and
Security Forces and of MINUSMA and Operation Serval
helped to significantly improve the security situation
in the major cities of northern Mali, at some point we
must recognize that the situation on the ground today is
characterized by the return of armed groups, terrorists
and jihadists who continue to pose a serious threat to
the stability, the peace and security in the northern
regions of the country and across the Sahel. As an
illustration, the increasing number of terrorist attacks
in northern Mali was the subject of a letter addressed to
the members of the Security Council dated 2 October
2013 (S/2013/586), with which the Government of Mali
sought to draw the Council’s attention to the threat.
Those terrorist attacks clearly demonstrate that the
fight against terrorism and organized crime in Mali is
not over and that the security situation remains fragile
throughout the Sahel region.
Let me say a few words about the humanitarian
situation in Mali, where much remains to be done to
bring about the safe and sustainable return of internally
displaced persons and refugees to their homes. In
addition to the difficulties arising from the security
crisis in the north, there has been a considerable
deterioration in the food situation in the south of the
country, where more than 800,000 people are facing
untold difficulties.

6/6

16/10/2013

The renewed terrorist activities in recent weeks
requires the deployment of the Malian army throughout
the territory, with the support of the MINUSMA, which
also needs to receive adequate resources to fulfil the
mandate assigned to it under the relevant provisions
of paragraphs 16 and 17 of resolution 2100 (2013), of
25 April.
Before concluding, I wish to reiterate here the
sincere thanks and deep gratitude of the people and the
Government of Mali to our bilateral and multilateral
partners for their continued engagement with our
country, but also to remind them of the need to never let
down our guard vis-à-vis terrorist and jihadist groups
on the grounds that the Malian crisis is resolved and
that we should turn the page and move to other areas
of tension.
I wish to state emphatically that the security
situation remains very volatile. It requires sustained
attention from all the friends of Mali and involves a
renewed commitment from the international community
to combat terrorism and transborder crime.
Finally, I would make an urgent appeal to the
international community, especially the friends of
Mali, which met in Brussels in May, for an urgent
mobilization of pledges to boost economic development
in Mali.
My delegation welcomes the
consideration today (S/2013/582).

report

under

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

13-51326
