S/PV.8062

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8062nd meeting

Thursday, 5 October 2017, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2017/811)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-31061 (E)
*1731061*

S/PV.8062

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2017/811)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali, who is joining this meeting via
video-teleconference from Bamako.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, to participate in this meeting. Mr. Annadif
is also joining this meeting via video-teleconference
from Bamako.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/811, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the f loor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): I am pleased to
interact with the Security Council this afternoon
from Bamako. I thank the Secretary-General for this
opportunity to introduce his report (S/2017/811) and to
take stock of recent developments in the situation in
Mali, including the implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which emanated
from the Algiers process.
I am delighted to welcome among us His Excellency
Mr Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.
The report before us covers the period from
mid-June to mid-September 2017. This period was
2/10

05/10/2017

characterized by the following major developments
in the political and security areas: a debate on the
draft revision of the Constitution, and armed clashes
between the Platform coalition of armed groups and
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA),
which are the two signatories to the Agreement. These
two events almost called into question the entire
process of the implementation of the Agreement. The
combined efforts of the main Malian actors, including
the leaders of the signatory movements, in addition
to those of the international community, made it
possible to resolve the two crises, which are the main
reason for the ongoing delays in the implementation of
the Agreement.
With respect to the debate on the draft constitutional
revision, the decision of President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita to postpone the referendum has eased social
tensions and put an end to the protests. As for the clashes
between the CMA and the Platform, after signing
renewable truces on 23 August and 6 September, the
two coalitions were able on 20 September to sign a
text they are calling a commitment, enshrining a total
and final cessation of hostilities. The implementation
of the provisions of this undertaking continues apace.
In witness to that, this morning the CMA freed nine
Platform prisoners in Kidal.
It was in this atmosphere of successful outcomes
that the Government of Mali and the United Nations
convened a high-level meeting on the implementation
of the Agreement on 20 September in New York. The
high-level meeting, co-chaired by the President of Mali
and the Secretary-General, was attended, for the first
time, by CMA and Platform officials. The many highranking participants stressed the need to accelerate
the implementation of the Agreement, including
the creation of a second chamber of Parliament and
the operationalization of regional associations; the
launching of the cantonment and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; the
drafting of a security sector reform road map; and
the gradual redeployment of the reconstituted Malian
defence and security forces.
The Governor of Kidal took office on 19 September,
symbolizing the return of the State. In that regard, I
would stress that this new impetus must be capitalized
on to ensure that the return of the Governmor to Kidal
will be more than merely symbolic.
17-31061

05/10/2017

The situation in Mali

Despite these positive developments, we must keep
in mind that the 2018 deadlines are fast approaching
and that the challenges ahead are enormous. All parties
will have to redouble their efforts to restore trust
between them and, despite the aforementioned delays
in the implementation of the Agreement, commit to the
necessary reforms and provide the peace dividends so
long awaited by the people of Mali.
I recall that the human rights situation remains
a matter of concern owing, inter alia, to the volatile
security environment in the country. The rise of violent
extremism perpetrated by armed elements, which has
impeded the enjoyment of fundamental rights and
freedoms in the central regions in particular, has become
very worrisome. The absence of State authorities in
certain areas and the conduct of anti-terrorist operations
in which human rights violations have been reported
are the main causes contributing to the resurgence of
these phenomena.
With respect to the fight against impunity, it is
worth noting the progress made by the Government, in
particular in the handling of cases stemming from the
2012 crisis. The start of the trial of Aliou Mahamane
Touré and the verdict sentencing him to 10 years of
incarceration has aroused a glimmer of hope for the
many victims of abuse and serious violations of human
rights committed since the beginning of the crisis. In
this regard, I would stress that what is being sought is
that all perpetrators of such violations and abuses be
held accountable for their actions, whatever the context
or circumstances of their occurrence. The ultimate
objective of the support the United Nations is giving
the Government of Mali is to fight impunity, ensure
access to justice for all and preserve the rule of law
and democracy. Further, intensified redeployment of
security and judicial authorities and the strengthening
of transitional justice mechanisms to prevent impunity
from promoting a culture of do-it-yourself pseudojustice is essential.
In addition, the Security Council sanctions
regime that was recently set up under resolution 2374
(2017) rightly represents an important turning point
in the fight against impunity and in guaranteeing
respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by all parties to the
conf lict. The sanctions regime is an important lever
against those who would pose obstacles to the smooth
unfolding of the peace process. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in

S/PV. 8062

Mali (MINUSMA) will continue to provide assistance
to State institutions, with which it maintains a regular
dialogue. The dialogue aims, inter alia, at promoting
exchanges about cases of human rights violations
and abuses that have been documented throughout
the country in order to allow appropriate legal action
to be taken in accordance with international human
rights obligations. The forthcoming establishment of
the international commission of inquiry will work in
this direction.
As for MINUSMA, it continues to face significant
challenges resulting from the activities of extremist
groups and other terrorists that have formed criminal
networks. These are the main obstacles to a return to
peace, in particular because the groups are enemies
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
almost daily loss of United Nations peacekeepers,
caused by improvised explosive devices or land mines,
particularly on the main supply lines of the Mission,
has become unbearable and unsustainable. The death
of three peacekeepers and the wounding of four others
and a Malian civilian contractor who has since died, in
Gao on 24 September, is a small but perfect illustration
of this fact. Unfortunately, many questions remain
unanswered, including the identity of the perpetrators.
That is why we are urging the Government and the
signatory groups to accelerate their implementation of
the Agreement and their efforts aimed at reconciliation,
so that, first of all, we can figure out who is who and pool
our capacities in order to address the situation together.
With regard to the fight against improvised
explosive devices, we intend to undertake several
actions in the coming days, but a global approach is
required, starting with a strategic vision, including
finding backers and technicians, who mostly come from
abroad, as they are not Malians, as well as attracting
associated financial mechanisms. It is also high time
for the escort battalion convoy and the regional quick
reaction force to be fully deployed to give the Mission
the freedom of action it needs.
In the light of all the threats faced by MINUSMA
and the entire United Nations family in Mali, we
reiterate the funding needs, which are growing — we
will not hide that fact — given the need for investment
to protect against indirect attacks and improve
surveillance, detection and early-warning and alarm
systems. These are some of the protective measures
designed to mitigate the loss of life resulting from
indirect attacks on the MINUSMA camps, even

17-310613/10

S/PV.8062

The situation in Mali

though, for some time now, outside patrols have limited
these indirect attacks. Technological upgrades are
also welcome.
The establishment of the joint force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) provides us with an
opportunity that could contribute to creating a climate
conducive to the proper execution of MINUSMA’s
mandate. It is important to note that a holistic approach
that goes beyond the use of military force and ensures
coherence with the peace process, development
initiatives and the African Union peace and security
architecture is necessary. At the request of the
Secretary-General, an exploratory mission comprising
representatives of MINUSMA, all headquarter
departments and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel visited the capitals of the G-5 Sahel
countries and the Force Headquarters based in Sévaré
in early September. This mission noted the countries
of the region’s commitment to operationalizing the
Force conjointe.

05/10/2017

noting that Mali has received nearly $17 million, which
has been used to finance some 11 projects, and through
funding for the region we have received $3 million for
a programme linking Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Annadif for his briefing.
I shall now give the f loor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate and commend Ethiopia
for the effective manner in which it conducted the work
of the Security Council the month of September, and to
wish you, Sir, and your delegation success in leading
the Council this month.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his briefing today.

Pursuant to resolution 2364 (2017), consultations
are under way to determine which responsibilities
may be transferred to the United Nations country
team. It should be noted, however, that this transfer
of responsibility will take place only gradually and in
the medium and long terms, because the challenges
are enormous. I need only cite problems of access
and resources, among others. These are factors that
contribute to the increase in humanitarian needs.

To begin, I would like I would like to ref lect on
the juncture at which Mali is today, with a security
situation that has seriously deteriorated; a precarious
humanitarian situation resulting primarily from
insecurity; an Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali that has been in effect for more than two
years, but continues to await implementation; a newly
established Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017); a peacekeeping operation on
the ground enjoying the most robust and lethal mandate
of its kind; and a joint multinational force to counter
terrorism that is supposed to begin operations in the
near future. Uruguay welcomes the establishment of
a joint force by the Group of Five for the Sahel, and
encourages such subregional initiatives to address
the challenges accompanied by national ownership.
Nevertheless, the civilian population in Mali continues
to fall prey to the actions of terrorist groups, the
repeated clashes among armed groups and the absence
of State authority primarily in the northern half of
the country.

In that regard, and as Council members know,
in 2017 humanitarian actors launched a $305 million
appeal to meet needs in the areas of health care, water,
nutrition, food security, protection, education and
shelter. However, as Council members also know, the
humanitarian response plan was funded only at just
over 35 per cent, which still allowed the Government
and its partners to assist thousands of Malian citizens
in the north who have been affected by the conf lict.
With respect to the Peacebuilding Fund, it is worth

We regret that the situation in the Republic of Mali
continues to deteriorate, largely owing to the actions
of terrorist and extremist groups, which are enemies
of the peace and reconciliation process, but also of
additional and deep concern are the violations of the
provisions of the Agreement by the signatory groups
themselves. Uruguay reiterates and emphasizes that
the primary responsibility for public order and the
protection of civilians in the Republic of Mali lies with
its authorities.

We welcome the ongoing exchanges between the
G-5 Sahel countries and their partners, including at
the high-level event in New York organized by Mali
in the context of the General Assembly and at the
Berlin meeting held on 19 September. In this regard,
we reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for substantial
and sustained international support for the G-5 Sahel
initiative. The events that took place yesterday at Mali’s
border with Niger are a cause for concern.

4/10

17-31061

05/10/2017

The situation in Mali

The international community, in particular the
United Nations, is assisting the Government in its efforts
to shoulder the responsibilities that intrinsically befall
it as a sovereign country. The international community
indeed has been supporting Mali in its efforts to achieve
peace in the country in a number of ways, including
by making financial contributions for the development
of projects in the north of the country; establishing
and strengthening the mandate of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA); and carrying out peacebuilding
projects under the aegis of the Peacebuilding Fund, as
well as visits by the Secretary-General and missions of
the Security Council.
We believe that it is necessary and urgent to
adopt a multidimensional approach to address the
root causes fuelling the conf lict in Mali. Areas such
as social development, providing basic services to the
population, access to justice and creating jobs should be
among the priorities, along with initiatives pertaining
to security, if we want to achieve long-term stability.
We note with concern the repeated allegations of
human rights violations committed by armed groups
and security forces in the country. In that regard,
Uruguay calls for all security activities, including
those deployed to counter terrorism, to be carried out
in strict compliance with the norms of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
as well as to ensure that all due process guarantees be
accorded to the alleged victims of those violations.
Those responsible for committing those violations
must be held accountable.
We welcome the establishment of the sanctions
regime pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), in response
to the request of the Government of Mali. We must
not lose sight of the fact that the imposition of those
sanctions constitutes an additional tool for the Council
to achieve sustainable peace in Mali, but at the same
time we must continue to use the other tools at our
disposal, including operations deployed on the ground,
mediation and good offices, among others, while always
keeping within the framework of Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation as the cornerstone of the political
process. But what is most important is continuing
dialogue and the commitment to the agreements by all
the signatories.
Lastly, we would like to express our support and
appreciation to MINUSMA and the troop-contributing

S/PV. 8062

countries that are doing commendable work in an
adverse environment and with limited capacities,
but — beyond any doubt — with outstanding courage,
goodwill and devotion to carrying out their mandate.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to underscore
its appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia and his team for their outstanding presidency
of the Security Council last month, and joins the
representative of Uruguay in wishing the French
presidency every success for this month.
Bolivia appreciates the briefing given by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, and welcomes the presence of Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs, African Integration
and International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali,
We thank France for having convened and organized
this briefing.
Bolivia regrets and condemns the attacks
perpetrated by armed groups against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in the Gao region on 24 September.
We convey our condolences to the families of those
attacked and to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh for the loss of three members of the
peacekeeping force. We also express our appreciation
to the personnel of MINUSMA who have stepped up
their work so as to complete the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, while
facilitating political dialogue through mediation, good
offices and cooperation with the Malian Government.
Similarly, we acknowledge the work of the Government
and the President of the Republic of Mali, aimed at
bringing about a definitive ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities by initiating the national plans and taking
national political measure that are fundamental to
achieving peace and stability in Mali.
In that regard, it is important that to analyse the
root causes of the crisis, including the consequences
of intervention and the regime change policies carried
out in Libya in 2011, leading to destabilization and
the ensuing chaos and terrorism that fuelled national
conf licts in the Sahel and Libya.
We express our concern about the lack of material,
technological, logistical and intelligence capacities
suffered by MINUSMA, which impedes it from
effectively being able to effectively and efficiently
carry out its mandate in a very volatile environment

17-310615/10

S/PV.8062

The situation in Mali

encompassing asymmetrical attacks that jeopardize
the political process, the safety of the members of the
Mission and the civilian population.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/811), during the reporting period from June
to September, 44 attacks were carried out by terrorist
and extremist armed groups, of which 21 were against
MINUSMA, 10 targeted French forces, and 13 targeted
the Malian defence and security forces. Those statistics
represent an increase of 102 per cent in the number
of attacks. Moreover, owing to those asymmetrical
attacks, the protection of civilians has deteriorated.
Armed groups continue to carry out violent acts in
the Ménaka, Mopti, Gao, Timbuktu and, especially,
Kidal regions where we have also seen a breakdown
in relations among the Coordination des movements
de l’Azawad, the Tuareg and the Platform coalition of
armed groups.
The humanitarian situation is also a source of
concern largely because of the clashes among non-State
armed groups engaged in activities of serious concern,
including
forced
disappearances,
extrajudicial
executions, the recruitment of children and sexual
abuse and violence. Their actions and hold over large
swathes of the territory have led to the increase of
internally displaced persons and refugees, who to date
number more than 3,000. More than 140,000 Malians
have sought refuge across the border in neighbouring
countries. Bolivia calls on all armed groups to lay down
their weapons, join the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process and abide by all the provisions
of the 2015 Agreement.
In conclusion, we urge the international community
to continue its unwavering efforts to bring about peace
and stability Mali once and for all. We believe that
supporting the Mali Government is key to achieving
lasting peace, while firmly respecting the country’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We also welcome the initiative of the French
presidency to organize a visit to the region, which
will allow us to gain first-hand understanding of the
situation in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
f loor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, African
Integration and International Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I am very happy
to see you, Mr. President, presiding over the Security
6/10

05/10/2017

Council this month. I wish you and the entire French
delegation every success in as you guide the work of
the Council and assure you of the full cooperation of
Mali in those endeavours.
I also take this opportunity to welcome the
outstanding work of our brother Ambassador Tekeda
Alemu and the Ethiopian delegation during their
presidency of the Council last month.
I particularly welcome the forthcoming visit of the
members of the Security Council to three countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We will be
very happy to welcome Council members to Bamako
on 19 October.
I also take this opportunity to express the gratitude
of the people and the Government of Mali to the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and all the
women and men of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
under the leadership of our brother Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, for their ongoing commitment and sacrifice
alongside the people of Mali in their quest for peace,
stability and development.
On behalf of the Government of Mali, I take note of
the report (S/2017/811) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali from June to September, and thank
the Special Representative for his briefing, which
brings me to make the following observations.
At the outset, I should like to welcome the
clarifications made by the Special Representative on the
period covered by the report, in which the SecretaryGeneral states that “almost no progress was made in
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali” (S/2017/811, para. 77). I thank
the Special Representative for his efforts in that regard.
Indeed, the Government of Mali was astonished at that
assertion, which at first glance gives the impression of
widespread inertia regarding the implementation of the
Agreement, despite the efforts of the Government of
Mali and the international community.
The Government of Mali recognizes the
difficulties that have plagued the peace process, but
it considers that remarkable progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement, a product of
the Algiers process. Today, that is evidenced in the
recognition by all the secular and republican signatory
armed groups of the State of Mali and, above all, the
fact that national unity is contested by no signatory
17-31061

05/10/2017

The situation in Mali

to the Agreement. It is also evidenced in the effective
cessation of hostilities between the armed groups
and the Malian defence and security forces, which
continues to this day.
To that end, I welcome and recall the conclusions
of the high-level meeting on the implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
held in New York on 20 September. At the end of the
meeting, the participants
“took note of the substantial progress made in its
implementation since the Ministerial Meeting of
23 September 2016. They noted, among others,
the holding of the Conference for national
understanding, the establishment of the National
Integration and Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commissions and the National
Council for Security Sector Reform as well as the
efforts underway to pursue institutional reforms,
notably the establishment of the second chamber of
parliament in line with the provisions of the Peace
Agreement and on an inclusive basis. Also, noting
that the implementation of the Peace Agreement had
entered in its third year, participants stressed the
need for additional progress in the coming months”.
The Secretary-General has expressed satisfaction in
his previous reports and hailed the progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement and the commitment
of the Government of Mali, led by President of the
Republic His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
to pursuing his efforts. Such satisfaction makes it
clear that the peace process is well under way, despite
the difficulties.
Despite all the challenges, I can assure the Council
that the Government of Mali remains committed to
expediting the implementation of the Agreement,
because we are convinced that there is no credible
alternative to that peaceful solution to the crisis, in
particular in light of the agreement that was concluded
today among all Malian actors. I understand the
impatience of the Secretary-General, the members of
the Council and our other partners with the delays in
implementing the Agreement. I know that the Council
also understands the complex challenges facing our
peace process, many of which are out of the hands of
the Government of Mali.
At the domestic level, the lack of trust and persistent
tensions between the two signatory movements
constitute a major concern for the Government.

S/PV. 8062

The deadly clashes between the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad and the Platform coalition of
armed groups last July in the Kidal region are a perfect
example of that. Faced with a situation that jeopardizes
the peace process, the Government has turned to its
own national crisis-settlement mechanisms. Thus, the
efforts of the religious and traditional leaders of Mali,
together with those of the High Representative of the
President of the Republic of Mali for the Implementation
of the Algiers Peace Agreement, have restored calm and
enabled the signing of a ceasefire agreement between
the two armed groups. Those efforts also allowed for
the return of the Governor of Kidal. In that regard, I
also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Mali and his team.
Those positive dynamics need to be reinforced. I
welcome the adoption of resolution 2374 (2017), through
which the Security Council instituted a sanctions
regime against the spoilers of the peace process in
Mali, at the request of the Malian Government. Yes,
we asked for sanctions, but we asked for sanctions that
would be fair, transparent and equitable, to be used as
an additional means to pressure the Malian parties to
accelerate the implementation of the Agreement, with a
view to achieving the legitimate lasting peace that our
people await.
However, I would like to point out that the delays
in the implementation of the Agreement are also and
above all attributable to the deterioration of the security
situation, characterized by asymmetrical attacks on the
Malian defence and security forces , which are on the
front line of the fight against terrorism. Those attacks
have also targeted Blue Helmets, the French forces,
civilians and even the signatories of the Agreement.
Regarding the other dimensions of the
implementation of the Agreement, the Government’s
resolve remains steadfast. Joint patrols are becoming
increasingly operational, as are the interim authorities
and the emergency plan for the development of the
northern regions. The State will step up its efforts to
provide basic social services and peace dividends to
the populations affected by the crisis.
Municipal and regional elections are planned
before the end of the year. Only today, the Council of
Ministers decided to hold the elections on 17 December.
The Government of Mali has already acquired the
materials for the elections.

17-310617/10

S/PV.8062

The situation in Mali

With regard to the holding of the referendum and
regional and local elections, I am pleased to announce
to the Council that, under the budget amendment
adopted by the National Assembly on 25 August, the
Government of Mali has fully addressed the issue of
the CAF18 billion gap mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General. That is therefore no longer an issue.
Similarly, I would like to recall the promulgation
by the President, on 2 October, of the law on the
code for territorial communities, the law on the selfadministration of local and regional authorities and the
law on the special status of the Bamako district. Many
of the provisions are intended to meet our commitments
in the context of the Peace Agreement.
I should like to emphasize that, at the request
of a certain part of the national community, the
President has decided to postpone — and I underscore
that it is merely a postponement, wheres the report
mentions staying the referendum — the holding of the
referendum on the draft review of the Constitution of
Mali. However, the Head of State remains determined
to pursue that major reform, as he believes it to be
indispensable for the future of our country.
With regard to the processes of cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
Government of Mali calls on the signatory movements
to cooperate in good faith in order to ensure the
success of those programmes, which are crucial for the
stabilization and restoration of security in our country.
For its part, the Government of Mali, which has
already made enormous financial commitments,
will respect all its obligations in the context of the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. In that regard,
the draft State budget for the financial year 2018,
which is currently under consideration by the National
Assembly, duly takes into account the need to finance
the implementation of commitments undertaken
through the Malian Peace Agreement.
In parallel with the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Mali, the Government is paying particular
attention to the situation in the central regions of the
country. As a result of that commitment on the central
regions, we have appointed Mr. Mahmoud Dicko, Chair
of the High Islamic Council, to work towards dialogue
and reconciliation between the communities of the
Mopti and Ségou regions. We have already seen very
encouraging and appreciable results. In Ségou, the
Prime Minister has just chaired the forum for peace in
8/10

05/10/2017

the fourth region, the conclusions of which have made
it possible to hope for a gradual easing of the situation
in the central regions. That is a concrete example of
Malians themselves taking national ownership of
the process.
As in previous reports, in the present report
the Secretary-General expresses his concern about
human rights violations in Mali — a situation of
great importance. With regard to the cases of human
rights violations and attackes listed in the report,
the Government of Mali would of course like more
information on the localities concerned.
With regard to the arrest of persons by the Malian
authorities for acts of terrorism, the report mentions
116 persons arrested for terrorism, including 106
released persons, including five boys and two women.
Information gathered from our judicial services since
the publication of the report shows that it is rather four
boys, not five. While it is a small difference, I think
it is important to be precise. The four were handed
over to the Regional Director of the Ministry for the
Promotion of Women, Children and the Family from
the beginning of their questioning.
In addition, the report indicates that 239 people
were detained for terrorism, including five boys, and
that they were still in custody in State institutions.
For our part, the technical services in charge of the
issue have told us that out of a total of 277 people who
were taken to the Judicial Investigations Service of
the National Gendarmerie, 50 had arrest warrants for
suspicion of terrorism. In 2017, out of 102 cases heard
in the court of assizes, four individuals were convicted
of violations of human rights or attempts to undermine
human rights. On 31 August, at least 52 persons out
of 132 plaintiffs were summoned by magistrates.
Although no trial has been officially opened, the
procedure is following its legally outlined course. For
its part, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission set
up by the Government has gathered 5,267 testimonies
from victims and witnesses.
In any event, I would like to reiterate the commitment
of the Government of Mali to respecting and upholding
the norms of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. All cases reported in
areas under Government control are systematically
investigated and subsequent prosecutions are initiated
against the alleged perpetrators. There is not, nor
17-31061

05/10/2017

The situation in Mali

will there ever be, impunity in the matter of human
rights violations.
The Government of Mali welcomed the adoption
of resolution 2364 (2017), which renews the mandate of
MINUSMA. The resolution, which follows resolution
2295 (2016), calls upon MINUSMA to take a more
proactive stance and endows it with a more robust
mandate. However, it is clear that the major innovations
brought about by the resolution have not been ref lected
in the situation on the ground. Accordingly, the
Government of Mali strongly hopes that the operational
capacities of MINUSMA will be strengthened by the
Security Council in order to enable it to implement its
mandate fully and effectively. I welcome the fact that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
made the same point.
Equally important is the strengthening of
cooperation between MINUSMA and the Malian
defence and security forces. I know that the Special
Representative is equally committed to that important
aspect, which will one day allow for the gradual
withdrawal of the Mission. In particular, I would
like to highlight the need and urgency of supporting
the Maliand defence and security forces in their
daily struggle against terrorism on the ground. That
support need not wait for the completion of the reform
process to be carried out. I welcome the fact that such a
central issue has been taken into account by resolution
2364 (2017).
Similarly, the Government of Mali welcomes the
inclusion in the renewed mandate of the important
issue of MINUSMA’s support for the restoration of
the State’s authority throughout the country, including
through the return of the administration and Malian
defense and security forces in all regions of the north
of the country, particularly Kidal.
As the Council knows, the crisis in Mali is not a
solely domestic one. It has regional and international
dimensions, which are marked by terrorism, organized
crime and trafficking in human beings. That is what
brought about the creation of the Group of Five for the
Sahel G-5 Sahel (G-5) Joint Force, whose deployment
the Security Council welcomed. I also welcome the
holding of the G-5 high-level meeting in New York,
which featured the participation of the Heads of State
of G-5 Sahel, the President of the French Republic, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. As a result of

S/PV. 8062

that meeting, I would like to call for more substantial
and more consistent support from our bilateral and
multilateral partners, with a view to mobilizing the
necessary resources for the effective operationalization
and efficient deployment of the Joint force. I call on all
of our partners to participate actively in the planning
and pledging conference for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
scheduled for mid-December in Brussels.
The violent and deadly clashes yesterday on
the Niger-Mali border once again remind us of the
urgent need for the rapid operationalization of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The current Chair of the G-5
Sahel, President Keita, has just issued a communiqué
in which he condemns what took place yesterday in
the strongest possible terms. He also reminds us of the
urgent need to ensure that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
be operationalized as soon as possible in order to
ensure that it can withstand those who are seeking to
destabilize the entire region, including terrorists and
armed groups.
I take this opportunity, on behalf of the President
of the Republic, to convey our sincere condolences to
the people and the Government and the people of the
Niger and the Government and the people of the United
States of America. We must continue to stand together
to keep up the pressure on these terrorist groups and
win this battle.
I thank every member of the Security Council
for their continued, invaluable support to Mali and
to the ongoing peace process. I reiterate the eternal
gratitude of the people and the Government of Mali
to the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and all MINUSMA personnel, the troop-contributing
countries, the members of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, led by Algeria, and all other partner
countries and institutions for their continued and
multiform support to the peace and stabilization
process in our country. On behalf of the people and the
Government of Mali, I also pay tribute to the memory
of all the victims of the Malian crisis — civilian and
military, foreigners and nationals — who have fallen
with honour in the line of duty in Mali.
In conclusion, I reiterate the resolute commitment
of the President of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, to maintain and intensify
his efforts in the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in the higher interests

17-310619/10

S/PV.8062

The situation in Mali

of Mali and its people. The President is acutely aware
of his responsibilities, but also and above all convinced
that improving the situation in Mali will have a positive
impact on peace and security in the Sahel and on
international peace and security, which is the Council’s
primary responsibility.

10/10

05/10/2017

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

17-31061
