Resolutions ttdupled 01.1 the reports of the Third Committee

Taking into account the urgent uecessity for the
adoption of practical :md far-reaching measures with a
view to settling the main social problems as presented
in the Report on thtJ World Social Situation, 1963, and
in other related documents and studies,
Convinced that economic and social progress, especially in the developing countries, cannot be achieved
without a substantial change in outlook and a clear
view of the ends to be attained, and without such
alteration of certain social structures as may be necessary,
1. Recommends that the Governments of the developing countries should take all necessary steps with a
view of the ends to be attained and without such
for economic development, as well as for progress and
social justice ;
2. RequC'sts the Economic and Social Council to review its resolution 4% (XVI) of 31 July 1953, entitled
"Progr.-imme of concerted practical action in the social
field of the United Nations and the specialized agencies",
in the light of the Report on the World Social Situation,
1963, and of the objectives of the United Nations Development Decade;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider effective means of trauslating the social objectives
of the Decade into concrete realities;
4. Invites Governments of developing countries to
prepare specific targets to be achieved in the major
social sectors during the second half of the Decade, to
integrate those targets with economic plans, programmes
or projections for the s.-ime period, and to set forth
the volume and types of the external resources that
will be required to achieve these social goals, taking
into account similar proRrammes in other countries and
the advantages of regional and international cooperation;
5. Requests the ·secretary-General to prepare in so
far as is feasible, for submission to the Economic and
Social Council in 1%5, a draft programme of social
development for the second half of the Decade, to cover
not only priorities of international action in the social
field but also major targets of social development to
be achieved in the different less developed regions by
the end of the Decade, and methods of implementation,
taking into account :
(a) The intentions of national Governments and
regional bodies, as indicated 0y specific responses to
the present resolution as well as by national and regional
development plans and programmes ;
( b) The possibilities of external aid;
( c) Feasibilities in terms of material and human resources, both national and international, and the requirements of balanced economic and social development;
( d) Methods of establishing appropriate standards,
reducing costs and achieving maximum efficiency in
expenditure of the funds available for the social development of the less developed countries ;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to undertake far-reaching studies, covering the various regions
and countries with different social systems, of basic
problems in the social field and measures adopted for
their solution, with a view tu incorporating the results
of these studies in future reports on the world social
situation;
7. Invites the co-operation of the specialized agencies concerned, the functional commissions and committees of the Economic and Social Council, the regional

39

economic commissions, the regional development pLming insLitntes aml the United ~ations Research Institute
for Social Development in these endeavours;
8. Requests the competent bodies of the United
Nations to continue and to exttuJ the facilities granted
for the training abroad of national cadres, and to promote and encour.-ige the local 2.nd regional tr.-iining of
cadres of the higher .-ind intermediate levels, in order
that the indigenous populatiom, may participate with
increasing skill in social and economic development;
9. R,:quests the Economic and Social Council and
the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
.-it its nineteenth session on the steps taken to implement
the present resolution;
10. Decides to devote. at its nineteenth and future
sessions, the necessary number of meetings to the consideration of practical me.-isures in the social field, so
as to promote speedy social and economic progress and
to attain the objectives of the Decade.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

1917 (XVIII). Housing, building and planning
ThC' General Assembly,
Noting with satisfaction the report of the Committee
on Housing, Building :-md Planning on its first session,8
the relev.-int sections of the report of the Economic and
Social Council, 4 and Council resolutions 975 F
(XXXVI) and 976 (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963,
Conccrncd .-it the critic.-il deficiency of housing and
related .-imenities in the developing countries owing to
over-rapid urbanization in a setting of slow economic
z111d industrial growth and scarce resources,
Recalling its resolution 1508 (XV) of 12 December
1960 and Economic and Social Council resolution 976 E
(XXXVI) on the establishment of a United Nations
programme of pilot projects in housing, building and
planning,
1. Invites the Committee on Housing, Building and
Planning to prepare as soon as possible recommendations to Governments suggesting practical and effective
measures they may take to solve their housing problems;
2. Recommends that as a matter of priority the Committee on Housing, Building and Planning should
suggest appropriate means of emergency action during
the second half of the United Nations Development
Decade and that it should;
(a) Study and recommend practical methods of
establishing appropriate national bodies which could
promote the development of national building industries ;
( b) Prepare suitable targets for housing and environmental development consistent with the targets
for the Decade set out in the Secretary-General's proposals5 and in Economic and Social Council resolution
916 (XXXIV) of 3 August 1962;
( c) Suggest practical methods and criteria for establishing appropriate standards for such action along the
lines of Economic and Social Council resolution 975 F
8 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-sixth Session, Supf>[ement No. 13 (E/3719/Rev.l),
chapter iV.
4 Official Recards of the General Assembly, Eighteenth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/5S03), chapter IX, paras. 387-

396.
5 The United Nations Development Decade: Proposals for
action (United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.II.B.2),

General Aleembly-El1bteenth Se11lon

(XXXVI), taking into account the resources available
for housing and urban development;
3. Recommends that Governments take all necessary
measures designed to ensure the creation and execution
of low-income housin;., programmes, including the encouragement of housmg co-operatives, and to guard
against any practices, especially speculation in real
estate, which may prove detrimental to such programmes;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, the regional economic commissions, the specialized agencies concerned
and the interested inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the Committee
on Housing, Building and Planning and to assist requesting Governments in formulating· and exe~uting,
within the framework of general development and
taking into account internal resources and external aid
available for such programmes, specific action programmes in housing and environmental development'
consistent with the targets and standards recommended;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to explore appropriate methods of expanding, within the framework of
the United Nations programmes of technical cooperation and with the co-operation of interested Governments, the programme of pilot projects in housing,
building and planning as a means of facilitating the
achievement of national targets for the remainder of
the Decade;
6. Invites the Managing Director of the Special Fund
to consider the feasibility of including suitable aspects
of such pilot projects among the pre-investment activities essential for environmental development as part
of general development ;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Secretary -General to report to the General Assembly
at its nineteenth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1918 (XVIII). Capital punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1396 (XIV) of 20 November
1959, in which the Economic and Social Council was
invited to initiate a study of the question of capital
punishment, of the laws and practices relating thereto,
and of the effects of capital punishment and the abolition
· thereof on the rate of criminality,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 747
(XXIX) of 6 April 1960 concerning the procedure for
the study of the question of capital punishment,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 934 (XXXV) of 9 April 1963 relating to capital
punishment,
l. Endorses the action of the Eccnomic and Social
Council in its resolution 934 (XXXV);
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights to study the
report entitled Capital Punishment6 and the comments
thereon of the Ad H oc Advisory Committee of Experts
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders,'' and to make such recommendations on the
matter as it deems appropriate;
e United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.IV.2.
1 Officio/

Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Thirty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 11, document

E/3724, section IH.

3. Requests the Secretary-General, after examining
the report of the Commission on Human Rights and
with the CO·Oreration of the Consultative Group on the
Prevention 6 Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
to present a report, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly not later than at its
twenty-second session on new developments with respect to the law and practice concernin{ the death
penalty and new contributions of the criminal sciences
in the matter.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1919 (XVIII). United Nations Children'• Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1773 (XVII) of 7 December

1962,
1. Takes note with approval of the work of the
United Nations Children's Fund which, while continuing to be devoted to the fields of child health, nutrition
and social welfare, has now been extended to include
education and vocational training as well ;
2. Recommends that Governments, when planning
their economic and social development, should take into
account the importance of meeting the needs of children
and youth and should use to the full such facilities as
the United Nations Children's Fund can provide, including aid for the training of national personnel, in
order to help prepare them for life;
3. Calls upon Member States to continue to contribute as much as they can to the United Nations
Children's Fund.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

1920 (XVIll). Participation of women in national
social and economic development
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance of developing human
resources in order to accelerate social and economic
progress,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
961 E (section II), F and G (XXXVI) of 12 July
1963 and 975 B and C (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963,
Considering General Assembly resolution 1777
(XVII) of 7 December 1962 concerning United Nations
assista!lce for the advancement of women in developing
countries.
Believing in the necessity of women playing their full
part, on equal terms with men, in planning for balanced
and co-ordinated economic and social development, and
in the execution of such plans,
Recognising the contribution of women to national
social development programmes, particularly those relating to community development and social welfare
and the importance of such programmes to the advance~
ment of women in general,
Affirming the importance of training women for such
participation at all levels of social and economic development by means of appropriate programmes in the
economic and social fields, including the fields of educati~n_, vocati~nal training,. eradi~at.ion ?f illiteracy,
nutrition, public health, public adm1mstratton, housing
social welfare, and urban and rural development,
'
1. Calls the attention of Governments of States Members of the United Nations and members of the spe-
