United Nations

S/PV.5470

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5470th meeting
Tuesday, 20 June 2006, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Løj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Denmark)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Gayama
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. De Rivero
Mr. Al-Bader
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Matulay
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2006/361)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-39548 (E)

*0639548*

S/PV.5470

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2006/361)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Austria and Serbia in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. RaskovicIvic (Serbia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Søren JessenPetersen, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Jessen-Petersen to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security

2

Council is meeting in accordance with
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

the

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/361, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
As members all know, this is the last meeting of
the Security Council at which Mr. Søren JessenPetersen will represent UNMIK as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. His work has
been remarkable; he has performed under very delicate
political circumstances with great skill. I therefore take
special pleasure, on behalf of the Security Council, in
thanking Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen for his outstanding
and tireless efforts over the past two years as the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative
for
Kosovo.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Jessen-Petersen: I thank you, Madam, for
your kind words and for inviting me once again to brief
the Security Council on developments in Kosovo.
Denmark was also, I recall, in the chair in May
2005 when this body decided to launch the
comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo. It
was based on the findings of that review that, last
October, the Security Council endorsed the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that a process should begin
to determine Kosovo’s future status. It is that process,
now well under way under the leadership of Special
Envoy Martti Ahtisaari, that is at the centre of current
events in Kosovo.
Let me begin by saying that Kosovo today
presents a picture of a society making steady progress.
In saying that, I want to acknowledge the great
determination and energy which Prime Minister Çeku
has brought to Government since his appointment on
10 March. I am therefore delighted that the Prime
Minister is with us here today and also that he has
addressed a letter to the President of the Security
Council.
Standards implementation is the exemplar of that
progress. In my last report to the Council, covering
events up to 20 December 2005, I expressed regret that
the pace of standards implementation had slowed in the
second half of 2005. By February, I was able to report
here that the Government of Kosovo had begun to
respond to those criticisms and that the process was

06-39548

S/PV.5470

getting back on track. My latest technical review,
reflecting events up to 30 April 2006, shows an acrossthe-board revitalization of the process. The SecretaryGeneral’s report before the Council today echoes those
judgments and reinforces my observations that the
performance of the Kosovo authorities has become
dynamic and progressive as never before. There is, of
course, a need for still further progress, but if the
current momentum continues — and I am confident
that it will — we can expect further concrete
achievements over the coming months.
The pace of policy implementation has been
matched by a far greater willingness on the part of
Kosovo’s new leadership to take the lead in reaching
out to minority communities, in particular to the
Kosovo Serbs. The most recent example of that is the
Prime Minister’s initiative to establish a community
security council, which met for the first time last
Friday. The council brings together the Government of
Kosovo, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the Kosovo Force and
other key players in an effort to promote improvements
in the living conditions of Kosovo’s most vulnerable
communities — at this moment, notably, the Kosovo
Serbs.
Despite those efforts, however, it remains a fact
that the situation for many Kosovo Serbs remains very
difficult. Many of them feel confused, exposed and
isolated, and do not know what to think about the
future. In the final analysis, Kosovo Serb communities
are concerned about the status process, although I have
detected in my many contacts with them all over
Kosovo a willingness to start considering what life
might be like after final status, including on the
outcomes they might not welcome. All too often, the
only message reaching Kosovo Serbs tells them not to
engage with the majority. That is not healthy for the
more open and integrated society we all want to see.
As an example, whenever there is any crime in
which the victim is a Kosovo Serb, an ethnic motive is
often proclaimed, usually without any evidence. Not
only is that unfair to Kosovo as a society — a society,
incidentally, in which violent crime is decreasing
overall; more worryingly, it also perpetuates a climate
of insecurity among Kosovo Serb communities. Of
course, violent crimes need to be solved and
prosecuted if citizens are to have faith in the justice
system. We would all like to see quick results
whenever harm is done to any citizen, but it is no

06-39548

service to the Kosovo Serbs themselves to present them
only as targets and victims. Despite isolated
incidents — and they really are isolated — the picture
as it is painted does not correspond to the reality of
Kosovo as it is now.
I therefore call again upon the Serbian authorities
to work with us and the Kosovo Government to
provide factual information about current events so that
we do not promote a climate of fear and further
isolation. I welcome the Contact Group’s recent letter
to the Government in Belgrade making those same
points.
At this time of flux, as a new Kosovo is being
built around them, a growing number of Kosovo Serbs
would like to have a voice in the political process and
in Kosovo’s governmental and parliamentary
institutions, but they feel that they cannot do so until
Belgrade gives its consent. That has been the case for
more than two years now. I do not see any merit in
Belgrade’s isolationist policy from the point of view of
Kosovo Serbs. I do not see how the Kosovo Serbs can
make informed choices and decisions about their own
future within Kosovo if they are not even permitted to
take part in the democratic processes there, be it
centrally or locally.
At
the
grass-roots
level,
the
Serbian
Government’s directive, which has obliged Kosovo
Serbs working for certain Kosovo institutions to
choose between their Belgrade and Pristina salaries, is,
I am afraid, a divisive move and does a disservice to
Kosovo Serbs at this sensitive time. Needless to say, in
presenting those points to the Council, I take the
opportunity also to call on Belgrade, as the Contact
Group has done in recent days, to withdraw that
damaging directive and to give its consent to those
political actors in the Kosovo Serb communities who
want to work in the interests of their community, in
partnership with the institutions and Government of
Kosovo.
Amidst those difficult issues, there have been
some positive moves. In particular, I welcome the
signing on 6 June of a returns protocol between
UNMIK, Belgrade and Pristina, which should enable
returns to take place on an agreed basis. The numbers
of returns are steady, although still very low in absolute
terms. However, there are currently more people
wanting to return than there is available funding. We
need to see a significant increase in both numbers of

3

S/PV.5470

returns and resources to support returns in order for
those returns to be sustainable.

down the risk of incidents that might escalate into
something worse.

As I mentioned at the start of my presentation
today, the status process is of the highest importance in
Kosovo political life. Everything we do today is done
against the background of managing expectations about
and preparing for a settlement. It is the status process
above all that is behind the reinvigoration of the
political process in Kosovo. I would like in particular
to acknowledge the spirit of cooperation which has
characterized the Kosovo negotiators in the unity team
and political group. For this, credit is due not only to
President Sejdiu’s leadership, but also to Prime
Minister Çeku, Assembly President Berisha and,
equally, to the opposition leader, Hachim Thaci and
Ventran Sorai.

Indeed, the rule of law, as a whole, remains an
issue of paramount importance for Kosovo. In some
areas, much has been achieved. For example, we are
proud of the development and performance of the
Kosovo Police Service and the progress it has made
since its establishment under UNMIK’s aegis.

UNMIK is not a player in the status process. Our
job is to fulfil our mandate as set forth in resolution
1244 (1999). But having said that, from the start it has
been important to me that the activities of UNMIK in
Kosovo should be consistent with and supportive of the
status process being conducted out of Vienna. With that
process gaining momentum, it is clear that we are
moving towards the end of the UNMIK mandate. Much
work has already been done on what will follow it. Of
course, this work cannot prejudge what this Council
might decide. Nevertheless, useful preparations are
being made. The preparation already undertaken and
the work that we will continue to do with partner
organizations should allow UNMIK to achieve an
orderly exit when the time comes so that Kosovo can
experience an orderly transition.
Naturally, the status process carries with it risks
as well as opportunities. Tensions may well rise as the
process moves towards its conclusion. I am deeply
concerned to see how violent crimes can quickly
become politicized and used to provoke tensions and
divisions, in particular, in the northern part of Kosovo.
In this context, it is important at this crucial
moment that no measures are taken by any political
actors in the region that may foment instability. We
will never be able to entirely eliminate the risk of
security incidents in a volatile environment such as
Kosovo. But we are alert to the dangers, and we have
been working more closely with the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) — whose commander and whose members I
would like to take this opportunity to salute — on
strategies to respond to any eventuality and to keep

4

But there are areas where we will need to
improve, and more needs to be done in the field of
justice. I welcome the recent establishment in Pristina
of a European Union planning team that will work with
UNMIK to ensure that the rule of law sectors continue
to receive the attention they need up to and beyond the
end of our mandate. The future of Kosovo must be
built on the solid foundation of the rule of law.
The year 2006 is extraordinary for Kosovo. It is
vital for stability and economic and social progress in
Kosovo and the region that the status process be
brought to an early and successful conclusion. I am
aware, of course, of some voices that say that
everything is happening too quickly and that that
introduces unnecessary risks. I hold the opposite view.
I hold that after seven years of interim administration
in Kosovo, the society is ready — indeed impatient —
to move on. In fact, it would be a far greater risk to
keep Kosovo in limbo for much longer.
At the moment, there is a feeling in Kosovo that
progress is being made under a new, dynamic
leadership. This dynamism is based on a vision of a
transformed future, a future based on the Guiding
Principles that there be no return of Kosovo to the pre1999 situation, no partition of Kosovo and no union of
Kosovo with any country or part of another country,
and that the status outcome be acceptable to the
majority in Kosovo while the rights of minorities are
respected and protected.
UNMIK
administration
has
extraordinary
achievements to its credit. UNMIK will of course
respect its mandate until the very end. However, there
are now diminishing returns from this mandate and
limits to what can be achieved by an international
administration in the absence of clarity on status.
Interim administration has been in place for seven
years without a clearly defined endpoint. It is time for
us, for Kosovo and for the region to move on.

06-39548

S/PV.5470

Madam President, as you said, this report will be
my last one to the Security Council before leaving my
post at the end of this month. It has been a fascinating,
at times difficult, but always rewarding post. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank the Security
Council for the unstinting support I have received since
taking up the appointment two years ago. I am
confident that the Council will, when the time comes,
take a decision that will allow Kosovo to build the
democratic, multi-ethnic society it envisions, and for
which, I am proud to say, the United Nations has
helped to lay the foundations.
I have served most of my United Nations career
in the humanitarian field, and I have seen too much
suffering in the Western Balkans over the last 15 years.
My biggest hope as I leave my post is that the coming
status agreement in Kosovo will finally allow the
victims of the conflict on all sides to become the
beneficiaries of a peaceful and lasting settlement,
leading to a better future that they so thoroughly
deserve.
The President: I thank Mr. Jessen-Petersen for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic,
President
of
the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija.
Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): I am particularly
pleased to be able to greet those present here today and
express my respect for this body.
First of all, I would like to single out the singular
importance of the Security Council as a guarantor for
the preservation of universal principles of international
law and the entire world order in establishing, building
and ensuring future peace in Kosovo and Metohija and
in the entire region of South-Eastern Europe.
As the successor State to the former Serbia and
Montenegro, Serbia is firmly convinced that only by
consistent implementation of international principles,
such as the inviolability of sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of democratic States, is it possible
to maintain and promote peace and stability in the
Western Balkans. We deem it particularly important to
reiterate that Serbia is absolutely ready to assume its
share of responsibility in the process of a successful
resolution of the issue of Kosovo and Metohija on the

06-39548

basis of international law and in accordance with
modern democratic values.
We come before the Security Council with full
confidence, with the expectation that it will make its
crucial contribution in the spirit of the documents it has
previously adopted, primarily resolution 1244 (1999),
of 10 June 1999, which unambiguously reaffirms the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country. We
are firmly convinced that the Council’s future decisions
also will be consistent with these fundamental United
Nations principles.
We welcome the further encouragement of the
dialogue on Kosovo and Metohija, that is, with respect
to achieving a solution regarding the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija. For Serbia, that status is
substantial autonomy within the internationally
recognized borders of Serbia.
However, I must point out that the report on the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija and on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2006/361), which is before the
Council today, is not sufficiently clear, mostly because
it proceeds more on the basis of unrealistic
expectations than of facts. The report does not
accurately reflect the situation regarding the
implementation of standards.
I would like to recall that, in his comprehensive
review of the situation in Kosovo (S/2005/635, annex),
Ambassador Kai Eide rightly indicated that the only
way to make progress is through the process of
establishing future status and continuing the
implementation of standards. Unfortunately, so far
there have been no serious signs that any of those
perfectly fitting and appropriate recommendations are
being taken into account. Little progress has been made
to resolve issues relating to property rights; returns
have been almost frozen for a number of years now;
and instruments for the protection of human rights and
the rule of law are dead letters. According to a report
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, 44,000 cases are pending before the courts,
while 17,000 damage compensation claims are on hold.
It is well known that human rights in Kosovo and
Metohija have been violated on a massive scale. The
very right to survival of Serbs and non-Albanians — a
definite minority in the province — has been
threatened. Every week — sometimes every day — we
and UNMIK witness various forms of violence

5

S/PV.5470

perpetrated against the non-Albanian population. I
must point out that two thirds of the non-Albanian
population have been expelled from Kosovo and
Metohija. In reality, low-intensity extremist violence is
tolerated in Kosovo and Metohija, and there is no
progress in the reconciliation process among the inconflict communities.
Since June 1999, 929 Serbs and other nonAlbanians have been killed or reported missing, and
there have been 7,000 ethnically motivated attacks,
4,830 of them terrorist attacks. All of those crimes
have gone unpunished. From 25 October 2005, when
negotiations were announced and the Albanians were
sent a clear signal about the need to freeze conflict
actions, until recently, there have been at least 200
ethnically motivated attacks — that is, there is
reasonable suspicion that they are such — against
Serbs and other non-Albanians, in which 2 people died
and 26 have been seriously wounded.
It is noteworthy that roads used by Serbs to travel
from isolated areas have been targeted of late.
Initially — at the beginning of last year — those
attacks were focused on central Kosovo, on Lipljan and
Gracanica. In the second half of the year, a series of 12
terrorist attacks was perpetrated on the road connecting
Strpce with other Serbian communities, while buses on
the road leading from the municipality of Gora to
Prizren were shelled. This spring, the brunt of the
attacks shifted to northern Kosovo and Metohija — the
municipalities of Kosovska Mitrovica and Zvecan. The
attacks were committed mostly at night, with automatic
weapons being used against vehicles known to ferry
Serbs and other non-Albanians.
Kosovo Albanian violence on 17 and 18 March
2004 demonstrated that stability in that part of Europe
is fragile and that reconciliation between Serbs and
Albanians is far from a reality. As many as 5,000
people were expelled, eight people were killed and 35
Orthodox churches and 935 homes were destroyed, as
were 10 health institutions and Serb schools, in just
two days. Six towns and nine villages have been
ethnically cleansed. Of the 50,000 people who took
part in the large-scale Albanian extremist action, only
six men were remanded in custody. For the sake of
comparison, I would like to point out that in postDayton Bosnia and Herzegovina there have been fewer
than 200 ethnically motivated incidents over the past
10 years, while the same number occurred in Kosovo
and Metohija in the space of only seven months.

6

The international community’s proclaimed
objective of making Kosovo a stable, democratic and
multi-ethnic society is still far from being achieved. It
has to be acknowledged that economically Kosovo is
extremely underdeveloped: 600,000 able-bodied
people, including 70 per cent of the young, are
unemployed; the black market is flourishing; and
human beings are trafficked and goods are smuggled.
There is no rule of law and corruption is rife. Pervasive
organized crime hampers economic recovery and
presents a serious political, economic and security
problem, as it primarily undermines people’s faith in
institutions.
The participation of Serbs in the work of the
Provisional Institutions is one of the topics addressed
in the report — and one of the true problems. We
consider that it is of the utmost importance for Kosovo
Serbs to participate and to play an active role in the
political life of Kosovo and Metohija, but only under
the condition that their participation is meaningful, that
it is not merely a matter of political decorum and that
the out-voting of Serbs is prevented. That implies that
those institutions must be democratic and that all
interested parties should be engaged in working
towards the democratization of Kosovo and Metohija
society.
Decentralization in Kosovo and Metohija is of
great importance to the Serb community. It is not only
about establishing closer links between citizens and the
authorities, or about ensuring better and more efficient
services to citizens. For Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija,
decentralization is a vital condition, enabling survival,
security and return. That is why the Serb negotiating
team proposed the strengthened self-government of
Serb majority municipalities, horizontal ties among
municipalities and direct issue-oriented and transparent
ties with Belgrade. Those proposals have nothing to do
with the idea of the division of Kosovo and Metohija,
as claimed by the Albanian representatives. They are
merely a concrete and institutional response to the
existing situation, in which the survival of the Serb
community — and thereby the multi-ethnic character
of Kosovo and Metohija — has ultimately been
threatened.
The activities of the working groups established
on the basis of the outcome of the Vienna meeting in
2003 are an important aspect in defining future status
and in the peace process. The resolution of the issues
of missing persons, returns, transport and energy

06-39548

S/PV.5470

cooperation would certainly improve the overall
situation and reduce the level of political tension.
However, so far neither UNMIK nor Pristina has been
overly enthusiastic about the process.
In our view, the security situation in Kosovo and
Metohija is extremely precarious. We cannot agree
with the assertion in the report that the security
situation is stable, with a small number of inter-ethnic
incidents. We express concern about the new wave of
attacks against Serbian representatives, aimed at
further intimidating the Serbian population right before
the start of status negotiations.
The current situation in northern Kosovo and
Metohija and the deployment of new KFOR
contingents in the area should also be borne in mind. I
would like to believe that their presence will strengthen
security and lead to the establishment of cooperation
with the Serbian community and its leaders. I also hope
that we will be able to launch a joint struggle against
organized crime and violence in the near future.
Considering the lack of progress with regard to
the freedom of movement of minorities, the cessation
of the operation of inter-city bus lines for minority
communities because of budget constraints is of great
concern. We also consider that the decision by the
international police to cease police escorts for Serbian
political representatives will lead to the further
isolation of the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.
In the context of the unjustifiably accelerated
transfer of competences to the Provisional Institutions
in the field of the rule of law, we consider that the
establishment of the Ministry of Police and the
Ministry of Justice and the accelerated transfer of
competences from UNMIK to those Ministries at the
time of the launching of the political process to address
the future status of Kosovo and Metohija are intended
to influence the outcome of the negotiations by
supporting the request of Kosovo Albanians — that is,
at prejudging the future status of Kosovo and Metohija.
I would like to point once again to the
observation in the comprehensive review of
Ambassador Eide that the justice system is the weakest
of Kosovo’s institutions and that the further transfer of
competences in those areas should be considered with
great caution.
The failure to include certain facts in the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the

06-39548

findings and conclusions with respect to corruption at
Pristina airport (A/60/720) serves to conceal the real
situation and to prevent the Security Council from
gaining proper insight into the realities of Kosovo and
Metohija and the effects of UNMIK’s work. My
Government considers the conclusions in the report to
be very important, particularly the following:
“With UNMIK peacekeeping operations
winding down and in the light of the widely held
view that the United Nations will withdraw from
Kosovo in 2006, the reluctance by senior Mission
management to address fraud and corruption will
have a devastating impact on public perception
inside and outside of Kosovo, as the United
Nations will be seen as escaping from the
problems rather than solving them.” (A/60/720,
para. 46)
My Government and hundreds of thousands of
expellees are particularly concerned over the lack of
progress in returns of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). According to data of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 16,000 Serbian and other
non-Albanian internally displaced persons have
returned to the province; but according to the data
available to the Coordinating Centre for Kosovo and
Metohija and the Republic of Serbia Commissariat for
Refugees, that number is only 2,000. Others have
returnee status for largely administrative reasons. Take,
for example, the case of the town of Prizren, where
Albanians, Serbs and Turks — 12,000 members of each
of those three national communities — lived before the
war. Eight hundred Serbs are on the Prizren return list,
but in fact only 16 Serbs live there.
We believe that the report before us provides a
general assessment that the return and integration
process continues to face challenges, but that it does
not reflect the true picture of the problem. The
assessment in the Secretary-General’s report on
UNMIK concerning the visible support of the
Provisional Institutions in Kosovo and Metohija for the
return process is unfounded. Special mention should be
made of the report’s observation that no progress has
been made in the reconstruction of the property
destroyed in March 2004. Of course, Belgrade supports
all activities aimed at creating conditions for the return
of expellees. In that context, we support the signing of
the Protocol on IDP returns by representatives of the
Coordinating Centre for Kosovo and Metohija of the
Government of Serbia and by representatives of the

7

S/PV.5470

Pristina working group on returns. At the same time, I
would like to point out that the conditions for returns
will not be met by the Protocol, but by work in the
field.
As you stated, Madam President, today, 20 June,
is World Refugee Day. It has been seven years since
Serbs and other non-Albanians were expelled from
Kosovo, and they are still waiting to come home. In
that connection, it is worrisome that since the previous
Security Council meeting on this item, held in
February (see S/PV.5373), no tangible progress has
been made in the implementation of standards. The fact
that no substantial progress has been made in the six
rounds of negotiations on the future status of Kosovo is
also a source of concern. Unfortunately, the flexible
position of our negotiating team has not been
reciprocated by the Albanian team, which has
embraced a firm and single-minded position. Such a
position serves more to fuel expectations and raise
tensions among the majority Albanian population in
Kosovo and Metohija than to help find solutions to
serious problems in the province. The tensions have
also been heightened by certain representatives of the
international community — UNMIK, among others —
claiming that the independence of Kosovo is the only
possible outcome, or even a fait accompli.
Martti Ahtisaari has a narrow space in which to
manoeuvre, but there is room for compromise. The
narrow space for a solution can be found somewhere
between the situation in Kosovo and Metohija up to
1999 and independence. Independence is not a
compromise; independence means merely succumbing
to one of those two positions. Serbia is totally opposed
to any redrawing of the borders and believes that any
“either-or” solution — making one side a winner and
the other a loser — would not be good. Our negotiating
team, political leadership and general public deeply
believe that a solution must be found through
negotiations, that it must not be imposed and that both
sides must engage more wholeheartedly and be
prepared for alternative solutions.
For its part, the Government of the Republic of
Serbia has launched two initiatives aimed at providing
new impetus to the negotiations. In its first initiative —
submitted to the members of the Contact Group and
Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari on 19 May — my
Government proposed that direct negotiations be
started on the future status of Kosovo and Metohija.
According to that proposal, direct negotiations between

8

Belgrade and Pristina on the status of Kosovo and
Metohija would begin with a high-level round of
negotiations and continue with a discussion of key
elements that would crystallise the status and that
would be conducted in four working groups, on
constitutional matters, security, economic questions
and decentralization.
In its second initiative, submitted on 30 May, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia presented a
concrete proposal on the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija. It is a compromise between two extreme
positions: the status of Kosovo and Metohija prior to
1999 on the one hand, and independence on the other.
It is the most concrete proposal that our side could
have made, offering more than the standard autonomy
that is known and practised in European countries. The
proposal also calls for the conclusion of an
international agreement that would be reached through
status negotiations and would include basic principles
and concrete provisions regarding the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija. It would be signed and
guaranteed by Serbia and the United Nations.
Serbia is ready, together with the Security
Council and in line with international norms, to make
every effort to reach a compromise solution to Kosovo
and Metohija. We also trust that the United Nations and
the international community will not succumb to
threats of violence and pressure to break up a
democratic State. We are convinced that that would
thoroughly undermine the very foundations of the
international order. Serbia is resolutely opposed to any
attempt to impose a solution to Kosovo and Metohija,
since that would imply dividing the country and taking
away a part of its territory.
Since we believe that we embrace the same
principles as those on which the legal order and the
United Nations are based, we have no doubt that the
Security Council will act in a just manner, applying the
same rules and universal principles to Serbia that are
valid for all members of the Security Council and
States Members of the United Nations. I am fully
convinced that the principles of international law and
order substantially supersede any form of legal
violence.
Convinced that the members of the Council will
devote due attention to these positions, I express to
you, Madam President, my gratitude for having been
able to address this body.

06-39548

S/PV.5470

Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation acknowledges the presence of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo in the Council Chamber this
morning. My delegation is also grateful to Mr. Søren
Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his informative briefing. We pay
tribute to him and to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their
commitment and dedication in assisting Kosovo in the
implementation of the standards and for their support
for Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, in the talks on future status. My
delegation also recognizes the presence of Ms. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination Centre of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and
thanks her for her insightful statement.
We congratulate the new leadership of Kosovo
and commend the democratic process through which
they were elected. That is a demonstration of the
political maturity that will continue to be required in
the progress towards a comprehensive settlement of
Kosovo’s future status.
When we discussed the issue of Kosovo in
February this year (see S/PV.5373), we noted that
progress had been made in the preparations for the
talks on the future status of Kosovo. We were pleased
to note that four rounds of direct talks among the
parties have since been held in Vienna. However, we
regret that the absence of Kosovo Serbs in these talks
has continued to be highly conspicuous. The SecretaryGeneral’s report cites several other areas where the
participation of Kosovo Serbs is lacking or has
remained marginal.
Tanzania believes that for Kosovo to become a
truly multi-ethnic and democratic society, all ethnic
groups must be represented in all spheres of political
life, including in future status talks. We therefore urge
the Kosovo Serbs to fully cooperate and to participate
not only in these talks but also in other Provisional
Institutions. We share the Secretary-General’s view
that the leaders and the people of Kosovo also should
increase their outreach efforts with respect to minority
groups so as to promote confidence across ethnic lines
and start engaging in reconciliation.
Madam President, let me thank you warmly for
having reminded us that today is World Refugee Day.
My delegation would like to express its solidarity with
refugees and to commend all humanitarian

06-39548

organizations such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for
protecting, assisting and finding durable solutions to
the problems of refugees the world over.
In that regard, we are concerned at the low
number of refugees returning to Kosovo. We call for
the creation of a conducive climate that will encourage
refugees and internally displaced persons wishing to
return to Kosovo to do so and that will ensure for them
conditions of safety and dignity. Similarly, efforts
should be geared towards improving the living
conditions of, and providing opportunities for, the Serb
community in Kosovo.
We are encouraged to note that regional
integration has improved and that progress has been
registered in the decentralization process despite the
lack of participation by Kosovo Serbs. We are also
pleased to note that the security situation has remained
stable, albeit fragile. We commend UNMIK and KFOR
for their even-handed determination to enhance
security to support and shepherd the political process
leading to a determination of Kosovo’s future status.
We also welcome the efforts of UNMIK and other
international partners in assisting Kosovo in the
decentralization process and in other reforms,
including in the police and the judiciary. We support
UNMIK’s restructuring to reflect the changing phases
of Kosovo’s political process and a possible
international civilian presence in the future.
My delegation wishes to recognize the important
role and contribution of all the different players in
Kosovo, including United Nations agencies and the
European Union.
I wish to express to Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen
our profound gratitude and appreciation for his
tenacious work in Kosovo, in one of the most
challenging post-conflict situations in recent years. He
has brought to the challenge tremendous humanitarian
and political experience, which we believe will
contribute positively to the future of Kosovo. We wish
him all the best in his future engagements.
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Søren JessenPetersen, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for the constructive efforts that he is making
in Kosovo and for his technical assessment and the

9

S/PV.5470

progress that has been achieved in connection with
standards for Kosovo.

those structures so as to make them more competent
and to promote a political settlement.

The situation of Kosovo depends on the effective
participation of Albanian and Serb leaders in this
process, as the region is at a critical juncture with
respect to forging a better future for itself. All
categories must participate in the dialogue in order to
ensure its legitimacy and sustainability. The
international community must support these efforts and
this process.

Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I should like at the outset to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report as well as Mr. Søren JessenPetersen for his supplementary briefing. We wish to
express our regret at Mr. Jessen-Petersen’s upcoming
resignation. Over the past two years, he has made an
outstanding contribution to the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). China would like to express its appreciation
for all his efforts.

The Kosovo of the future will be stable and
prosperous only if it is based on a recognition of multiethnicity. For that reason, national reconciliation and
the participation of all of the parties in the process is a
crucial element to ensure a multi-ethnic Kosovo. As a
result, the participation of non-Albanian minorities in
all of the workings of the State and society remains
pivotal. To that end, the Government must continue its
efforts to ensure governmental participation of
minorities. Belgrade must also facilitate their work in
the context of those institutions. That would be
reassuring for the inhabitants of Kosovo, who would be
returning in a climate of security.
We would like to know what measures are being
taken to facilitate the return of refugees and displaced
persons, and how financial support could improve the
situation on the ground.
While the Special Representative has, in past
assessments, pointed out the slow pace of standards
implementation, his current assessment is more
positive and indicates that a great deal of progress has
been made in standards implementation during the
period covered by the Secretary-General’s report. We
share his hope that the Provisional Institutions will
sustain their current commitment, which will make it
possible to accomplish even more in the months to
come.
There is no doubt that the total commitment of
the new Government and of the new Prime Minister,
Mr. Çeku, to standards implementation, as well as the
high priority given this process, will allow progress to
be made in the implementation of the eight standards.
We commend the role that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in Kosovo is playing in supporting the Provisional
Institutions, in the fight against crime and in adapting

10

We welcome also the presence of Ms. Sanda
Rasković-Ivić, President of the Coordination Centre for
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and
the important statement she made.
In recent years, Kosovo and the Balkan region
have undergone a series of political changes and are at
a critical and historic juncture. China has always
followed very closely the situation in the region, and
we hope that the situation in Kosovo will remain stable
and that new uncertainties will not arise in the Balkan
region.
We have noted that, thanks to the concerted
efforts of UNMIK and of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, considerable progress has been made
in the implementation of standards. However, many
challenges still remain in the economic, social and
cultural fields and with respect to the problem of
refugees.
The
progress
achieved
in
standards
implementation will serve as a basis for the future
status of Kosovo. It reflects the need to build a
harmonious society in Kosovo in which all ethnic
groups can coexist.
We welcome the will expressed by the
Provisional Institutions and their leadership to
implement the standards, and we hope that
thoroughgoing efforts will be made and progress
achieved. Members of the ethnic majority in Kosovo
should assume primary responsibility for creating a
social climate marked by security and tolerance; all
others should cooperate with them in a positive
manner.
The process to determine the status of Kosovo
began last year. Since then, with the good offices and
coordination of Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of

06-39548

S/PV.5470

the Secretary-General for the future status process for
Kosovo, the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo have
held many rounds of direct negotiations and have
reached some consensus. China welcomes the
continuation of such dialogue, which can help enhance
mutual understanding and the search for common
ground and can move the question of Kosovo onto a
positive track. China supports all efforts to find a
sustainable solution acceptable to both parties, through
peaceful negotiations. The question of Kosovo is rife
with very specific characteristics and complexities, and
the international community should demonstrate great
resolve and patience with respect to its resolution.
China has always respected the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the countries in the Balkan
region. We have consistently held that an appropriate
comprehensive resolution of the question of Kosovo
should be based on the provisions of Security Council
resolutions and that all the standards should be
implemented. Both parties should be encouraged and
assisted to reach compromise through a process of
consultation. In a sincere and pragmatic spirit, all the
parties concerned should promote the political process
in Kosovo. Only with the attainment of economic
development, social stability and ethnic harmony in
Kosovo can the question of Kosovo be resolved
satisfactorily.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I should like to start by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for all the work he has
done over the past two years of his service as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We thank him also for his
comprehensive briefing today.
We welcome the presence of Her Excellency Ms.
Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija.
We also welcome the presence of the UNMIK
delegation, with Kosovo’s Prime Minister, Agim Çeku.
Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.
Three months on from the previous report of the
Secretary-General to the Council, we are pleased to
note that the Provisional Institutions of Self-

06-39548

Government, especially under the leadership of the
new Prime Minister, have taken careful note of
criticism with respect to progress in standards
implementation and have responded with renewed
efforts. Progress in the implementation of certain
standards is now clearly discernible, as the SecretaryGeneral concludes. We believe that the Provisional
Institutions have fully realized the inescapable link
between progress on standards implementation and
progress in the political process to determine Kosovo’s
future. Functioning democratic institutions are
continuously improving and growing stronger.
Legislative measures are being adopted, and all the
right structures across the board of a new civil service
are being created. Further transfer of competencies in
the area of rule of law has been implemented
successfully.
Important legislative and other measures,
however, still remain to be adopted. These should not
be treated as secondary details to be dealt with at some
later point. They are reflected in the 13 priorities that
the Contact Group identified and communicated to the
Provisional Institutions recently. They include, to name
but a few: the adoption of laws on languages, cultural
heritage
and
religious
freedom;
completing
reconstruction and the provision of compensation with
regard to properties damaged as a result of the March
2004 riots; adopting a public transportation strategy for
minorities; and establishing an independent media
commission.
Additional positive developments that are worth
noting are the recent signature between Pristina and
Belgrade of the Protocol on Returns and the progress
reported in the preservation of cultural and religious
heritage, and especially in the programme of
reconstruction of church property damaged during the
March 2004 violence.
At this point, though, what is sorely needed —
but is only just limping along — is sustainable progress
on substance that would give flesh and meaning to all
those reforms. Also needed is progress that would
translate a decision or measure taken in Pristina into
fact and reality in Prizren, Gnjilane and Strpce, for
example. Surely, complete progress in building a
functioning democratic system cannot be considered to
have been achieved so long as a part of the society that
the system is supposed to represent refuses to
participate. We cannot stress enough the value, above

11

S/PV.5470

all to themselves, of the Kosovo Serbs rejoining the
Provisional Institutions and engaging in them.

and there shall be no changes in the current territory of
Kosovo.

Surely also, progress in reconciliation and in
promoting the new democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo will be impossible as long as the prevailing
atmosphere for minorities is one of insecurity and
severely restrained freedom of movement. The increase
in security-related and violent incidents over the past
month, especially in the north and with victims coming
mainly from the Serb minority, is real and should not
be ignored or downplayed. Some of the violent attacks
that have occurred may not be ethnically motivated. It
is therefore all the more essential that the facts be
established and that people be given all the extra
reassurance they need that their concerns and fears are
being taken seriously into consideration and are being
dealt with effectively.

Those principles constitute a right that can be
claimed and an obligation that should be respected for
both the Kosovo Albanians and the Serbs. In the
coming months, as the political process in Vienna
gathers speed, the efforts by the Provisional
Institutions must keep pace and deliver further results.
Such results will stand as the only proof that Kosovo is
ready to move forward.

As talks on political progress for the future status
are under way, security on the ground — perceived,
felt, monitored and achieved — acquires greater
importance and should become an absolute priority for
both the international presence in Kosovo and the
Provisional Institutions.
As all of us here are aware, we cannot look at the
picture on the ground in Kosovo independently of what
is happening in Vienna in the political process for
determining future status. Talks in Vienna have so far
touched upon all the basic aspects of the relationship
between the Kosovo Albanian and Serb sides, but
progress has been limited. It is positive that, at least,
the positions of the two parties have been set down
clearly and that common concerns or points of eventual
agreement have been identified. We continue to believe
that further progress on standards — along, of course,
with the necessary political will — is one of the main
factors that can provide the necessary impetus for
closing the gap between the positions of the two sides.
But we also think it opportune at this juncture to
come back to the starting point and remind everyone of
the basic rules of this exercise, as contained in the
Contact Group guiding principles, which were
endorsed by the Security Council last November: the
settlement of status should be fully compatible with
international standards of human rights, democracy and
international law; the settlement of status must ensure
multi-ethnicity that is sustainable; the settlement of
status must strengthen regional security and stability;

12

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
Security Council meeting of the President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Her Excellency Ms. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic, and of the Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, and his delegation.
We take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral
(S/2006/361)
and
of
his
Special
Representative’s briefing on the situation in Kosovo,
Republic of Serbia. We also take note of the work of
Mr. Jessen-Petersen as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
during the past two years. However, we are obliged to
note that the most recent report shows signs of
rewriting Kosovo’s reality. We must also note that,
despite certain favourable trends and the promises
made by the leaders of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Kosovo, the implementation of
standards in Kosovo still cannot be called satisfactory.
Some of the positive peripheral developments in
Kosovo — for example, the functioning of local
governance — do not compensate for the continuing
failure to implement standards in the region as a whole.
We associate ourselves with the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to the leaders of the province to
urgently address those problems while giving primary
attention to priority areas, especially those of vital
importance to national minorities. The Contact Group,
along with UNMIK, transmitted to the leadership of
the Provisional Institutions a list of crucial steps in that
regard. Progress in those areas will be an important
indicator of the readiness of Kosovo’s leadership to
establish the foundations for a multi-ethnic democratic
society in which the members of all communities can
live in decent and safe conditions. We hasten to add

06-39548

S/PV.5470

that the tasks set out in that list constitute only a small
part of what must ultimately be done. We count on
close monitoring by the Contact Group as regards the
implementation of standards by leaders of the
province.
At the moment it is premature to say that the
requisite guarantees of the rights, safety and freedom
of movement of members of minority groups,
especially Serbs, exist. The problems associated with
decentralization and protecting the religious and
cultural heritage of minorities are also far from being
solved. The situation urgently requires greater efforts
on this track by UNMIK, the representative of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other European organizations. We would also
welcome more energetic efforts in this area by the
Council of Europe.
In the area of maintaining law and order, and
specifically with regard to the progress made in
investigating the anti-Serb pogroms of March 2004, we
note that to date not a single network behind the
pogroms has been eliminated. Of the houses destroyed
two years ago, only slightly more than half have been
rebuilt.
We are particularly concerned that, according to
available information, between 24 October 2005 and
31 May 2006 there were a total of 187 attacks on
members of the non-Albanian population of Kosovo.
Fifteen of those cases involved firearms, and 11
included explosive devices. There were also 16 cases
of arson, while 27 passers-by in cars had stones thrown
at them. As a result of that, one person died and 21
were injured, 25 buildings were burned or damaged,
four religious buildings were destroyed or seriously
damaged, and 18 graves were desecrated. The list of
the damage goes on. The troubles in that area are also
evidenced in a series of incidents in northern
Mitrovica, were victims are unfailingly Kosovo Serbs.
Flagrant crimes against the Serb national minority are
not fully investigated, and criminals go unpunished. To
doubt that the vast majority of these crimes are
ethnically motivated is to fly in the face of common
sense.
The facts point to the urgency of the need for
more effective international pressure on extremists in
Kosovo. The international community must not give in
to outrageous blackmail from extremists, whereby the
wave of violence will continue if the province does not

06-39548

receive independence by the end of the year. Claiming
political maturity, the authorities in Pristina, as well as
UNMIK, must effectively put an end to such threats
and, even more so, to such acts.
The sorriest state of affairs concerns freedom of
movement. A prime example of that is the fact that the
overwhelming majority of the inhabitants of the Serb
enclave of Gracanica, near Pristina, have never been to
the provincial centre. In other words, those people are
living in total isolation due to fear and the lack of
sufficient security on the roads.
We welcome the meeting between Mr. Sejdiu,
President of Kosovo, and Bishop Teodosije, head of the
monastery at Visoki Dečani. That should provide
impetus to making progress in this area.
Nevertheless, the situation concerning the return
of refugees and the rights of communities continues to
be unsatisfactory, as the figures contained in the report
confirm. That does not take into account those who
registered their return, sold their property and once
again left Kosovo. In order to rectify the situation we
need not only political statements but also concrete
efforts, including financial measures to improve living
conditions on the ground and eliminate obstacles to the
process of return.
We note in particular the role played by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Council of Europe in restoring
Serbian Orthodox Church buildings in Kosovo. We
count on continued attentive monitoring by those two
international organizations. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern about the continuing acts of
vandalism against religious shrines. Any incident of
that nature requires firm condemnation, above all by
the political leaders of the province.
The non-participation of Kosovo Serbs in the
activities of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment proves that Kosovo is still far from
resolving the main task of creating a multi-ethnic and
democratic society. The level of trust of minorities in
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Kosovo is still low. Moreover, non-Albanian
communities have misgivings about the lack of
democracy and systems to include minorities, as well
as about the existing mechanism to monitor local
implementation of decisions in the interest of all, rather
than of a single community. A significant number of
non-Albanians still have the impression that their

13

S/PV.5470

participation in the Provisional Institutions is more
decorative than anything else. They feel that there is no
real involvement in the decision-making process. The
majority community must create a climate that
encourages minorities, and Kosovo Serbs in particular,
to cooperate with provincial authorities and take part in
all spheres of life in Kosovo. In that regard, we believe
that the attempts to shift to Belgrade the blame for the
non-participation of Kosovo Serbs in the activities of
the Provisional Institutions are wrong. Nor should
Belgrade be blamed for the unsatisfactory situation visà-vis the standards.
We urgently call on provincial leaders to intensify
their efforts to ensure real and stable progress in the
implementation of standards, especially as regards
those that are of priority to national minorities.
Given the defining significance of the standards
for Kosovo’s future, we categorically oppose attempts
to defer their implementation to the post-status period.
We view as unacceptable statements regarding
predetermination of the question of the region’s
independence before the end of the year. We also
oppose the notion, heard here and there, of “status, if it
works, before standards”. Arguments that the
independence of the province would somehow make it
possible for Pristina to implement standards more
effectively are absolutely unfounded.
Achieving specific and effective progress on
standards is one of the determining factors influencing
the pace and success of the negotiating process that
will determine the future status of Kosovo. We are
convinced that only a qualitative correction of the
situation regarding standards will serve to lay the
foundation for productive progress in their
implementation through the mediation of Martti
Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to
find a negotiated compromise between Belgrade and
Pristina. We note that the task of the international
mediators should be precisely that of mediation and
should not be an imposition of their own ideas,
particularly if they coincide with those of only one
side.
It is already clear that, even in the optimal
outcome, lasting and genuine results in standardization
can be assured only in the long term. Quite some time
will also be required for the parties to reach an
outcome in status negotiations. In that regard, we see
no need for the status issue to be artificially hastened.

14

We feel in that respect that it would be
counterproductive to establish any kind of arbitrarily
stringent timeframe. We base that assessment on the
multiple potential versions of the status option. Parties
to the direct negotiations must themselves identify,
without outside pressure, a negotiated decision on the
future status of Kosovo that satisfies both Belgrade and
Pristina.
In that connection, it is of primary importance
that, in the context of the forthcoming negotiating
rounds, the Belgrade status platform be constructively
considered alongside other proposals. The success of
the collective efforts of the international community on
Kosovo will depend on the consistent observance of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and of the
guiding principles laid out by the Contact Group, as
well as on ongoing and comprehensive monitoring by
the Security Council of standards implementation in
the province and the evolution of the negotiating
process as the parties seek a mutually acceptable status
solution.
A decision on the future status of the province
must, in all circumstances, be comprehensive. The
formula for resolving the problems of Kosovo – which
are far from unique, by the way – will objectively have
an impact on the development of situations in other
conflicts. The Security Council must therefore support
only negotiations, and not one-sided, unilateral or
imposed solutions, for only negotiations will not set a
negative precedent in the context of international crisis
resolution.
Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me
to join my colleagues in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. JessenPetersen, for his entire contribution to the peace
process in Kosovo and for his briefing today. We
believe that, at this critical stage for the international
presence in Kosovo, we can hope for a new
appointment soon.
Our appreciation extends to all the members of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) team for their commitment and daily
work.
On behalf of my delegation, I should like to
welcome Ms. Rašković-Ivić, President of the
Coordinating Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, and the presence of the Prime

06-39548

S/PV.5470

Minister of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo, Mr. Çeku, at this meeting.
The region of the western Balkans remains a
natural priority of Slovak foreign policy for many
reasons. Our involvement there is based on the
principles of transparency and impartiality, aimed at
strengthening the stability of the region and at
supporting the democratization and integration process.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered later this morning by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. That is why I
will limit my statement to the following points.
First of all, we wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his evaluation of the situation in Kosovo,
contained in his report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. We continue to
believe that the role of UNMIK, as a consequence of
the Security Council’s decision to launch negotiations
in order to define the future status of Kosovo, has
become even more vital and instrumental to the peace,
stability and prosperity of the region and to a lasting
settlement of Kosovo’s future status.
That is why we think that the current UNMIK
report does not fully reflect the context in which it is
presented. We had hoped for certain elaborations that
would help us to facilitate our assessment of the
ongoing political process, under the auspices of the
United Nations. We deem the report to be
unsatisfactory with respect to the following areas:
Kosovo’s institutions’ ability to meet the challenges of
democratization and the rule of law, with an emphasis
on the issue of international organized crime, which
threatens more than just Kosovo and its closest
neighbours; the prospects for Kosovo’s economic and
political sustainability; its prognosis for multi-ethnic
coexistence, which is directly proportionate to such
issues as the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons; and, last but not least, the question of whether
Kosovo’s ultimate status will contribute to the stability
of the region.
Those critical issues for the determination of
Kosovo’s future status should be taken into
consideration, and we look forward to receiving the
forthcoming report of Mr. Ahtisaari, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Future Status Process
for Kosovo.

06-39548

Secondly, we note with some satisfaction the
section of the Secretary-General’s report in which he
elaborates positively on general trends among
Kosovo’s new leadership on the ongoing issue of
standards implementation. We commend the personal
role and dedication of Prime Minister Çeku in that
regard, which is also praised in the report.
However, in the context of the talks on future
status, we think it critical objectively to evaluate
whether the overall results in that regard are sufficient
for further progress on the issue of future status, and
vice-versa.
The report’s lack of directness in that
regard, and the fact that the Contact Group has decided
to redefine and narrow key standards, are indicators
that the situation in this area cannot be considered to
be as positive as it is presented. We therefore believe
that the 13 priorities of standards implementation
considered by the Contact Group deserve special
support and a thorough overview by the Security
Council, as well as by other entities.
Thirdly, in our view the participation of the
Kosovo Serbs in the future status process, as well as
their engagement in Kosovo’s political life, are of
cardinal importance. We therefore call on Belgrade to
encourage the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
process and in the political life of Kosovo in order to
influence the process, which will be decisive to the
province’s future. We also call on Belgrade and
Pristina to allow Kosovo Serbs to exercise their rights
in a way that will contribute to creating a positive
atmosphere in the negotiating process and to the
stabilization of the region.
However, we do not share the view that the
official target of 16.6 per cent minority participation at
the central level of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment is in the best interests of the international
community in Kosovo, as set down in Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). In our opinion, the current
proportional key is not a good mobilization tool for
minority participation in the central Government. The
ongoing existence of parallel structures, as also
mentioned in the report, is proof that minorities still do
not trust the central Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment.
It is our firm belief that the determination of
Kosovo’s future status is an extremely sensitive issue.
It is already almost inevitable that its consequences
will be felt beyond the region’s borders. The starting

15

S/PV.5470

points in the Kosovo issue are linked to the situation as
it was set up after the Second World War and
intermingled with the ethnic and religious complexities
of the region, which have endured for centuries. Those
are the elements that make the Kosovo case sui generis
and extraordinary.
While it may be problematic today to impose a
desired solution on the international framework of
conflict settlement, there are still many alternatives
that could be explored. The potential failure of an
incorrect solution could call into question the existing
tools for conflict settlement that have been in use for
decades. We therefore wish to repeat that we believe it
necessary to find a lasting and balanced settlement of
the future status of Kosovo. At the same time, as is also
highlighted in the Contact Group’s guiding principles
for a settlement of Kosovo’s status,
“the settlement of the Kosovo issue should be
fully compatible with international standards of
human rights, democracy and international law
and contribute to regional security”.
We continue to believe that it is important to seek
a negotiated settlement and compromise from both
Belgrade and Pristina through direct talks and
dialogue. Only such a solution, reflecting the objective
concerns of all parties concerned and not considered to
have been imposed from the outside, will contribute to
the lasting security and stability of the region. In that
context, we also believe that all options for the
outcome of status talks should remain open. In the
expectation of success in the status talks, we think it
more than important that all participants in the talks
refrain from any activities that could give Belgrade or
Pristina the impression that the outcome of the final
status talks has been prejudged.
In conclusion, I would like to reassure you that
Slovakia, being a troop-contributing country to KFOR,
is ready to continue its dedication to the peace,
stabilization and integration process in the Balkans.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his
presentation of the report on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK)
during the first months of the year. With the
announcement of his upcoming retirement from that
post, my delegation wishes to express our gratitude for
the dedication and effort that the Special

16

Representative has shown as the head of UNMIK for
almost two years. We wish him almost every success in
his future endeavours.
We also wish to express our gratitude for the
briefing given us this morning by Ms. Sanda RaškoviċIviċ, President of the Coordination Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija.
The political process intended to determine the
future status of Kosovo has made progress in the initial
months of application. Even though it is premature to
call for substantial agreements, we are encouraged by
the active participation of both parties in those
conversations, and by the progress in the
conversations. We hope that as a result of this
willingness we will soon begin to see initial
understandings. My delegation reiterates its support for
that political progress designed to find a negotiated
solution. We also support the approach adopted by the
Special Envoy to begin direct conversations between
the parties on practical issues and to gradually move
towards a future status.
But as we have said earlier, in the search for a
future status for Kosovo it is important not to delay the
implementation of standards. Indeed, important
progress in the attainment of standards is a crucial
condition in order to make progress in the political
process.
Whatever territorial entity may emerge in
Kosovo, it is important that it be a democratic entity,
where there is respect for civil freedoms, where there is
political and religious tolerance, where there is respect
for minorities, where there are economic opportunities
for all, and where power is transferred periodically in a
democratic fashion. The implementation of standards is
fundamental in order to establish an entity of that
nature and thus to help in the attainment of a European
vision for that region.
We are pleased to note the renewed commitment
with which the new leaders in Kosovo have proposed
to carry out the pending tasks in the implementation of
standards. Even though we understand that there are
major areas in which significant progress is yet to be
firmed up, the actions that have been undertaken and
that are set out in the report do make us hopeful about
short-term results. However, we must reiterate that all
the parties concerned must join and cooperate in that
process, which is decisive for their own future. The
building of a multi-ethnic and democratic society

06-39548

S/PV.5470

requires the active participation of all parties involved
in order to build a consensus that would make it
possible to lay the foundations for a lasting solution to
the question of Kosovo.
In the implementation of standards, a priority is
reconciliation and the promotion of the return of
displaced persons, as well as full respect for the
diversity of the population. We welcome the recent
signing of the protocol, on 6 June, by representatives
of Serbia and of the Kosovo region to speed up the
return of displaced persons. The signing of that
instrument reflects the political will of the parties to
deal with the problem, which is crucial. Direct
conversations on the return of the displaced persons,
which have begun and which will continue at the
expert level, should be encouraged by the international
community with a view to producing concrete facts,
which would create a new, positive environment in the
treatment of the question of Kosovo.
One aspect that my delegation considers central
in standards implementation is progress in building a
viable economy in Kosovo, one with enough
productive capacity to ensure economic sustainability
and future democracy in Kosovo. A viable economy is
still quite remote in Kosovo, and thus there are doubts
that a future multi-ethnic democracy can be sustainable
in a country with such extreme poverty. We hope that
the economic actions presented in the report to
modernize the economy will in the short term generate
jobs and opportunities so that the local population can
become part of the economy and in that way help fight
the disturbing crime and international illegal activities
in Kosovo.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset I should like to thank Mr. Jessen-Petersen
for his briefing and for his steady commitment to the
stabilization and development of Kosovo, as
demonstrated by the considerable progress that we
have seen today. I wish to join my voice to all those
who today have paid a well-deserved tribute to him as
he is about to leave his post.
I am pleased to welcome here Ms. Raškoviċ-Iviċ,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and, in Mr. JessenPetersen’s delegation, Mr. Çeku, Prime Minister of
Kosovo.
The representative of Austria will make a
statement as President of the European Union, with

06-39548

which I associate myself fully. I will make a few
remarks of my own.
First, I wish to stress the fresh impetus given by
the authorities of Kosovo — particularly by the new
Prime Minister, Mr. Çeku — to implement the
standards concretely and swiftly. Tangible progress has
been made in accordance with the demands by the
members of the Council. Dialogue with minorities,
beginning with the Serbian minorities, is encouraging.
We fully share the positive evaluation by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in this respect.
The Kosovo authorities must continue to make
determined progress along that path. Many concrete
measures remain to be adopted — and swiftly —
particularly as regards the 13 priorities identified by
UNMIK and the Contact Group relating to the
protection of minorities and the rule of law. Progress in
that respect will be an essential criterion when the time
comes to determine the status of Kosovo.
No lasting stabilization will be possible without
the reconciliation of the communities. The violence
directed at minorities referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General shows that such reconciliation is
still a long way away. The transfer to the Provisional
Institutions of competencies in the areas of justice and
the police should lead to the creation of an impartial
administration capable of combating such violence.
But that necessary reconciliation will require the
Kosovo Serbs to agree to participating in the
Provisional Institutions — which is in their own
interests — as the authorities in Kosovo have invited
them to do. In this respect, we share the concerns
expressed by the Secretary-General regarding the
pressure on Kosovo’s Serbs to discourage them from
doing that. The Belgrade authorities must encourage
such participation, not hold it back.
The evolution of the situation on the ground is
linked to the development of the political process
regarding future status. Direct dialogue under the
auspices of Mr. Ahtisaari has intensified, thanks to the
active participation of both parties. The Kosovo
negotiating team has made constructive proposals in
terms of decentralization. Despite the difference in
positions, it seems that it would be possible to find
common ground on certain concrete questions, and in
that area in particular. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral stresses, the parties must display flexibility
and a spirit of compromise.

17

S/PV.5470

Lastly, the international community must remain
present one way or another in Kosovo, both to ensure
the implementation of future status and to guarantee
the stability of the entire region. That presence should
no longer be through UNMIK, because we feel that its
mandate will be concluded once status has been
defined. The European Union will have a role to play,
particularly in terms of justice and the police, and
France is ready to make its contribution and to play its
part.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I, too, would like
to welcome Prime Minister Çeku here today, for the
first time since his appointment. I also welcome
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic and thank her for her statement.
The United Kingdom associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.
The United Kingdom would like to express its
gratitude to the Special Representative, Mr. Søren
Jessen-Petersen, for the absolutely outstanding work
that he has done for two years in Kosovo. He has
transformed and reinvigorated the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and has worked relentlessly with the Provisional
Institutions to ensure genuine progress on standards
and minority rights. The fact that Kosovo was in a
position last autumn for the status process to begin is
due, in no small part, to his efforts. His and his team’s
tireless commitment, energy and perseverance do
them — and, as a consequence, the United Nations —
enormous credit. We thank his family, too, for the
support that they have given him as he has carried out
his vital task. The United Kingdom would like to wish
him every future success.
His successor will have a hard act to follow. The
United Kingdom looks forward to having a productive
working relationship with him or her, as UNMIK
continues to reform and Kosovo learns difficult lessons
about accountability and responsibility. More hard
work will be needed, especially to continue Søren
Jessen-Peterson’s good work in reaching out to
minority communities to help create an environment in
which all communities can coexist in stability and
prosperity.
I would like to make four brief points on
priorities for the coming months.

18

First, the Secretary-General’s report makes clear
that substantial progress has been made on standards
implementation and outreach to minority communities.
That is welcome, but it must be sustained. Further
progress is needed across the board, for example in
minority rights legislation and the reconstruction of
damaged and destroyed property. We look forward to
some important steps in that regard being taken by the
Assembly in the coming weeks.
The international community and the Council
remain focused on monitoring concrete results, as
shown by the Contact Group letter to Pristina of
9 June, which specifies — as the representative of
France mentioned — 13 priority areas with set time
boundaries for progress.
I would like to strongly echo what the
representative of Peru said, that the future of Kosovo is
as a functioning democracy and economy. I also
endorse what he said about the European vision. Of
course, we want that European future to apply to
Serbia, too.
Secondly, the Kosovo Government’s efforts to
reach out to minorities have been impressive. The
inter-faith conference hosted by the Serb Orthodox
Church, and President Sejdiu’s visit to Kosovo Serb
areas, are very positive signals. Such initiatives,
however, can make meaningful progress only if they
are reciprocated. It is hard to see how Belgrade’s
persistence in actively discouraging Kosovo Serbs
from joining Kosovo’s institutions or political life
serves their interests. It does not serve the interests of
the Kosovo Serbs. The future of the Kosovo Serbs in
Kosovo is as active participants and contributors, not
as an insular and disenfranchised community.
Thirdly, the Contact Group’s letter to Belgrade of
9 June called on the Serbian leadership to stop
obstructing processes that can only improve the lives
of Kosovo Serbs. Belgrade’s active and constructive
engagement in the Kosovo status process is the best
way to preserve, protect and promote the interests of
Kosovo’s Serbian community. But it is also a vital part
of Belgrade’s own rapprochement with the rest of
Europe, so that it can take its rightful place there.
I welcome what Ms. Raskovic-Ivic said about the
importance of Kosovo Serb participation in the
political life of Kosovo. That is very welcome, but I
encourage Belgrade not to make it conditional on
agreement to decentralization. Decentralization is an

06-39548

S/PV.5470

important part of Kosovo’s future. Talks are under way
in Vienna, and they deserve our support. But Kosovo
Serb
participation
is
needed
now,
without
preconditions.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the United
Kingdom continues to support, unreservedly, the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Kosovo’s
future, Martti Ahtisaari. I will reserve our comments on
status until his presentation later this summer. But I
would like to respond to a couple of points that have
been made today, including one point from
Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic about international order and
legality.
The United Kingdom recalls the Contact Group
ministerial statement of 31 January, which was
supported by the United Nations, the European Union
and NATO. The solution to status must be acceptable
to the people of Kosovo. There is a sound basis for that
in the United Nations Charter.
I would also like to echo what the representative
of China said about the great specificities and
complexities of the Kosovo situation. It is true that the
day-to-day problems of Kosovo, particularly in the
economy, are not unique to that place. But Kosovo is
uniquely placed in the panoply of post-conflict
situations by virtue of the events of 1998 and 1999,
resolution 1244 (1999) and the existence of the status
process, led by Martti Ahtisaari. The resolution of
status will enhance regional stability, not detract from
it.
The United Kingdom is serious about the
commitments the Contact Group expressed in its
guiding principles and the 31 January statement. We
are working intensively towards a settlement during
2006. The international community cannot allow the
future status process to be delayed.
Mr. Brencick (United States of America): We,
together with other members, welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jessen
Petersen, back to the Council and thank him for his
encouraging report on progress in Kosovo. He has done
an outstanding and exemplary job in his position in the
leadership
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
regret his departure on 30 June, but wish him all the
best in his future endeavours.

06-39548

We welcome the progress that the Special
Representative has documented in Kosovo. In
particular, the United States congratulates Kosovo’s
President Sejdiu and Prime Minister Çeku on for their
bold calls for ethnic reconciliation and for actions
taken to improve the lives of Kosovo’s minority
communities.
We recognize, however, that more work needs to
be done, particularly in the short term, to build
confidence among Kosovo’s minorities. This is critical
while negotiations on Kosovo’s future status are under
way. Symbolic overtures are important, but we also
need to see more results on the ground. Kosovo’s
leaders must continue to demonstrate, through their
actions, a commitment to reconciliation and an ability
to govern effectively. The first steps are encouraging,
but the Kosovo Government needs to maintain this
momentum.
We welcome the decline in potential ethnicallymotivated crimes, as reported recently by UNMIK. We
urge leaders of all groups to condemn all violence and
to vigorously prosecute acts perpetrated against ethnic
minorities. We also urge leaders to refrain from
alleging ethnic motives for crimes until facts are
known.
We note that Belgrade has important
responsibilities to help improve the situation in Kosovo
as well. In particular, Belgrade can cease obstructing
Kosovo Serbs from participating in Kosovo’s
institutions. Participating in those institutions will
allow Kosovo Serbs to advocate their own interests
most effectively.
The implementation of standards must continue
after
Kosovo’s
status
is
determined.
Full
implementation of the standards will be an important
part of Kosovo’s long-term democratic development
and of its future integration into Europe. We continue
to support Martti Ahtisaari, the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy, leading the Kosovo status process. We
look forward to his consultations with the Security
Council this summer.
The United States calls on both sides to engage
seriously and constructively with Mr. Ahtisaari,
particularly on the issues most critical to Kosovo’s
long-term stability, such as decentralization and the
rights of minorities. We urge both sides to be realistic
about the outcome of the status process. I would only
repeat what the Special Representative of the

19

S/PV.5470

Secretary-General, Søren Jessen-Petersen, just said:
there will be no return to the Kosovo of the pre-1999
situation, no partition of Kosovo and no union of
Kosovo with any other — or part of any other —
country. Kosovo must remain multi-ethnic, and a
settlement must be acceptable to the people of Kosovo.
Finally, all possible efforts must, in our view, be
made to achieve a negotiated settlement in the course
of 2006. Further delay would prolong instability, as
just noted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I, too, should like to thank Mr. Søren JessenPetersen, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his presentation. His briefing, which
provided the Council with useful details, and the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2006/361) give us a clear
picture of the situation in Kosovo — a situation that
recent events have made even more disturbing.
Indeed, we are concerned by certain unilateral
statements and initiatives that could threaten to
destabilize the situation on the ground. We refer in
particular to the recent demonstrations against the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which only serve to heighten
needless tension at a time when the international
community is calling for more responsibility,
particularly to give every chance to the political
process, which has just begun, to determine Kosovo’s
future status.
Permit me to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, who is preparing to leave
UNMIK, for his far-sighted activities during the past
few years in a particularly difficult environment.
During his mandate, he was able to carry out and
consolidate activities to combat crime and to promote
economic recovery and the building of a multi-ethnic
society. The Secretary-General’s periodic report clearly
indicates the favourable developments noted in recent
months as a result of those activities.
Thanks to the impetus provided by UNMIK,
many initiatives have been undertaken to enable
members of the Serb community and other minorities
to feel that they belong in Kosovo and are living in
peace and security. We must build on those results for
the long term.

20

During this period, UNMIK satisfactorily
transferred
competencies
to
the
provisional
authorities — represented here today by Prime
Minister Çeku — in various areas such as respect for
the rule of law, the police and justice, while retaining
general jurisdiction on those issues. This is now
enabling the Pristina authorities to carry out daily
administration of their own affairs. We are pleased to
note that the recent political changes have not altered
such cooperation, which is being demonstrated at all
levels, including the local level. The commitment of
the new authorities to continue investigating the crimes
committed in March 2004 is an encouraging sign for
the affirmation of justice and the fight against
impunity.
However, those positive developments must be
built upon, because they remain limited. Although the
Secretary-General highlights some areas of progress,
we must note that, since the Security Council’s last
meeting on Kosovo (see S/PV.5373), there has been
much work to do in the areas of deepening democracy
and building the rule of law and respect for the rights
of minorities, which remain among UNMIK’s top
priorities.
In that regard, we note several sources of
concern. The implementation of the standards must be
a prerequisite for Kosovo’s future development. We
must note that, whether it be dialogue with Belgrade,
Serb participation in the political process and in the
Provisional Institutions, economic development, the
strengthening of security or the return of refugees and
displaced persons, there have been too few results so
far. That could compromise the attainment of the
Contact Group’s objective of concluding the political
negotiations during 2006.
Only reconciliation and confidence among the
various communities can attain what must remain the
international community’s objective: building a
modern, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo in
keeping with the standards established by UNMIK and
in everyone’s interests. Thus, we look forward to the
briefing to be made by Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, on the developments
in the political process. Of course, we wish him every
success.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): While the talks on the
future status of Kosovo are drawing much of the
international community’s attention, the issue of

06-39548

S/PV.5470

standards implementation also needs to be closely
monitored by the Security Council. We thank
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.
Japan appreciates the initiatives undertaken by
Mr. Jessen-Petersen and by Prime Minister Çeku of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to promote
standards implementation. We welcome the presence of
the delegation of the Provisional Institutions, led by
Prime Minister Çeku, in this Chamber today. I also
thank Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, representative of the
Republic of Serbia, for her detailed statement.
Japan sent an expert-level mission to Kosovo in
March, followed by the dispatch in May of ViceMinister for Foreign Affairs Yamanaka to the region in
order to be apprised of the political, social and
humanitarian situation on the ground — including the
progress being made in the standards implementation
plan — and to reaffirm to the authorities of the
Provisional Institutions the importance we attach to
standards implementation.
We are encouraged by the good progress being
made in this regard, as the Secretary-General has noted
in his latest report. We appreciate in particular the
important initiatives taken by President Sejdiu and
Prime Minister Çeku to visit and talk with
municipalities and minority communities, as concrete
attempts at confidence-building among communities.
The standards implementation plan itself has already
been elaborated, with detailed assessments of the needs
of minority communities. They need to be acted upon,
and we ask the leadership of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to continue those
outreach activities to minority communities so that
they can grasp their real needs.
We also appreciate the initiative of the Contact
Group aimed at identifying 13 key areas for standards
implementation. This will not only be useful to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in policy
planning and implementation but could also lead to
further desirable developments through closer
interaction among the Provisional Institutions, the
Contact Group and the international community, as
stated in the letter from Prime Minister Çeku to the
Secretary-General dated June 16.
These signs of progress notwithstanding, we are
concerned that there is a lack of progress in promoting
the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the political

06-39548

process in Kosovo. We wish to reiterate that nonparticipation, and encouragement of non-participation
by whomsoever, is to be avoided, since it would not be
conducive to a positive outcome.
Likewise, we are concerned that not much has
been achieved in the area of freedom of movement and
that there has not been any significant number of
internally displaced persons and refugees returned to
Kosovo. It is our expectation that KFOR and the
Kosovo Police Service (KPS) will continue to work to
improve the security situation.
With respect to the issue of future status, the
Government of Japan extends its full support to the
initiatives taken by the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari. We look forward to substantive
discussions on this issue in the Council when he visits
the United Nations next month.
Last but not least, we commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the other international players deployed
in Kosovo for their contributions. In particular, as
Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen has indicated his intention
to resign soon, the Japanese delegation expresses its
deep appreciation to him for the outstanding
contributions he has made over the years in leading
UNMIK and as a humanitarian. We would like to
express our hope that the spirit of unity with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government that he has
engendered in working towards the standards
implementation will be fully embraced by his
successor. We wish Mr. Jessen-Petersen every success
in future.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I would like to
acknowledge the presence of the Prime Minister of
Kosovo and of the President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija.
On this occasion — World Refugee Day — my
delegation joins other States Member of the United
Nations in expressing solidarity with all refugees,
displaced persons and victims of war, natural and manmade disasters.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his comprehensive briefing
and to congratulate him for his exemplary work as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We

21

S/PV.5470

take this opportunity to wish him success in his future
endeavours.

the Balkans, without which the region’s economic and
political potential cannot be fully realized.

We are greatly encouraged by the fact that the
authorities in Belgrade and Pristina are engaged in
direct and sustained negotiations on a broad range of
issues, including on power structures, issues related to
cultural and religious heritage, as well as the economy.
All these affect the vital interests of the various
population groups, and we eagerly await the outcome
of the negotiations. Hopefully, it will be a win-win
situation for all.

Finally, we join other delegations in appealing for
additional assistance for the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government to enable them to carry out their
capacity- and confidence-building programmes.

My delegation remains convinced that the path to
social harmony and lasting peace in Kosovo must be
based on a deliberate policy of inclusiveness and
respect for the rights of all ethnic groups. The
importance of the principles embodied in the standards
cannot be overstated. They constitute the bedrock of a
democratic, stable and prosperous Kosovo, and we are
pleased with the determined efforts by the leadership
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of
Kosovo to meet the benchmarks. Whatever the
outcome of the final status negotiations, the vision of a
multicultural, tolerant, open and democratic Kosovo
must not be compromised.
In that regard, we call on the Kosovo Serbs and
other ethnic minorities to take full advantage of the
guarantees enshrined in the standards in order to secure
a meaningful role and greater well-being in the future
Kosovo. While we acknowledge that the wounds of
war will take time to heal, we believe that that should
not blind any ethnic group to the realities of a shared
destiny with others with whom they share longstanding
historical ties. It is only by participating fully and
meaningfully in the ongoing dialogue that each group
can make its fears, interests and aspirations heard and
understood by its counterparts.
In the meantime, my delegation wishes to
commend the leadership of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government for the bold steps they have taken
to reach out to the minority groups. We encourage them
to keep knocking on the doors of the Kosovo Serbs in
particular until they join in the process of forging a
common destiny for all the people of Kosovo.
Undoubtedly, this must be a most challenging
period for the authorities in Belgrade as well. We can
only encourage them, in weighing their options, to be
guided by the larger interests of peace and stability in

22

Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to join other members who
spoke before me in expressing our gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Søren Jessen-Petersen, for the comprehensive report he
has given us on the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
as well as on the developments that have taken place in
the province. As Mr. Jessen-Petersen has recently
announced that he will soon be leaving his post, we
would like to commend him for his commitment to
Kosovo and for the professionalism he has
demonstrated in fulfilling his mandate.
We would also like to thank the President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Rasković-Ivić, for
her statement. We note also the presence of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo in the Special Representative’s
delegation.
We understand that currently there are two
processes in Kosovo which are running in parallel. On
the one hand, the process to determine the future status
of Kosovo has moved forward. Despite the violence
that has taken place, it is encouraging to note that
direct talks between the parties have shown that there
is a certain level of convergence on some concrete
issues, though substantial differences still persist. It
should also be pointed out that it is the parties
themselves that are responsible for ensuring progress in
those talks, of which the outcome should be a mutually
beneficial agreement. For the process to succeed, it is
vital that the outcome — whatever it might be —
should be the outcome of negotiations between the
parties and not an international imposition.
We are pleased also to note the progress detailed
in Mr. Jessen-Petersen’s report with regard to the
implementation of standards, which is evidence of the
commitment of the political leaders and of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo
to realizing the objectives set by the international
community. We agree with the Special Representative
that real progress regarding standards is a key factor in

06-39548

S/PV.5470

setting the pace of the political process aimed at
determining the future status of Kosovo. We would
also underline the actions taken that have allowed for
the revitalization of the implementation process, and
we urge the Government of Kosovo to deploy vigorous
efforts in the key areas identified in the report,
including the incorporation of Kosovo Serbs in the
Provisional Institutions; the promotion of confidence
and reconciliation between both communities; and
ensuring that due attention is given to the security
situation and the rule of law, bringing to justice those
who are responsible for acts of violence.
Argentina believes that there can be no
prosperous or peaceful future for Kosovo without full
respect for the diversity of its people. We think that it
is necessary, and possible, to reach a sustainable
solution for Kosovo with full implementation of the
principle of territorial integrity. This political process
must be fostered by real progress in the
implementation of the eight standards. Standards
implementation is also a requirement for realizing
Kosovo’s European perspective, and it must continue
to be the core of the efforts during the process of status
determination, and even after that process has been
completed. We urge the Provisional Institutions to
continue the vigorous implementation of the standards
in order to fulfil the aim of laying the foundations of a
multi-ethnic and democratic society in Kosovo, where
all communities can live in dignity, security and
democracy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Denmark.
Like others, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2006/361) and Mr. Søren
Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing.
I would also like to thank Ms. Sanda RaskovicIvic, President of the Coordination Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo, for her statement.
I associate myself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Austria
on behalf of the European Union.
I recall the discussion in the Council on the
UNMIK report (S/2006/45) in February this year (see
S/PV.5373). The general assessment by Council

06-39548

members was that standards implementation had been
too slow. Thus, the prevailing message was a call for
Kosovo’s political leaders to renew their efforts to
improve the implementation of standards. We are
pleased to note that efforts have indeed improved.
Denmark would like to welcome the alertness and the
political willingness to move forward shown by the
new administration in Pristina. Denmark shares the
assessment by the Secretary-General that the
Provisional Institutions are indeed enhancing their
efforts to implement the standards.
While we welcome the concrete steps taken by
the Provisional Institutions, it is also clear that these do
not automatically alter the situation on the ground. The
leadership of the Provisional Institutions needs to keep
up the commitment and ensure that political decisions
trickle down, yielding improvement on the ground.
Denmark agrees with the assessment by the SecretaryGeneral that real reconciliation depends on the
prevailing mindset of the majority population. Every
effort has to be made to create confidence amongst
Kosovo’s groups, confidence that is sorely missing.
That is essentially the main challenge ahead for the
political leaders of Kosovo.
It is with some concern that we have received
reports about Kosovo Serb representatives cutting off
cooperation with the Provisional Institutions and
urging public servants to withdraw from their
positions. Encouragement of a spirit of noncooperation is not in anyone’s interest. It will only lead
to isolation and forced decisions. We hope that
Belgrade will encourage the Kosovo Serb leaders to
participate
constructively
in
the
Provisional
Institutions. We all wish for a sustainable solution to
Kosovo’s future. That will not be brought about by a
spirit of non-cooperation and isolation. The primary
beneficiaries of a sustainable status solution will be all
Kosovans regardless of ethnic group, the population of
the Republic of Serbia and indeed all the people of the
Western Balkans. Therefore, cooperation and
participation are in everyone’s best interest.
My country views Kosovo as a key regional
issue. Denmark steadfastly supports UNMIK, the
UNMIK police and the Kosovo Force. We look forward
to a more peaceful and prosperous future, which the
peoples of the Western Balkans deserve. That will
entail close regional cooperation between former foes
and efforts towards the common integration of these
truly European countries into the Euro-Atlantic

23

S/PV.5470

institutions where they rightfully belong. However, the
Euro-Atlantic perspectives depend on implementation
of standards and a sustainable solution to Kosovo’s
future status.
Let me conclude, still in my national capacity, by
thanking Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen for his outstanding
work in Kosovo and wishing him all the best in the
future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.
Let me begin by thanking Søren Jessen-Petersen,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing, and by
reiterating the European Union’s full support for his
work. We would also like to warmly welcome the
participation of Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo. At the same time, we also warmly welcome
the presence of the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Agim
Çeku, in the delegation headed by Mr. Jessen-Petersen.
Two years ago, Mr. Jessen-Petersen took up
leadership of the United Nations mission in Kosovo at
a very difficult phase. He has since made a decisive
contribution to the stabilization and development of
Kosovo. We would like to pay tribute to him for his
tireless efforts towards our common goal: a multiethnic Kosovo in which all inhabitants can live in
peace and dignity.
The main task of Mr. Jessen-Petersen’s successor
will now be to continue that work while at the same
time preparing the transition from the current United
Nations administration to an international presence
after the determination of the future status of Kosovo.
The sustainable implementation of all standards by the
Kosovo Institutions will be of crucial importance for
the European future of Kosovo.
At the last meeting of the Security Council on
Kosovo (see S/PV.5373), we urged Kosovo’s
Institutions to renew their efforts to ensure substantive,
accelerated and sustainable progress in the
implementation of the standards, especially in key

24

areas such as returns, equal access to justice and the
preservation of cultural heritage. Like the SecretaryGeneral, the EU welcomes the renewed vigour in the
implementation of standards and expects that concrete
and demonstrable results will follow. Nonetheless, the
EU remains disappointed with the low numbers of
returns. To ensure tangible improvements in the
conditions on the ground, not only political but also
financial commitment at all levels is required. In this
regard, both Pristina and Belgrade have a role to play;
we welcome the recent signature of the Protocol on
Returns on 6 June 2006.
The European Union underlines that real progress
on implementing standards remains an essential factor
in determining progress in the political process to
determine Kosovo’s future status. At the same time,
accelerated implementation of standards should not be
viewed merely as a goal in itself or only as a way to
achieve a decision on the future status of Kosovo.
Effective standards implementation, including dialogue
and outreach to Kosovo’s minority communities,
leading to a sustainable democratic and multiethnic
society, is also a prerequisite for the fulfilment of
Kosovo’s European perspective.
The Partnership for Kosovo, adopted by the
European Union last December, incorporates the
standards as requirements for Kosovo’s long-term
European perspective, thereby underscoring that their
effective implementation must continue to be the
primary focus of efforts by the Provisional Institutions
throughout, and beyond, the status process.
The European Union shares the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that increased outreach to all
Kosovo communities, particularly the Serbian, by
Kosovo’s leaders is welcome. However, that process
needs to go hand in hand with a change in attitudes
within Kosovo. Indeed, all people in Kosovo have a
responsibility and a role to play in implementing the
standards. We therefore call upon the leaders and the
population in Kosovo, but also upon Belgrade, to
increase their efforts to engage in reconciliation and
the promotion of confidence across communities. In
doing so they must not tolerate any violence, and those
responsible for committing acts of violence must be
brought to justice. Such efforts should be
acknowledged and not dismissed.
We also believe that it is equally essential that
Kosovo Serbs rejoin the Provisional Institutions at all

06-39548

S/PV.5470

levels and actively engage in them. We share the
Secretary-General’s concern about reports of pressure
on Kosovo Serbs to withdraw from positions within the
Provisional Institutions, and we call upon the
authorities in Belgrade to encourage, rather than
discourage, Kosovo Serb leaders to participate
constructively in the Provisional Institutions. To do so
would allow the Serb community to engage in shaping
their political future within Kosovo and contribute to
improvements in their living conditions. The EU
encourages concrete steps in that regard. At the same
time, leaders on all sides will have to prepare their
populations for difficult compromises ahead.
The European Union has consistently attached
particular importance to the establishment of a
substantial dialogue between all Kosovo communities,
as well as between Belgrade and Pristina. The EU
strongly urges both Belgrade and Pristina to work
towards a lasting Kosovo status agreement that
promotes a multi-ethnic and democratic society and
contributes to regional stability.
On 16 June, EU heads of State or Government
reaffirmed their support for the ongoing talks about the
future status of Kosovo being led by Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari. In that regard, it should be noted that,
at their meeting in Salzburg in March, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States members of the European
Union, the acceding States, the candidate States and the
potential candidate countries of the Western Balkans
reiterated that every effort should be made to engage in
good faith in the status process in order to find realistic
solutions.
The European Union has been at the side of
Kosovo and its inhabitants throughout the post-conflict
period and has provided a major part of international
aid, economic access, political support and reform
advice. It is clear that Kosovo will require an
international presence to supervise compliance with the
provisions of the status settlement to ensure, inter alia,
security throughout Kosovo and the protection of
minorities and to support the continued implementation
of the standards. The EU heads of State or Government
have just reaffirmed their full support for the agenda
set out at the Thessaloniki Summit in 2003, and for the
Stabilization and Association Process, which will
remain the framework for the European course of the
Western Balkan countries.

We fully support the Secretary-General’s call to
all parties to continue to engage so that the eventual
transition following a political settlement will be
smooth and orderly. Consequently, the European Union
has established a planning team in order to ensure a
smooth transition between selected UNMIK tasks and
the possible EU crisis management operation in the
field of the rule of law and other areas that might be
identified in the context of the future status process.
In close consultation with key international
actors, the European Union stands ready to assume its
responsibilities and to enhance its role in Kosovo
following a status determination, in particular in the
areas of police, rule of law and the economy, with a
view to assisting a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo
in its efforts to realize its European perspective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.
Mr. Neritani (Albania): Let me begin by
thanking
Mr.
Søren
Jessen-Petersen,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. I would like to
extend to him my delegation’s special thanks and my
Government’s
appreciation
for
his
personal
commitment in constantly pursuing the goal of a
democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo. During these two
years, in a difficult and challenging phase, he made a
very tangible contribution to the stabilization and
development of Kosovo. Having won the respect and
appreciation of the international community — and, in
particular, that of the people of Kosovo — we regret
his resignation and wish him the very best in his future
endeavours. His successor’s continuation of his
resolute work will find an active and serious partner in
the Albanian Government.
We would like to warmly welcome the presence
in the Security Council Chamber of Prime Minister
Çeku of Kosovo. We commend him for his
achievements in implementing standards and for his
Government’s realistic commitment to make the
accelerated pace a sustainable and permanent one. We
are convinced that the Prime Minister and his
Government will continue to build a viable, multiethnic, democratic and stable Kosovo for all of its
citizens and for the entire region.
We also welcome the presence of Ms. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic at the head of the Serbian delegation.

06-39548

25

S/PV.5470

We have before us the Secretary General’s report
on the activities of UNMIK and the situation and
developments in Kosovo from 1 January to 30 April
2006 (S/2006/361). Let me express my delegation’s
appreciation to the Secretary-General for that realistic
and substantive document.
We are pleased with the report’s overall
assessment that significant progress and tangible
achievements have been made in various important
areas in that period. We note with satisfaction the
existence of an improved and stable political and
security situation in Kosovo. The election of the
current leadership in Kosovo in accordance with
democratic principles and in closer cooperation with
representatives of the international community is a sign
of the increased capacity and maturity of Kosovo
institutions, which bodes well for the future.
The intention and determination of the new
leadership to accelerate the implementation of
standards and to create a more constructive relationship
by reaching out to Serbs and other communities has
been effectively translated into concrete actions. It is
now possible to discern progress across the broad front
of standards implementation. Many processes within
the standards programme have been revitalized.
Concrete and demonstrable results have been achieved
on priority standards. A legitimate institutional
framework, a checks and balances mechanism, and the
effective engagement of Kosovo’s President, Prime
Minister and other governmental officials will be more
effective if a measured, responsible and forwardlooking approach is taken by other stakeholders of that
society. Despite their origin, the obstacles created by
some Kosovo Serbs do not contribute to establishing a
multi-ethnic and democratic society and State in
Kosovo.
We welcome the renewed vigour and fresh
achievements in the implementation of the standards,
and we encourage Kosovo’s Government and political
leaders to continue to tackle energetically the
challenges in standards implementation, with a
particular focus on priority areas recently highlighted
by the Contact Group. The systematic and accelerated
implementation of the standards should continue to be
an essential part of building a sustainable, democratic
and multi-ethnic society and State firmly rooted in the
European architecture. We are convinced that Prime
Minister Çeku’s Government will maintain the positive
momentum it has created and, as he has personally

26

vowed, will continue with the implementation of the
standards as his most important responsibility
throughout and beyond the status process.
To build a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo, it
is essential that all minority communities fully
participate in Kosovo’s Institutions in a spirit of
cooperation and with recognition of their legitimacy.
We encourage non-participating minorities, especially
Kosovo Serbs, to respect, fully cooperate with and
participate in the political process and in the
Institutions to ensure that their needs are met. We again
appeal to Kosovo Albanians to continue their good
work while demanding responsibility and doing their
utmost to respect the freedom and rights of minority
communities. With a high degree of responsibility and
accountability towards the present and the future,
Albanians, Serbs and other minorities in Kosovo
should look forward to their common future, strengthen
their cooperation and leave behind their past.
Kosovo is going through a very important stage at
present. Its status process continues to remain the
driving force. We note with satisfaction that the
process designed to determine Kosovo’s status has
moved forward during the reporting period. The
Albanian Government welcomes the direct talks
between Pristina and Belgrade in Vienna on the crucial
matters of decentralization, economic issues and
religious and cultural heritage. We encourage and urge
both sides to further continue this dialogue in a
constructive and realistic manner, despite currently
existing differences.
The political process to determine Kosovo’s final
status has attracted great attention in and out of
Kosovo. With regard to negotiations to move this
process forward, Albania will continue to play an
active and constructive role in closer cooperation with
the international community’s relevant institutions and
representatives. We continue to hold the view that the
status process should proceed steadily and swiftly, with
a decisive solution before the end of 2006. The
conclusion of this process within this year and the
definition of the status will serve the stability and
security of Kosovo and the whole region. Delay and
uncertainty will serve no one’s interest.
We reiterate our strong support for the Contact
Group’s Guiding Principles for the settlement of the
status of Kosovo. We agree that there should be no
changes in Kosovo’s current territory and borders and

06-39548

S/PV.5470

no partition of Kosovo or union with any other country
or with part of any other country. We do support a
realistic, stable and multi-ethnic solution of Kosovo’s
status, one which will respect the overwhelming and
clear will of the people of Kosovo.
We stress our strong conviction that the most
realistic, pragmatic and just solution of this status is
independence, with the extension of a civil and security
presence of the international community for a certain
period of time. We mean an independence that will
ensure the support and protection of the rights of Serbs
and all other minorities and of their cultural and
religious heritage. We support an independence that
will achieve a society where all people in Kosovo can
live in dignity and prosperity and free from fear. We
are encouraged that the Kosovo institutions and leaders
hold the same vision and are proving their commitment
to such an outcome. We are confident that
independence will not only generate and guarantee
social and economic stability and security for Kosovo
and the whole region, but will also help to establish a
sustainable, multi-ethnic, democratic society there. It
will pave the way for a clearer European perspective.
In conclusion, let me reassure this body that the
Albanian Government will continue to play an active
and constructive role in the region and on this
particular matter. The international community and the
negotiating team of Mr. Ahtisaari will have a reliable
partner in Albania throughout the upcoming process
and beyond.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. JessenPetersen to respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Jessen-Petersen: First of all, allow me to
thank the Council for the many very generous
comments on the work that we have conducted and are
conducting in Kosovo. Although these words are
addressed to me, I see them also as very much
addressed to my staff and to our local and international
partners in Kosovo. I am grateful to the Council.
I also want to reiterate my thanks to the Council
for the constant support that I have been receiving over
the last two years. Allow me also today to thank the
Secretary-General for his trust and his support.
We have listened carefully to the many useful
observations made today. I have taken notes, and I am
sure that Prime Minister Seku has also taken careful
notes. We welcome the words of support, but we also

06-39548

clearly agree — and I am sure that the Prime Minister
does as well — that there is need for further action.
Further action and results will be pursued. The Prime
Minister has taken very seriously the 13 points
conveyed by the Contact Group a couple of weeks ago.
Action is already under way, and we expect to see the
results in the course of this month, most of it before the
end of next month. That does not detract from the
importance of focusing on all the priority standards,
and that work will also continue.
I listened with particular attention and interest to
the statement by the representative of Serbia,
Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic. I must confess that, having lived in
Kosovo for two years — with my eyes and ears open
most of the time, I believe — I did not recognize
everything I heard. I certainly agree with
Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic, and I just said it, that the situation
remains very difficult for many of the minorities,
Kosovo Serbs in particular. I do agree, and said in my
opening remarks, that we need to focus on more
progress in the living conditions of the Kosovo Serbs.
Many of the statements here have once against urged
Belgrade to allow the Kosovo Serbs to participate in
the process.
Let me just mention four or five examples of
statements with which I do not quite agree. We have
heard that there has been little progress on property
issues, when in fact 98 per cent — 98 per cent — of all
private property cases, have been resolved.
However — and this is where our focus will be — 10
per cent of those 98 per cent resolved cases are still
pending in terms of enforcement, which is where
action should be focused. Furthermore, a couple of
months ago we did establish the Kosovo Property
Agency. That new agency will be focusing on the very
important work related to agricultural and commercial
lands, which is of particular importance to the many
Kosovo Serbs, including the returnees. In that
connection, it would be extremely helpful if Belgrade
could help us with returning the cadastral records. It
would be difficult to make progress without them.
We heard a reference to a report on the so-called
187 incidents. Our UNMIK Directorate of Crime
Analysis has, of course, analysed these reports,
because we take all such reports seriously. Our
preliminary finding is that some of the 187 cases were
wrongly reported statistically. The number of cases in
the document is actually 101, and not 187. Nine of
those 101 can indeed be categorized as inter-ethnic.

27

S/PV.5470

Forty-two of the cases were never reported to the
police nor to the judicial authorities. Thirty-five are
categorized as having an unknown motive;
investigations are still continuing. Ten cases were seen
as crimes for personal gain, and in five cases, anger
was seen, in a not-very-legal impression, as the motive.
Then there were references to recent incidents in
the north. Let me first say that we regret each and
every security incident, because each incident adds to
the fears of the Kosovo Serbs. I will cite an example:
of the four most recent incidents, one was an attack on
a petrol station. It is clear that it was robbery and, by
all indications, Serb-on-Serb. There was a regrettable
killing of a young man in Zvecan. The police
immediately interviewed two suspects, neither one of
which was Albanian. A third incident involving a Serb
Orthodox priest who was driving in his car and was
attacked with his family. Two days ago, the police
arrested a Kosovo Serb policeman as the suspect in that
case.
Once again, I just want to underline that we
should not jump to conclusions. We have to address
these incidents, we have to prevent them and we have
to investigate them. But facts do not bear out what we
had heard on that point.
I do welcome the statement by Mrs. RaskovicIvic that she considers it to be of utmost importance
that the Kosovo Serbs should participate. She also
rightly says that their participation must be meaningful.
I would suggest that we let them participate and let
them decide whether their participation is meaningful.
For two years, we have reserved two ministerial
positions for Kosovo Serbs; they are still vacant. We
have 10 reserved seats in the Assembly; they are still
waiting. We have several deputy ministerial posts; they
are still waiting. But I agree that Kosovo Serb
participation should be meaningful. Let us give them a
chance and let them decide whether it is meaningful.
There were several references to returns, and I for
one certainly regret that we have seen so few returns.
In fact, for me personally it is one of my most serious
regrets over the past two years. I thought I had come to
the job with a certain experience on return and
humanitarian issues. I thought that I could make an
impact. I have to accept that the numbers remain very,
very low.
However, I think we have to accept that the
conditions have gradually been put in place for returns.

28

We have the Protocol on Returns; I welcome the very
constructive engagement of Belgrade in that. That is
now being developed into a plan of action in which we
have the direct involvement of the internally displaced
persons. We are doing this on behalf of the internally
displaced persons. I do believe that the very fact that
the plan of action is now being developed with the
direct involvement of internally displaced persons
could lead to larger returns. We will have to wait and
see. It is certainly an area in which we have not seen
the kind of results we must see.
There were some concerns expressed that the
ethnic bus lines will cease to operate. That is not
correct. They will be taken over lock, stock and barrel
by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.
They will be taking over the operation that UNMIK has
been running for the past seven years, so it will of
course continue and both KFOR and UNMIK will be
there in total support of those bus lines and also to
make sure that there are no incidents.
Talking about incidents, there was some reference
to the repeated stoning of buses. Our police statistics
will show that, over the first five months of this year,
some 1,400 minority buses drove through Kosovo.
There were stoning incidents in six of the 1,400
journeys, and five arrests have been made. I still regret
the sixth. There should not be one single stoning
incident, and I know that this is something that the
Provisional Institutions take very seriously. We have to
make sure that it does not happen.
Finally, there was some reference to corruption at
the airport. Let me just refer to the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services, which is based on
shortcomings up to and including 2003 — in other
words, it is three years out of date. Since then,
considerable measures have been taken. There has been
overall management reform and criminal action against
a few who were found to have been conducting their
activities in a way that is not acceptable, and
disciplinary action has also been taken.
Let me just say that the airport is actually a
success story for Kosovo. It has just won the Best
Airport 2006 award in the category “Under 1 million
passengers per year” from Airports Council
International. I believe that is a very, very strong
reflection of the solid management of the international
airport of Kosovo.

06-39548

S/PV.5470

Once again, this is my sixth and last report to the
Security Council since assuming my post. I believe
that, together, we have come a long way, but we also
know that there is still a considerable way to travel
before we get to the kind of society we all want to see
in Kosovo. I am grateful for the role played by this
Council in moving the process forward and for its
decisions to launch the comprehensive review last May
and the status process last October. And as I leave, I
certainly count on the Security Council to see the
process through to what I hope will be an early and

06-39548

successful conclusion. It will be successful only if the
beneficiaries are the people of Kosovo and of the
region. I count on all Council members to make sure
that our focus is on the people of Kosovo and of the
region.
The President: There are no more speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

29
