United Nations

A/RES/64/290

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 July 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 114

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 July 2010
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/64/L.58 and Add.1)]

64/290. The right to education in emergency situations
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that everyone shall enjoy the human right to education, and
recalling in that regard the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, 3 the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949, 4 the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 5 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6
the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, 8
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

6F

7F

Recalling all relevant United Nations resolutions related to the right to
education in emergency situations, 9
8F

Recalling also that, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 10 it was
resolved that children everywhere, boys and girls alike, would be able to complete a
full course of primary schooling and that girls and boys would have equal access to
all levels of education by 2015,
9F

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
4
Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.
5
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
7
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8
Resolution 61/106, annex I.
9
Resolutions 46/182, 59/113 A and B, 63/241, 64/145, 64/146 and other General Assembly resolutions on
the rights of the child, the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance and
international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters; Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1674 (2006), 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1894 (2009); and Human Rights Council resolutions 8/4 and 11/6.
10
See resolution 55/2.
2

09-47923

*0947923*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/290

Recognizing that a large proportion of the world’s children out of school live
in conflict-affected areas and in natural-disaster-stricken regions, and that this is a
serious challenge to the fulfilment of the international education goals, including
millennium development goal 2,
Underscoring the fact that the Convention on the Rights of the Child must
constitute the standard in the promotion and protection of the rights of the child and
that the requirements for the realization of the right to education, pertinent also to
emergency situations, are set out in articles 28 and 29 of that Convention,
Deeply concerned that, despite the progress made in recent years towards
achieving the goals of the Education for All initiative agreed upon at the World
Education Forum, held in Dakar in April 2000, 11 the level of funding for
international education goals is inadequate,
10F

Deeply concerned also that, in the humanitarian consolidated and flash appeals
launched in 2009, the education sector was one of the most underfunded with
respect to meeting the original requirements,
Recognizing that ensuring the right to education in emergency situations
requires specifically designed, flexible and inclusive approaches consistent with
protection needs, conflict mitigation initiatives and disaster risk reduction
considerations,
Condemning the targeting of civilians as such in situations of armed conflict,
including schoolchildren, students and teachers, as well as attacks on civilian
objects such as educational institutions, as prohibited under international law,
recognizing that such acts may constitute grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 12 and, for States parties, war crimes under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, 13 and reminding all parties to armed conflict of their
obligations under international law to refrain from the use of civilian objects,
including educational institutions, for military purposes and child recruitment,
1F

12F

Acknowledging that protecting schools and providing education in emergencies
should remain a key priority for the international community and Member States,
Recognizing the important role that education can play in supporting efforts in
emergency situations to halt and prevent abuses committed against affected
populations, in particular efforts to prevent all forms of violence, including rape and
other acts of sexual violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons and the worst
forms of child labour,
Emphasizing the importance of the promotion of human rights education and
learning at all levels, including through the implementation of the World Programme
for Human Rights Education, 14 as appropriate, and encouraging all States to develop
initiatives in that regard,
13F

Considering that quality education can mitigate the psychosocial impact of
armed conflicts and natural disasters by providing a sense of normalcy, stability,
structure and hope for the future,
_______________
11

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
13
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
14
See resolutions 59/113 A and B.

2

A/RES/64/290

Considering also that, in situations of displacement, education, among other
factors, can play a significant role in contributing towards preparing for and
promoting durable solutions for the affected population,
Welcomes the work of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education,
1.
and takes note of his report on the right to education in emergency situations; 15
14F

2.
Welcomes the work carried out by the Committee on the Rights of the
Child through the holding on 19 September 2008 of a day of general discussion on
the right of the child to education in emergency situations;
Notes with appreciation the work of the Special Representative of the
3.
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict on violations and abuses
committed against children in armed conflict, and notes the importance of her
continuing work, within her existing mandate, on the adverse impact of armed
conflict on the education of children;
Welcomes the global advocacy initiative, the “One million safe schools
4.
and hospitals” campaign, launched on 8 April 2010 in Manila, aimed at making
schools and hospitals safer from disasters, as part of the “Making Cities Resilient”
global campaign of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction for 2010 and
2011;
Recognizes the establishment of the Education Cluster by the United
5.
Nations Inter-Agency Standing Committee and other initiatives as measures to
address, in a coordinated manner, educational needs in emergency situations,
including through partnerships for the implementation of the “Minimum standards
for education: preparedness, response, recovery” handbook of the Inter-Agency
Network for Education in Emergencies, 16 calls upon donors to support the work of
the Cluster, and emphasizes that those measures should continue to be taken in close
coordination with relevant authorities;
15F

Recalls its thematic debate of 18 March 2009 on access to education in
6.
emergency, post-crisis and transition situations caused by man-made conflicts or
natural disasters;
Education in all stages of humanitarian response
7.
Urges Member States to implement strategies and policies to ensure and
support the realization of the right to education as an integral element of
humanitarian assistance and humanitarian response, to the maximum of their
available resources, with the support of the international community, the United
Nations system, donors, multilateral agencies, the private sector, civil society and
non-governmental organizations;
Requests Member States to ensure that the best possible systems of
8.
education are in place, including through the allocation of sufficient resources, the
appropriate adaptation of curricula and training of teachers, the implementation of
risk assessments, disaster preparedness programmes in schools, the legal framework
for protection, and health and basic social services, so as to withstand emergencies;

_______________
15
16

A/HRC/8/10.
Available from www.ineesite.org.

3

A/RES/64/290

Safe and protective educational environment
9.
Recommends that Member States ensure access to education in
emergency situations to all affected populations, in accordance with their
obligations under international law and without discrimination of any kind;
10. Urges all parties to armed conflict to fulfil their obligations under
international law, in particular their applicable obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, including to respect civilians,
including students and educational personnel, to respect civilian objects such as
educational institutions and to refrain from the recruitment of children into armed
forces or groups, urges Member States to fulfil their applicable obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian law, related to the protection
of and respect for civilians and civilian objects, and urges them, in order to prevent
and combat impunity, to criminalize under their domestic law attacks on educational
buildings, and stresses that such attacks may constitute grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions12 and, for States parties, war crimes under the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court;13
0H

11. Urges Member States to ensure that disaster risk and safety
considerations are factored into all phases of the planning, design, construction and
reconstruction of educational facilities, through the consideration, inter alia, of the
recommendations contained in the “Minimum standards for education:
preparedness, response, recovery” handbook of the Inter-Agency Network for
Education in Emergencies and its “Guidance notes on safer school construction”;16
12. Also urges Member States, in their support for education, to specifically
address the gender-specific needs of girls in emergency contexts, including their
increased vulnerability to gender-based violence;
13. Invites relevant United Nations entities and partners to allocate sufficient
technical expertise to enhance, in close consultation with concerned Member States
and relevant authorities, data collection on and documentation of the impact of
emergencies on the access of children and young people to quality education,
disaggregated by age and gender, and on attacks on educational institutions,
students and educators, with due consideration given to information provided by
concerned States and relevant authorities;
14. Urges Member States to implement gender-sensitive policies and
programme interventions, in order to ensure that populations affected by emergency
situations have equal access to safe, quality and relevant education;
Reconstruction and post-emergency situations
15. Also urges Member States to provide quality education in emergency
situations that is gender-sensitive, centred on learners, rights-based, protective,
adaptable, inclusive, participatory and reflective of the specific living conditions of
children and youth, and that pays due regard, as appropriate, to their linguistic and
cultural identity, mindful that quality education can foster tolerance and mutual
understanding and respect for the human rights of others;
16. Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes and
agreements and post-conflict recovery, peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts, as
well as reconstruction planning, are sensitive to the special and specific needs of
women, children and youth and include specific measures for the protection of
civilians, including the facilitation of early access to education, learning and

4

A/RES/64/290

training, and to ensure the participation of women, children and young persons in
those processes;
17. Calls upon States and other relevant actors to ensure the facilitation of
early access to education and training for children and adults in secure and friendly
environments in the aftermath of emergencies, including through the
implementation of specific related measures in early recovery initiatives,
peacemaking and peacebuilding processes, capacity-building strategies, the
participation of children and youth and the mobilization and prioritization of human,
technical and financial resources;
The importance of political will and financing
18. Reaffirms its commitment to supporting the efforts of developing
countries to ensure that all children have access to and complete free and
compulsory primary education of good quality, to eliminating gender inequality and
imbalances and renewing efforts to improve the education of girls, and to continuing
to support the efforts of developing countries in the implementation of the
Education for All initiative, including with enhanced resources of all types through
the Education for All fast-track initiative in support of country-led national
education plans, and urges donors to honour their pledged contributions;
19. Calls upon States, as primary duty-bearers, to ensure the realization of
the right to education in all phases of emergency situations, in a manner that meets
the essential needs of the affected populations, recognizing the role of the donor
community and humanitarian agencies in assisting those efforts;
20. Calls upon all Member States, including donors, and invites the private
sector and all concerned individuals and institutions to continue to support diverse
humanitarian funding channels and to consider increasing their contributions to
education programmes defined in humanitarian appeals, including humanitarian
consolidated and flash appeals, based on and in proportion to assessed needs, as a
means of ensuring adequate, timely, predictable, flexible and needs-based resources;
Follow-up
21. Requests the Special Rapporteur on the right to education, in close
cooperation with all relevant stakeholders, including Governments, United Nations
agencies and programmes, civil society and other relevant United Nations mandate
holders, to include in his next interim report to the General Assembly at its sixtysixth session an update to his report on the right to education in emergencies, in
order to identify gaps and remaining challenges in ensuring the right to education in
emergency situations.
106th plenary meeting
9 July 2010

5
