281 (III).

Refugees and displaced
persons

I 281 (III). Refugies et personnes de•
plaeees

l..' Assemblce g(:nf:ralc

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, drawn up in consultation with tlw Inter·
national Refugee Organization on the rqiatriation, resettlement and Immigration <>f rdugf'.es
and displaced persons. 1

Prend acte du rapport du Secretaire general,
etai;li en consultation avec !'Organisation internal ionale pour Jes refugies, sur le rapatriement,
la reinstallation et !'immigration des refugies d
per sonne;-, deplacees 1 .

Two hundred fmd fifteenth plcnarv meeting,

nrux ,rnt q11inzieme seance plf:niere,
le 16 mai 1949.

16 May /049.

282 (III). Discriminations practised
by certain States against immigrating labour and, in particular,
against labour recruited from the
ranks of refugees

282 (III). Mesures discriminatoires
prises par certains Etats contre la
main-d'reuvre immigree, et notam•
ment contre la main-d'reuvre recrutee parmi les refugies

The General Assembly,

C Assnnblcc !rhr/ralc,

Considering the statement made by the Polish
delegation to the effect that it wishes to postpone
examination of the item to the fourth regular
session of the General Assemhl_v ,2

c·onsidcrant la declaration faite par la delegation polonaise exprimant son desir de remettre a
la quatrieme session ordinaire de I' Assemblee
generale l'cxamen de ce point 2 ,

1. Withdraws from the agenda of its th~rd
regular session the item entitled: "Discriminations practised by certain States against immigrating labour and_, in particular, against labour
recruited from the ranks of refugee:;'';

Retire de I'onlre du jour de sa troisieme
session ordinaire le point intitule: "Mesures discriminatoires prises par certains Etats contre la
main-d',e11vre immigrce, et notamment contre la
main-d'<ruvre recrutee parmi les refugies";

2. Recommends the Secretary-General to in-elude th;s item in the provisional agenda of the
fourth regular session of the General Assembly,
as an item outstanding from the agenda of the
third regnlar St?ssion

2. Raoninurnde au Secretaire general d'inscrire cctte question a l'ordre du jour provisoire de
la quatrieme session ordinaire de l'Assemblee
generale, en tant que point demeure en suspens
de 1'c,rdre du jour de la troisieme session ordinain·.

Two hundred and ~fl,·rnth plenary merting,

ncu:r CCIII quinzieme seance plcniere,
le 16 mai 1949.

16 May 7949.
1
See documents E/816, E/816/Add.l, E/816/Corr.l
and A/C.3/375.
'See document A/SR.215.

'Voir
les
documents
E/816,
E/816/'Corr.1. et 2, et AIC.3/375.
'Voir le document A/SR215.

32

E/816/Add.I.
